Steven Choi: thank you, speaker, and the members of the assembly. i'm steven, as you already heard the last time. as a korean-descent member of the community, when i hear that assemblyman matthew harper proposed to adjourn our session in memory of dr. sammy lee, who was a korean american, and myself, i first of all appreciate for that suggestion and i must add my few comments, as i know he was such a great role model, a hero to our community. i know he was well-known as a olympic gold medalist, as a physician, and he served his community for a long time. i met him several times when he came to the city of irvine in commemoration of korean american day. he's full of humor, wit, and knowledge and every time he speaks, people crack up with laughs. so such a wonderful human being. and then also, we recognize him as a very small physical stature, however, he was a giant to our korean american community. he continues to serve as a role model of our community. so this is very proper, and i appreciate all members in recognizing his service to the country as an olympian and citizen of this country. despite all the troubles that he had to go through, endure, all the discriminations that he could not access. i mean pools, and then had to practice, as you heard, practicing, you can imagine sand pools that he made in the back of his yard, but with a strong will, he accomplished the american dream. thank you so much.
[{'start': 57, 'end': 63, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 175, 'end': 189, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 239, 'end': 248, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark Seidenberg: My name is Mark Seidenberg, Vice Chairman of the American Independent Party of California, which is the third largest party in the state. Yesterday I was at the state bar, I picked up certificate of standing for him and according to the state bar, he's not qualified. He's only been active for nine days since January the 1st. He's been inactive since 1991. The government code of California and the state constitution requires five years of being active member of the state bar, and we don't believe he's qualified and I got copies for everybody who would like to receive them. So who do I pass it out to, sir?
[{'start': 11, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tam Ma: hi, good morning, mr. chairs and members. ma with health access california, the state healthcare consumer advocacy coalition. we worked very closely with representative becerra and his office to ensure passage of the affordable care act and we have the utmost confidence that he will continue working hard to ensure that all californians have access to quality and affordable health care and on a personal note, i grew up in mr. becerra's district, and my mother still resides there and i'm very honored to be here today in support of his nomination. thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 28, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 169, 'end': 176, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 429, 'end': 436, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alberto Serico: chairman jones-sawyer, chairman stone, members of the committee, good morning. congressman becerra, congratulations on your appointment. serico appearing on behalf of the california applicant attorneys association. the attorneys represent injured workers. collectively, our attorneys represent probably the most undocumented workers in the state, so we're very proud of that legacy. we are supportive of the nomination and the confirmation of congressman becerra, and we look forward to working with you. in enforcing the civil rights of all of california residents, both documented and undocumented. a point of personal privilege, mister chairmans, i would just say that as a latino and as a person of color we continue to break barriers and shatter through glass ceilings and honored and proud to support your confirmation for attorney general.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 21, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 32, 'end': 37, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 91, 'end': 98, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 455, 'end': 462, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tim Yarian: tim jonah yarian and quite a personal privilege and probably one of the few people in this room that had the opportunity to work with assembly member becerra back in the early 1990s and at that time i was representing the los angeles deputy probation officers and he was a member of the los angeles delegation and we were trying to secure funding for our probation camps and ranches throughout the state and we were very successful in it. i want to say three things about mr. becerra because there's a lot of members i have known come and go, but he's stuck out in my mind for three reasons. number one, his intelligence, which is obvious. number two, he was very respectful and number three, he was a wonderful listener. and he picked up things very well, as i think the committee knows. so, on behalf of my clients, the los angeles deputy probation officers union, asme local 685. also, on behalf of the los angeles professional peace officers association, the riverside sheriff's association, the association for deputy district attorneys. we look forward to working with you on labor, on law enforcement, and public safety issues and i'd like to introduce tj tarjamo with the los angeles police protective league, and he can put in his 25 cents worth. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 150, 'end': 157, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 476, 'end': 483, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1160, 'end': 1170, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tj Tarjamo: Congressman Becerra, TJ Tarjamo from the Los Angeles Police Protective League, representing 10,000 officers, hardworking officers keeping our city safe and on behalf of those 10,000 officers, and with the SD Board members, I'm here to support Congressman Becerra's nomination and confirmation for Attorney General. Thank you.
[{'start': 12, 'end': 19, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 21, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 255, 'end': 262, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Xavier Becerra: good morning. buenos dias, el presidente. congressman xavier tim becerra on behalf of the united food and commercial workers state council, we represent about 160,000 members in the state of california. we submitted our letter of support and endorsement of congressman becerra to be our next attorney general yesterday and we wholeheartedly support his nomination and confirmation. on a personal note, i've known xavier tim becerra since 1990s. today, ironically, is an historic day. not only what's happening here in sacramento, but also happening in washington dc, concurrently. senator dick durbin from illinois asked, requested an answer from the nominee of trump, jeff sessions, about what will happen to 800,000 students under daca. there was an incomplete response. he has been asked that question three times. ladies and gentlemen there's no time than the present to have a person of such integrity as congressman xavier tim becerra to be our next attorney general. with all due respect we ask for your yes vote. thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 26, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 27, 'end': 40, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 54, 'end': 72, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 269, 'end': 276, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 413, 'end': 431, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 589, 'end': 600, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 662, 'end': 667, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 669, 'end': 682, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 922, 'end': 940, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Amanda Wallner: Hi, good morning. Amanda Wallner with the California LGBT Health and Human Services Network. We're made up of over 60 LGBT community organizations throughout the state. I want to thank the congressman for his long-standing support of the LGBT community, which you referenced today. I think with kind of 2016's parting shot of ruling on an injunction of the Affordable Care Act's nondiscrimination protection for LGBT Americans, we know that they have every intention of keeping you busy over the next few years and we're confident that you will be an excellent champion for LGBT Californians at a time when we need it more than ever. So, we support.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Caitlin Vega: Mr. Chairs and members, Caitlin Vega on behalf the California Labor Federation and the 2 million union members that we represent. We could not be in greater support than we are today. We are very very pleased by the governor's nomination of the Representative Bacerra. These are hard times for working people. Here in California we know that so many workers are still having wages stolen, are forced to work off the clock and the Attorney General is the top enforcer of workers' rights. We are very grateful to have someone who has demonstrated commitment to protecting workers' rights. We are also seeing challenges across this country to workers' ability to come together and form a union. We know that Representative Becerra is a strong supporter of workers' rights on every level and comes from a family of working people, whose dad was a laborer like mine. He will be there to fight for workers and protect us when we need it most. So we're here in strong support. Thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 10, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 24, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 260, 'end': 267, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 720, 'end': 727, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Gregory Cramer: Good morning Chairman and members, Gregory Cramer on behalf of Planned Parenthood Affiliates of California, and we strongly support Representative Becerra for being appointed as Attorney General. He has been a relentless advocate for reproductive rights, and I would like to thank the members for bringing up those issues. He's scored 100% on our score card in 2016 in his fought back against congressional attempt to defund us and to throw 850,000 Californians off of our roles and deny them health care services that community clinics and other providers can not provide. So we look forward to working with you in the years to come, and pushing back and making sure that women and man across the state have access to the reproductive healthcare that they need, thank you.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 147, 'end': 154, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
George Asseto: committee members and congressmen, my name is asseto. i'm president of cruzino cebarro association, sacramento's local latino organization, and we strongly endorse congressman becerra for this position and we've spoken with a coalition of other latino organizations in town and they all very strongly support congressman becerra, like cafe de california and other organizations. we feel he's a great fit and various of our members have worked with congressman becerra and they've all told me he's a person with great integrity and will be a great fit for this position. so thank you and we've submitted a letter in support to the committee, thank you.
[{'start': 46, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 176, 'end': 183, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 321, 'end': 328, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 460, 'end': 467, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Paul Bower: good morning, mr. chairman and members of the committee, paul with mercury public affairs on behalf of every town for gun safety. this morning, we are very pleased to support the nomination of congressman becerra to this esteemed position and look forward to working with him in the future, thank you.
[{'start': 57, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 205, 'end': 212, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Craig DeLuz: mr. chairman, members of the committee, my name is craig xavier deluz, i'm with the fire arms policy coalition, and i am here in opposition to the nomination. fundamental to civil rights is the understanding that civil rights are fundamental. they're fundamental rights to all individuals, and to all citizens and it seems to be a tradition in california and amongst our most recent attorney generals, to support certain rights for certain groups of people. it's important that at this time, when californians are under serious attack simply for expressing and wanting to express and exercise their fundamental right to keep and bear arms. they're under attack by local municipalities as well as by the state legislature. it's important the we have an attorney general who can put partisan politics aside and who will seek to once again support, as well as enforce all civil rights for all californians. and unfortunately, based on the record as we see it at the firearms policy coalition, we simply do not believe that this particular nominee is capable of doing that and therefore, we oppose his nomination. thank you. thank you, sir.
[{'start': 51, 'end': 69, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Peter Schilla: Mr. Chair and members, Congressman Becerra, I am Peter Schilla with Californian's Together and the California bilingual education pack. We strongly support the endorsement of Congressman Becerra and we celebrate the governor's appointment that he will be our new Attorney General. Thank you very much. There are 1.4 million English learners in this state and we think he will provide protections for those children in an excellent fashion. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 42, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 49, 'end': 62, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 187, 'end': 194, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Marques Castrejon: hello, marques craig castrejon with the california pan-ethnic health network. it's a health equity advocacy organization. we're here to voice our support for congressman becerra for the next attorney general of california. i want to kind of touch on a couple of topics that we felt were necessary to mention but weren't really talked about a lot. one of them is that california's going to be at the forefront of a political battle that's coming down from washington, especially in regards to consumer protections in healthcare. in california since 2003 we've had some strong consumer protections here in california. we believe that our next attorney general need to take a strong stance in no providing the right battle for, not the undocumented groups, also them but the civil protections for our low income communities, our communities of color that are going to be so deeply affected by some of the proposals that new administration is bringing forth. we need to make sure that we continue to strive to keep the laws in place that we already have here. such as, need to timely access and interpretation of the plans, the actual languages in california. and we also want to be a voice that's going to try to repeal any laws that we have set here, especially the non-discrimination laws that we will not be able to discriminate regardless of your race, religion, national origin, ethnicity, age, sex, sexual orientation or disability. they believe that they have a great track record and we are proud to support them. thank you.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 170, 'end': 177, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brian Allison: good morning esteemed chairs and members of the committee. my name is brian marques allison. i represent 1.6 million members of afscme here to applaud the governor's prudent nomination, someone who has spent his entire career in public service standing up for the rights of working people and standing up to protect disadvantaged communities. we are in strong support of his nomination and we think that it's prudent at this time in california's history and this nation's history that we have someone in the office of attorney general who really understands the issues affecting californians, and is committed to supporting and protecting the rights of all workers and californians. so with that, we ask that the full body confirm him, but thank you for your time today.
[{'start': 70, 'end': 91, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: good morning, committee and congressman becerra. kyle with sierra club california in strong support for nomination for attorney general. i was greatly encouraged by your commitment to protecting the environment and the public health of all californians and hopefully can look forward to working with you in the future. thank you.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 47, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 49, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Juan Altamirano: thank you mr. chairman, my name is juan brian altamirano i'm here on behalf of autobahn california. also very thankful for the governor's nomination of congressman becerra. i also too am a first generation immigrant from mexico, so that's in itself a very prideful thing to have our first latino be represented in this powerful office. so, thank you for that. we look forward to working with you on epa and the essays. thank you.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 164, 'end': 171, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jerilyn Stapleton: Good morning, my name is Jerilyn Stapleton. I'm President of California Now, that's the organization for women and also I'm wearing two hats, today. As the state coordinator for the Peace Alliance, two things. There was a letter sent dated 12/7/16 to the Committee from the Americans Against Gun Violence and also Violence Prevention Coalition of Greater Los Angeles and several other organizations. Both of our organizations would like to add our name to that list, it really was concerned about the new Attorney General enforcing our new gun laws, I want to make sure that that happens, because it's extremely important in terms of that issue, in terms of ending the violence, gun violence. Secondly, at the Democratic EBoard meeting in November there was a resolution passed requesting that the Attorney General of California investigate, manage, interpret, prosecute where appropriate, all the matters relating to sexual misconduct of law enforcement officers. This is an issue that involved out of the human trafficking situation up in the Bay Area across six different counties where the local DA was reluctant in terms of doing this and it's gone on for months and months and months. So we do hope that you would consider this and follow through with it. Thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Catherine Douglas: good afternoon mr. chair members, congressman becerra. my name is catherine juan douglas and i represent private essential access community hospitals. we are the association of private disproportion share hospitals in the state of california and we have worked with congressman becerra since his first term as an assembly member in california legislature and 24 years in congress, fighting for the healthcare rights of seniors and low income californians in california. he has been our greatest advocate in probably the california legislatorate, in the terms of working for low income seniors. we see him come to california as the attorney general with great pleasure but with a little bit of sorrow because we so need him in dc right now doing the work that he's been doing for all these years. and in his capacity as attorney general he will have the responsibility of approving certain hospital sales transactions. we believe that he will conduct those duties with with same fairness, and balanced approach with an eye towards social justice that he has conducted himself in congress. so with that we offer our enthusiastic support for the nomination and your approval of congressmen becerra as our next attorney general. thank you.
[{'start': 46, 'end': 53, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 66, 'end': 88, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 278, 'end': 285, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1187, 'end': 1194, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mel Issac: morning mr. chair, members. my name is issac. i'm here for oceans 11 casino and crystal casino. we think that this has been an extraordinary hearing, we think that you've got an extraordinary nominee. this has been a great way to understand what the issues are that have been discussed so far. we're going to listen a little bit more for some other issues. we want to congratulate the nominee and your committee for this great hearing. thank you very much.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christopher Sanchez : Good morning, Mr. Chair and Members of the Committee. My name is Christopher Sanchez with the Coalition for Humane Immigrant Rights, in strong support for the Congress member's appointment, for his championship on immigration issues during his time in Congress and for his comments today as well. Thank you.
[{'start': 65, 'end': 84, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michelle Cabrera: Good morning Co Chairs and members, Michelle Cabrera with the Service Employees International Union, representing over 700,000 members state-wide and we enthusiastically support the nomination of Congressman Becerra for this position. We know he'll be a strong defender of immigrant rights, civil rights, workers rights as well as protect our healthcare safety net ongoing in this new capacity and we urge your support for his confirmation. Thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 208, 'end': 215, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Amanda Wilcox: Good morning. My name is Amanda Wilcox. As many of you on the panel know I have been an advocate for gun violence prevention in this building for over 12 years. I actually shouldn't be here today. Today is the 12th. No, I'm sorry. Today is the 16th anniversary of my daughter's death. She was killed in a rampage shooting in Nevada County in 2001 and shot four times at point blank range. I should be home, but I came because the position of Attorney General is so important to an issue that I care so deeply about. The Department of Justice and the Bureau of Firearms defends our gun laws, and I was pleased with your statement that you would make every effort to defend our strong laws against national intrusion and reciprocity efforts. The Department of Justice implements our new laws and there are going to be many on your plate in the coming year. And of course, maintains the databases that law enforcement uses, that the Bureau of Firearms uses, does the technology upgrades. We rely on the Bureau of Firearms to do good work, to fully and properly Implement our laws and enforce our laws and I felt very heartened that you recognize the need for resources and that you personally seem to be very aligned with where I am in terms of keeping guns out of dangerous hands. Protecting our laws that have reduced firearm death rate, 58% since their peak in 1993. So, thank you Committee Members for asking the questions about gun violence prevention and thank you very much for your answers and position on this issue.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gregory Kramer: good morning. good morning mr chair members, gregory again with planned parenthood affiliates of california. i'd like to thank senator jackson for more eloquently posing what we do here in california than perhaps i can, but i just want to be clear that the attacks on us are real and amount to nothing more than an attack on women, especially an attack on women of lower socioeconomic status. as i was mentioning, we provide services to over 800,000 patients with over a million clinic visits each year, along with one and a half million tests for sti treatment and sex ed for 207,000 california youth, and i just want to point that out as well. so in addition to the services that we provide which in some districts are the only healthcare services that are around for many miles we do provide comprehensive sex education. and we are active in schools across the state. schools are scrambling right now to be in compliance with the california healthy youth act, which mandates that all students obtain age appropriate comprehensive sex ed. the reality is that teachers are either not able to teach or are uncomfortable with providing comprehensive sex ed. that's where we help them out with materials, in addition to the services that we provide in our clinics, the youth of our state do rely on us for accurate information that may not come up elsewhere. but the threat to our operations in california is very real. the majority of our funding comes from federal dollars. and specifically we are worried about a drug program called 340b which provides for heavily discounted drugs for contraception and std's, and so the federal government pays about 90 cents on the dollar for those drugs and the fate of that program is also up in the air as well. the reality is that other community clinics have gone on record year after year saying they cannot absorb the amount of patients that we have if we were to shut down. in addition we are a vital resource for members of the transgender community. folks that feel like they have no were to go. even people that have doctors and private plans that may have a physician that may have personal issues or doesn't have the expertise with health care needs of transgender individuals. they come to planned parenthood. we give them advice, treatments, and services, and so on. with that i hope that we can continue on your support and we appreciate the senators introduction of this resolution, thank you. mr. chair, members of the committee, brian allison on behalf of the american federation state county municipal employees. i just want to express our strong support for this particular piece of legislation. the services that planned parenthood provides on behalf of low income and disadvantaged communities across the state of california. we'd also like to thank the senator for bringing this very important resolution forward. thank you for your time today.
[{'start': 45, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 135, 'end': 142, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2485, 'end': 2498, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jerilyn Stapleton: Hi, Jerilyn Stapleton, California National Organization for Women in very strong support. We definitely stand with Planned Parenthood, thank you for doing this.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Costa: Thank you, good morning Madam Chair and members. My name is Amy Costa. I'm Chief Deputy Director at The Department of Finance. I want to thank you for inviting me and allowing me to provide an overview of the governor's proposed 2017/18 budget. I have provided a number of slides which will helpfully hope guide my presentation. As you can see on the second slide and the slide that Senator Nelson referenced in his opening comments. The tide of revenues is beginning to turn. Even in the best of times we often note that the states budget is rather precariously balanced. And you can see that we have what we would consider a modest adjustment compared to the 2016 budget act, when we passed it. It's revenues are coming in lower than we had originally projected across the board. So that's corporation, personal income tax, and sales in use tax. So we're still growing, we're just not growing as quickly as we had estimated in the 2106 budget act. The slower revenue growth is totaling $5.8 billion over three years. And we also have a current year shortfall in the Med-ical program of $1.8 billion. That shortfall is attributable to two main factors, one of which is a drug rebate. And the other of which is a calculation error related to say things for the coordinated care initiative. And that is contributing to a projected budget deficit of $1.6 billion. On the third slide, you can see a chart that we've shown many times before which shows capital gains revenues over time. We've shown this graph in the past to just illustrate the high volatility of this particular revenue source. Through 2017, I note we are still forecasting above historical levels of capital gains. But we are adjusting the forecast we provided at the 2016 Budget Act. Our budget has been helped actually by the recent enactment of several voter approved initiatives. Prop 52, the hospital fee provided 211 million. Prop 56 at tobacco tax provided 1.2 billion, and Prop 57 precinct reformed provided $22 million savings in solution. We've also mitigated our projected deficit by a statue requires determining that the Coordinated Care Initiative is not providing savings. The elimination of what we call CCI provides the state a net benefit of $628 million. We do propose saving one portion of the program CCI which is the Cal MediConnect pilot project which is authorized by the Federal Government. And which we estimated to provided around $22 million in savings through that pilot. If you'll turn to the fourth slide, you'll see that even in light of revenues coming in a little bit slower than we projected, and with our projected budget deficit. We have tried to preserve and maintain several of the core achievements that we've achieved together in recent budgets. And those include the Earned Income Tax Credit, the increased minimum wage, the elimination of the maximum family grant, the continued investment in the Affordable Care Act, the SSI/SSP COLA. As well as continuing funding in education for both K-12 as well as higher education. We also continue our work on infrastructure and the Governor's proposed budget and climate change. Additionally, we grow the Budget Stabilization Act by 1.2 billion in our proposal. For a cumulative total of $7.9 billion which would be 63% of the constitutional target. In light of that, the proposed budget offers $3.2 billion in major solutions. And again, still preserving some of those core achievements. We propose several solutions to bring the budget back into balance while also building up a robust Reserve fund for some of the unpredictability that we're experiencing. We did pull back on a variety of one time spending proposals, and we have tempered some anticipated spending increases. If you look on the next slide, slide number five, I've you'll see the Proposition 98 funding including our proposals. Based on the revenue projection that we've updated and the proposed budget. We are adjusting the Proposition 98 guarantee in 2015, 16 and 16, 17 for savings of $1.7 billion. Another part of our solution package is to recapture some 2016 allocations for around 900 million. The major components of that include the 400 million that we had set aside in the Budget Act for affordable housing. We would score that, and we would cancel scheduled $300 million transfer for state office buildings. The remainder of the 2016 allocations that we would propose for savings include community infrastructure grants at $67 million. Children mental health crisis service grants at 17 million, residency flats for primary physicians at 33.4 million, and disability applications for 45 million. Those are some of the bigger ticket items, and there are more throughout the appropriates chapters in the budget. The last portion of the solution that we're offering is to constraint spending growth. And that includes a proposal to pause scheduled childcare rate increases. We would maintain the increased reimbursement rates for childcare providers at the 2016, 17 level. But we would pause the 17, 18 scheduled increase. And we'd also forgo the 17, 18 childcare provider COLA. We'd also pause the addition of 2,959 state preschool slots that were planned for April 1st 2018. And together, that's a savings of 104 million. Our next spending growth proposal for balancing ourselves is to stop providing any new middle class scholarships for new students. We'd maintain the students currently in the program. But we would not be offering any new scholarships and that provides as savings of $36 million in the budget year. And it would grow to $116 million in the out years. Lastly, we're not submitting a variety of justified department budget proposals. And we're converting some capital outlay projects to lease revenue as the final portion of our solutions. If you look at the next slide on slide six, I'm going to go over just a couple of the significant adjustments that we offer in the budget. As I mentioned, we do propose a change to the Proposition 98 levels. And so you can see that illustrated on this graph. And I'd note, even with the adjustments that based on revenue, when we adjust the guarantee. You're still seeing year over year Prop 98 growth of 2.1 billion from the revised 16, 17 Prop 98 guarantee level to the projected 17, 18 guarantee. For people's spending will be at 15,216 total funds. And we're also including $744 million for the Local Control Funding Formula. Which would bring us about 96% of the target for that funding formula. We're still ahead of schedule, but it's relatively flat based on this proposal. And then we offered 287 million for one time discretionary funding. And 200 million for the last year of the career technical education incentive grant funding program, that was a three year program, and this is the final installment. In the K-12 budget, we're also proposing a deferral. Where we would shift LCFF expenditures from June of 2017 to July of 2017 to maintain our 16, 17 expenditure levels consistent with our new minimum guarantee. Unlike the deferrals of the past, we create the deferral and we pay it off almost immediately. So it would not be an ongoing deferral. Moving on to the community colleges, apportionments are relatively flat year over year for the community colleges. We do provide a 1.48 COLA and a slight increase for enrollment growth. We are also proposing $150 million in one time Prop 98 funding for a guided pathways grants program. That would be administered by the chancellor's office to local community colleges. And we provide the community colleges with $43.7 million in one time Proposition 98 for deferred maintenance and instructional materials. In higher education, we do also propose increases on the CSU. They've received about $1.9 billion on new funding since 2012, 13. And we are proposing a total increase of $161.2 million for the CSU. Of that 26 million is for the final installment of funds, realized through the middle class scholarship savings. That's something that we've done in previous budgets for CSU. At UC they've also grown since 12, 13, the UC has received 880 million in new funding. And we are proposing an increase of $131.2 million as part of their growth. And we also include $169 million of Prop 2 funds. Again for the last installment of paying for their UC retirement fund, unfunded liability, this would be the last year that we did that. Moving on to climate change, we do have a proposal for a $2.2 billion Cap and Trade Expenditure Plan. It would be contingent on a passage of a two-thirds Legislation to confirm the ability to administer the program beyond 2020. Additionally, we have another drought package, slightly smaller than what we've presented in the past, for $179 million. In transportation, we're again proposing a transportation package. It's very similar to the packages presented in the past. This was first brought forward in 2015. I think only the notable changes I'll mention today, which includes that we would stabilize the gasoline excise tax up to 21 and a half cents. And additionally, we have a proposal to fund active transportation in this package, which is slightly different than the packages that we've presented in the past. Lastly, in the Health and Human Services area, the Governor's Budget contains and protects many of the important strides that we've made in recent years in the budget. The budget proposes $18.9 billion total fund, $1.6 billion general fund to continue the optional medical expansion in California. The budget also provides a full year funding for full scope medical coverage for undocumented children, for a cost of $179.5 million general fund. I'll just close out with the last slide, which I actually believe is also in the Committee summary of the budget, and it is a slide that we've used frequently. And it just shows that, in the history of this state, our budgets, our balanced budgets have very often been followed by deficits. And you can see that in 1718, we're starting to see a little bit of the red, a little bit of the bar below the line. And this fact added to a high degree of uncertain, uncertainty both on the revenue side as well as within the Federal government. We believe requires a prudent approach and additionally, it requires a robust Reserve. Unlike some of the previous red bars that you're seeing here, we actually do have the Rainy Day Fund, to help us whether some of these downturns that will invariably occur. And so we would just again underline the importance of ensuring that we have a robust Reserve, given the uncertainty that we're facing. With that, I'm happy to answer any questions, thank you.
[{'start': 60, 'end': 69, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 391, 'end': 397, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Arena Allsonson: thank you, madame chair. i'm arena jonah allsonson, i'm the chief economist at finance. as ms. costa mentioned, we do not regard the past few months of missing our forecast from the budget act as temporary. we do regard this as the beginning of a trend. and that is how we are interpreting things. this is one of the main disagreements with the legislative analysts office. while there have been times when revenues have come in stronger or weaker. for example, in november, when we saw revenues coming in very strongly. that was somewhat borrowed from december. and so, again, it is a little bit too early to tell. i think january's going to be informative in that sense because there is a estimated payment that is due, but we regard our forecast as sort of the central one, and what we see as a reflection of what is going on in the underlying economy.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 95, 'end': 100, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Adam Dorsey: dorsey, department of finance. so what the budget assumes is that the congress would have to take action to avoid a sunsetting of the chip program. and so absent that, the aca had a temporary bump in the federal matching percentage and so right now we're getting 88% federal dollars in that program, the traditional match rate would be 65%. so what the budget assumes is that we return to the traditional sharing ratio of 65% federal funds however, if congress fails to act, basically, there would be no chip program, and so we build in some general fund costs, assuming that congress will act to continue the program but at the 65% level. it's a couple $100 million and i can get you the exact number to your staff.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Adam Dorsey: I don't know if I stated my name, so Adam Dorsey, Department of Finance. Better late than never. So I'm tracking a somewhat smaller increase, but I will tell you that on the state operation side, the biggest investment that needs to be made in that department right now is getting ready to implement the federal managed care regulations, which really changed the way that Medicaid programs had administered the managed care benefit, and so there is an augmentation in this year's budget for that important work.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Frank Colins: Frank Colins, Department of Finance So, the $2 billion described as sort of the medical and pharmaceutical programs for all of healthcare. So, even if the receiver were to leave in its entirety, those cost don't immediately just diminish or go away. That is sort of the cost of providing medical and pharmaceutical care. There is a process that's been established with the court now, where the Office of Inspector General goes out and does a medical inspection of each institution. That information goes back to the receiver and then based on that information and additional information he's able to delegate prisons back to the state. To date nine of the 34 persons have been delegated back to the state, so that process is working, and that is moving forward. There is some additional money in the budget for the receiver, about a little over $30 million, and so that's a sort of recognition of the progress that is being made and kind of continuing to move forward. So, there is a point in time in the near future where the state is able to take back the prison medical care system.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matt Olney: Matt Olney, Department of Finance. Just for contacts the statue Specifies that 60% of annual proceeds are subject to continuous preparation, okay? Annual proceeds. The budget assumes $1.5 billion of cap and trade proceeds in '17-'18. 60% of that would be $900 million Okay so the budget reflects 60% of what we project to be the annual proceeds. The remaining $1.3 or so, reflects the remaining 40%, plus what's in the Reserve of the cap and trade greenhouse reduction funds. So, the money is subject to appropriation in the budget act, and given the fund balance as well as what we project to be 40%, that's where the calculation is made.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bernie Murphy: bernie arena murphy, department of finance, you are correct, senator.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Sisney: Jason Sisney from the LAO, I think that's exactly right. In the Constitution, actually the Legislature does have some limits on its ability to constrain our pension funds from what they can invest in. And I think that in effect, it really becomes a negotiation between the elected leaders and the Legislature and CalPERS about how these statutory restrictions will work. Because the voters in 1992 really gave the pension systems the upper hand and how to regard these limitations. I think the bottom line is that the Legislature needs to be careful. There are clearly situations where the elected representatives of state have decided that a particular category of investment is very problematic and that's something that the constitution envisions can happen. But really it gets into talking with CalPERS and CalSTERS as well as other pension systems about well if the state wants to move in that direction, how can we best achieve that policy goal while at the same time limiting the effects on the pension fund?
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christian Osmena: Christian Osmena with the Department of Finance and I think this is following up on the conversation that you all had earlier, so Ms. Costa referred to it as this is the offset that Ms. Costa referred to, so the initiative requires that the state, in 17-18, appropriate $50 million from this new special fund. And so, we are using this fund, the initiative requires that it be used to sustain, retain, and expand graduate education. We're using this fund in lieu of general fund that's provided already, and is already being used for graduate medical education.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 134, 'end': 139, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 186, 'end': 191, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Adam Dorsey: Adam Dorsey, Finance, so a couple of things. There's actually two different things going on in the budget with respect to Graduate Medical Education. And so there was a sort of one-time, it was a one year augmentation of 33 million that is proposing to come out of the budget for OSHPD, for Graduate Medical Education slots. And that is unrelated to the Proposition 56 money that is going to the University of California.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stuart Thompson: thank you. stuart bernie thompson, on behalf of the california medical association. i would just like to clear up the graduate medical education question we were just talking about. there was two separate allocations. actually, last year we negotiated $100 million to be allocated over three years in the budget. that is irrespective of prop 56, that's been completely removed from this budget. in regards to the prop 56 specific allocations to the uc, it's very clear that some money does have to go directly to the uc, $40 million per year. you actually look in the budget, it's $50 million, because dof has budgeted five quarters out, if i'm correct. so if you look at that, there's a corresponding reduction in the uc's general fund for any amount of the prop 56 money coming in. so basically, the way we read that is basically sweeping all that money straight into the general fund because if you look at it from the uc's perspective, there's no increased funding. they will have the same level of gme slots, of resident slots, as they did in the year before, which does kind of bring us to the larger point on prop 56. we do have major concerns in the proposed budget. in our perspective, basically the budget sweeps anything that is not bolted down in the proposition into the general fund. 82% of the non-allocated money was supposed to be spent on new programs. there has been some talk of a new programs but specifics are lacking. additionally, on the gme funding, there is concern from us that we're not making the required investments into the program that were necessary. prop 56 was supposed to be an initiative to create a special fund to make strategic investance into the medical program. after years, we couldn't get these rate increases through the general fund. if you read the budget as we read it, the vast majority, over 90% of this money is just getting swept into the general fund. so for us, it's a major concern. we understand this is a start of a conversation, look forward to continuing it. and i will say, 1.8 million medical budget deficit, we still are struggling to fully comprehend. and so more data on that, what we look forward to. so, thank you for the committee for having this hearing, and look forward to working with you in the future, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brianna Pittman: brianna stuart pittman with the california dental association. we just want to echo the comments of my colleague from cma. voters overwhelmingly approved proposition 56, and the measure was very clear that the medi-cal dollars were to be spent to increasing timely access to care. we know that we have an access to care crisis. we have insufficient providers, partially because they just can't afford to see these patients. and so, we know that we need to be diligent about how we use limited resources. but we do think that the measure is very clear that this should be looking at new growth and new rates and how do we improve access to care. so, look forward to working with you, legislative leadership and moving forward, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erica Romero: good afternoon, erica brianna romero on behalf of the association of independent california colleges and universities. we represent 79 wasc-accredited nonprofit colleges. this budget pulls the trigger on an 11.3% cut to the cal grant award to students who attend the nonprofit sector. that means every low-income student in california who wanted to attend a nonprofit would lose over $1,000 a year. it would cost the state $8 million to restore this cut, but to ask families who earn between 20 and $40,000 to come up with an extra $1000 per year is unfathomable to those families. we look forward to working with the legislature to make sure their college dreams can become a reality, thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anh Nguyen: good afternoon, senators. anh on behalf of the regional center of orange county, here speaking on behalf of the regional center's over 20,000 people that are served in orange county and their families. we just wanted to echo the concerns that senator mcguire had shared earlier regarding the rates. not only to those who are moving out of developmental centers, but also rates for community based providers who are working with people with developmental disabilities that mirror the conditions of those currently living in those conditions and in those facilities. and so, we thank you for the work of the legislature and their investment in this previous year. and look forward to continue working with the legislature in the upcoming year. thank you very much.
[{'start': 251, 'end': 258, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bob Wieckowski: committee on environmental quality for the 2017-2018 session, i'm senator bob jonah wieckowski, i've been, i will be returning as the chair of this committee. if senator stone were not traveling, i would welcome him as our new vice-chair of the committee, as well as senator lara and senator skinner, which will be joining it and senator stern, good morning to you, and welcome to the environmental quality committee. we do have senator hill returning, and senator bates, who's also traveling to places on the east coast for a special day in their lives. the purpose of this hearing is to provide oversight of the programs that are administered by the air resource board, and address the air resource board's responsibilities under the federal clean air act, as well as the state of california's clean air act. air quality is important, and has an important history in california, as our background paper indicates. it's los angeles has had dubious honor of not having two professional football teams no, not that dubious honor, but the first place in california to experience severe air quality pollution. as early as 1905, before the great earthquake in san francisco, los angeles was adopting measures to try to control smoke emissions from a severely smoggy day in 1903, caused the city to experience something many described as a solar eclipse. in the summer of 1945, los angeles experienced smoke and fumes in the downtown that caused people to experience stinging in their eyes, and a sensation that their throats were being scraped. as a result, the los angeles county board of supervisors appointed a smoke and fumes commission to study the county's air quality. this is in 1943. at los angeles' urging, a bill flew through the california legislature and was signed by governor earl warren, giving counties the authority to regulate air pollution. then in 1947, the los angeles county board of supervisors then established the los angeles county. air pollution control district, this was the first air pollution control program in the united states of america. now, as a group, the chemicals that caused these earliest problems in los angeles are the same eight same types of pollutants that we're still dealing with today in california. they're poisonous, they're toxic, they're carcinogenic, and they cause a variety of negative health conditions. smoke particles, and other organic compounds lead to cardiovascular, and respiratory illnesses, and also premature deaths. some of the halogenate compounds are known endocrine disruptors, and neurotoxins, which can cause cancerous tumors, birth defects, developmental disorders, central nervous system damage, intellectual disability, persistent memory impairment, epilepsy, and dementia. now, over the last 65 years, california has instituted programs and measures to protect california air and to reduce the air pollutants. today, california's air quality has improved, but criteria air pollutants from vehicles and from refineries continue to present real health risks, and environmental concerns to our citizens. finally, we were originally going to discuss the settlement with the volkswagen, relating to the defect device software installed in their cars. model from 2009 to 2014, that were sold here in california, and in the united states. now, these devices circumvented vehicle emission control systems, in order to bypass the state of california, and federal air pollutant laws and regulations that we're going to be discussing today. in light of the flurry of recent activity, relating to volkswagen, as well as fiat chrysler, we've decided that the senate will conduct a specific hearing on this later on to get together, so if you're here for the volkswagen discussion, i apologize and with those introductory remarks, we have the one and only star of our show, the one witness that we have to date here. resource board chairwoman mary nichols. good morning and welcome.
[{'start': 74, 'end': 94, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 170, 'end': 175, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 275, 'end': 279, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 292, 'end': 299, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 338, 'end': 343, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 437, 'end': 441, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 465, 'end': 470, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1787, 'end': 1798, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3904, 'end': 3916, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alan Abbs: My name is Alan Abbs. I'm the Executive Director for the California Air Pollution Control Officers Association, representing the 35 air districts in California. I'd like to say first off that I appreciate Sharon Nichols comments about the locals air districts, and the work that we've done together with their resources board in controlling emissions in California. And I think chart number four, that was part of our handouts, really displays what can happen when air districts and ARB, and other stakeholders can collaborate to reduce emissions. For every little dot you see on here, for some sort of in-use incentive, or some sort of regulation, there's probably three or four dots that don't show up here. That have either state regulations, or local air district regulations, that help contribute to this downward decline over the last 35 years. And I think it shows, but when you look at it in total, an 85% reduction over 35 years from working together shows you what both of us can do together. I would like to just point out that incentives are a big part of the reductions that local air districts can get nowadays. As Sharon Nichols mentioned, air districts by and large have done a lot of work in local regulations on stationary sources. But there's a lot of sources out here in California which local air districts really can't get to without using incentives. And so Prop 1B was very important, Carl Moyer Program continues to be very important, even in rural areas of California where we're changing over pretty large agricultural fleets to tier 3 and tier 4 engines. And the last thing I'll just mention, as Chair Nichols also alluded to, air quality regulation in California has gotten really complicated over the last 20, 25 years. We have new technology. In the old days, it was stationary sources and some mobile sources, and now we're talking about climate change. And so, in the old days, we had some stationary sources. But nowadays, between carb staff and local air district staff, we're looking at landfills, composting facilities, compost to land applications, and things which local air districts really never contemplated getting involved in, in the last 20 or 30 years. And so, it's a big effort. The air districts need all of the help they can get in working with carb and moving the ball forward. And we look forward to doing that. Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 205, 'end': 219, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1129, 'end': 1143, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1630, 'end': 1637, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ryan Kenny: hi. good morning, senator wieckowski, senator hill, chair nichols. my name is is ryan, i'm with clean energy. we're the nation's largest provider of renewable natural gas and natural gas transportation fuel. and one element i wanted to add to the great discussion this morning is on low nox, .02 nox vehicles. we have a urgent matter in the anathema districts in the south coast, in san joaquin valley.. and the .02 nox vehicles are available for appointment today. we have a nine liter that's been certified by air b, the 12 liter for the heavy, heavy duty trucks is expected to be certified a year from now. and one of the problems is the tech assessments by air b has demonstrated that fuel cell and battery electric in the heavy duty space, will not be deployable for between 15 to 35 years. that's according to arb's technical assessments. so if you're looking at nox and greenhouse gas reduction immediately, we believe that the .02 nox engines in heavy use space would be the way to go. also the dollars, of course, is what it all comes down to, incentive funding. and last year, the .02 nox engine received $23 million in the arb funding plan. it's expected to be made around the same this year, except the 12 where they will be available and that comes with a higher incremental cost between diesel and the .02 nox engines. so more money is needed, but we've been talking to the ports, we've been talking to the air districts. they all want this funding, they're all very supportive of the 0.2 nox engine and we encourage the other committee members to maybe talk to those folks as well. so, thank you for your time.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 36, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 46, 'end': 50, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 58, 'end': 65, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 81, 'end': 85, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bonnie Holmes-Gen: good morning, mr. chair, and member, and chairman nichols. very happy to be here, and part of this discussion, extremely important. we're very proud. i'm bonnie with the american lung association in california. we're very proud of the progress that we've made in california. we're very proud of chair nichols leadership at the state air board. i want to underscore that california's programs are saving billions in health costs, from lung and heart and other diseases connected to air pollution and climate change. and the american lung association in california has done research over the years to quantify these benefits in terms of the numbers of asthma attacks and hospitalizations, and premature deaths avoided. so just wanted to offer that we have some very helpful research and numbers. for example, our latest analysis, zero emission future, shows the severe health and climate toll of our current dependence on gasoline, conventional fuels. and the billions in savings, up to 15 billion in savings and benefits that we can achieve in california by 2030, by a conversion to zero emission transportation, and that's not even a complete conversion, that's just moving forward with about a 60% conversion. so, the lung association's working hard to protect and strengthen our clean air and climate programs. we look forward to working with you, especially important this next year. we're very focused on promoting the strongest possible scoping plan that you've discussed. a zero emission vehicle mission strategy that will meet and exceed the 1.5 million goal by 2025 as chair nichol's stated. moving to zero emission is critical. and moving to zero emission in the freight sector and adoption of a strong short lift client pollutant plan. we hope to work with you on all these things. and in closing, again, we're very proud of our state's accomplishments. at the lung association we track the progress through our annual state of the year report. and we always talk about both the tremendous progress we've achieved, but the tremendous challenge ahead of us. we have a lot of work to do. and as of this state at achieving this rapid transition away from combustion is a key step. thank you.
[{'start': 50, 'end': 57, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 154, 'end': 160, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 301, 'end': 308, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1583, 'end': 1589, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mikail Scavarro: chairman and senators, mikail here on behalf of the california council for environmental and economic balance. appreciate that you guys had this hearing today, and just wanted to make a quick statement that we're here as a resource. and that the stuff we touched on today, mainly transportation diesel does not include the complexity of some of the stationary sources which were kind of mentioned at the very end. with ceqa and ceqa mitigation as well as how the local air management quality plans feed into the state implementation plan. all these planning documents are taking place right now and so in the next year, 18 months or so, we're going to see a tremendous amount of movement towards the future and so some of those plateaus can be projected out as decreases as those plans are completed, and the rules and policies that are needed to achieve that are there. but also i want to kind of follow up on the comments about the air districts in regards to there's a tremendous need for funding and incentives. just in the south, i think they're projecting something upwards of 2 billion a year to help them achieve federal attainment. the national air quality standards are gettings stricter. and those things will continue to drive down while berries an attainment now. they made need help getting there in the future. so it's important for the state to look at these as a robust. comprehensive package in each air base and has their own individual needs. what's good for south coast is not necessarily good for san joaquin, and the bay area, and vice versa. and so we need to, one, look at it local. but two, at the state and regional level. and see how we can help everyone achieve their national ambient air quality standards as well as the state climate goals. all working together, moving forward, with the understanding that transportation is not stationary and everyone has their own needs and their own programs. the complexity is tremendous and steve is here to help you guys on either side. we're big supporters of a lot of the incentive funding programs, as well as compliance for the stationary sources. so, thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 419, 'end': 423, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1961, 'end': 1966, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ben Hueso: Thank you. Good morning everyone, it's my pleasure to be here. Thank you for having this public hearing and promoting public participation and transparency in governments. I know all of you had a good two months to vet this candidate. And I think it's very important that we do so. My name is Ben Hueso, Senator for the 40th district And currently serving us the Chairman of the California Latino Legislative Caucus. The Latino Caucus endeavors to unite legislators around policies that promote equality for all in California, not just Latinos, all of Californians. A just and equal society offers hope in achieving the American dream for all people irrespective of their differences. Members of the Latino Caucus participate at all levels of governance to ensure we begin to move our state closer to a representative government that succeeds in expressing the views and needs of every single Californian, a process that considers every unique experience and achieving the most effective public policy. Governance is also inclusive that strives to leave no one behind in society. We work to create a society that not only offers hope in achieving the American dream, but provides the necessary tools for everyone seeking to achieve it. I applaud the governor's decision, once again, for using his considerable resources for those available to him through his office to thoroughly search, throughout California, to bring forward the most talented and qualified individual in our state to occupy one of the most important offices in the State of California, the office of the Attorney General. And that candidate being the honorable representative of California, Xavier Beccera. Xavier Beccera is the most qualified person to fill this important position. In order to do best by Californians this moment in time requires us to be conscious of all the opportunities and challenges facing California. This moment in time requires us to take the appropriate action to guide our state and to safeguard all of California's interests. This moment in time requires the services of Representative Beccera. California has a pulse, California has values, California has needs. In our community today, there's no individual more in tune with the pulls of California that embodies it's values, and more prepared to serve it's current needs. No one is more prepared for all of that than Xavier Beccera. His career as a respected public servant dates back to 1986, when he started service as an aid for State Senator Art Torres. He moved on to serve as a deputy Attorney General for three years to the California Attorney General Van De Kamp. And since 1992, he has served the great State of California in the United States House of Representatives and has been a member of the very powerful and prestigious House Ways and Means Committee. He is the first Latino to serve on that Committee. That is an impressive 31 years fighting for California's best interest In that time, California has risen to be the sixth largest economy, and a statistical tie for fifth, and a symbol of our opportunity and equality for the rest of the world. First elected to public office in 1992, his extensive voting record lays out a very thorough and transparent history of his values, beliefs and goals. Few of us have clearly stated their positions on social matters as exhaustively as Representative Becerra. I hope you will consider that record. It speaks volumes to us. It says Representative Becerra believes unequivocally in equality for all, in prosperity for all, in education and empowerment for all. Most importantly, it says that Representative Beccera believes in equal justice for all. A society with the absence of hope breeds fear, crime, and lack of initiative. I believe Representative Beccera is the one to best represent the shining hook the California brings to the world. I applaud this Committee for your efforts in this important process, and I ask that this Committee advance this nomination to the Senate Floor as soon as possible. Thank you very much for your time.
[{'start': 293, 'end': 302, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1661, 'end': 1675, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1677, 'end': 1691, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2087, 'end': 2094, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2372, 'end': 2386, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2501, 'end': 2511, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2614, 'end': 2625, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3368, 'end': 3375, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3463, 'end': 3470, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3622, 'end': 3629, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3769, 'end': 3776, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alberto Torrico: Alberto Torrico appearing on behalf of the California Applicants' Attorney Association, who collectively represent the thousand of injured workers, including undocumented workers. Also on behalf of rank-and-file probation officers from the Kern County Probation Officers Union, the Sacramento County Probation Officers Association, and the San Joaquin County Probation Officers Association in support of the nomination. I think that Congressman Becerra over the last several hours, I think approaching seven now in both houses, has currently demonstrated and is eminently qualified to serve as Attorney General and I think, in these very perilous times, is the perfect choice to be our first Latino Attorney General of California. Proud to support his confirmation, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 445, 'end': 452, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Lovell: mr. chairman, john jonah lovell, on behalf of a number of law enforcement organizations, california coalition of law enforcement associations representing 80,000 peace officers throughout the state. the association of the district attorneys, the los angeles police protective league, the riverside sheriffs association, la county probation officers, afscme local 685, and the los angeles county professional peace officers association, this is an excellent appointment. we are strongly in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tam Ma: good afternoon, mr. chair and members. tam with health access california. we're the statewide health care consumer advocacy coalition working for quality affordable healthcare for all californians. we're here today to strongly support the nomination of mr. becerra to be california's next attorney general. mr. becerra has been a strong champion for health care consumers during his time in congress and we worked very closely with him and his office to secure passage of the affordable care act. i also very much appreciate all the questions that the committee raised today around healthcare issues from prescription drug prices to health insure and nonprofit hospital mergers, charity care, consumer protections around network adequacy and timely access, the future of the affordable care act, selling insurance across state lines. those are all issues that are very high on our agenda and they're all issues that affect the ability of california consumers to be able to access quality and affordable healthcare. so in closing, we just ask the committee to confirm mr. becerra's nomination. thank you.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 257, 'end': 264, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 311, 'end': 318, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1071, 'end': 1078, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Adam Keigwin: mr. chair and members, adam john keigwin on behalf of everytown for gun safety. we thank the congressman for all of his work through the years in congress and look forward to working with him as our next attorney general. thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Hailey DeOrro: good afternoon, hailey adam deorro on behalf of moms demand action, a campaign of everytown, we're here in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeremy Smith: thank you, mr. chair and members of the committee, jeremy on behalf of the state building and construction trades council. we're a council of over a 100 different unions throughout california, representing about 400,000 workers. the ags office is a key cog in the line of defense for worker's rights, whether it's fair pay, the right to organize, worker health and safety. the congressman has demonstrated, over his years of public service, a key understanding of those issues and a dedication to protecting them. for those reasons, we're happy to support his nomination and urge this committee to do the same. thank you.
[{'start': 51, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Young: Mr. Chairman and Senators, Michael Young on behalf of the California Labor Federation. We enthusiastically support the confirmation to the Congressman for the position of Attorney General. In these unprecedented times with the unprecedented attacks on labor, it's important to have someone in the Attorney General's Office who understands the plight of working people and is going to fight vigorously on their behalf. So based on his character and his history in Congress, we feel that he will be a strong advocate. And we look forward to working with you in the near future. And again, we urge confirmation, thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amanda Wilcox: Good afternoon, I'm Amanda Wilcox. And I'm here on behalf of the 28 California chapters of the Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence. Many of our members have lost a loved one to gunfire, including myself. I was very pleased today to hear your strong comments regarding implementing, enforcing, and of course protecting California's strong gun laws. And our organization looks forward to working with Department of Justice and you in saving more lives in our state. So, we're in strong support. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 95, 'end': 100, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nora Lynn: good afternoon, nora hailey lynn on behalf of the california faculty association. we represent 27,000 faculty, coaches, counselors, and librarians at the california state university. we're in strong support of your nomination, sir. good luck.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gregory Kramer: Good afternoon. Gregory Kramer with Planned Parenthood Affiliates of California. On behalf or our 115 health clinics within this state, we are supportive of Mr. Becerra's nomination. He's earned, for the last two years and over his career in service, 100% scorecard with Planned Parenthood, our federal branch. And he is a strong defender of women's rights. So we appreciate your time.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 161, 'end': 168, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brian Allison: Mr. Chair, members, Brian Allison on behalf of the American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees. Just wanted to inform this committee, but also make it clear that on behalf of the 1.6 million members that we represent across the country, we are delighted to support congressman Xavier Becerra's confirmation and nomination for this position. First, we'd like to give a tremendous amount of credit to the Governor of this state for having the foresight to nominate someone as eminently qualified as as Congressman Becerra is. We stand behind his commitments to workers protecting the rights of workers in California and we urge this body to approve his nomination and would urge the Senate to do so as well. Thank you all.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 295, 'end': 309, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 530, 'end': 537, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Christopher Sanchez : Good afternoon, Chair and members. Christopher Sanchez with CHIRLA, the Coalition for Humane Immigrant Rights. Stand in stong support for the appointment for Congressman Becerra. Mainly for the reasons that him being a champion in Congress on immigrant issues and a lot of his comments today. We appreciate him. So thank you.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 54, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 170, 'end': 177, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark Seidenberg: thank you, mr chairman. i, too, live in the 34th district. my name is seidenberg. i'm vice chairman of the american independent party of california, which is the third largest political party in the state. we have approximately 507,000 electors in the state of california. i personally was an elector for trump and pence and i got a little over 4,300,000 votes in this last election in california. the issue or my concern is california government code section 12503, which has a five year requirement, and my understanding is when governor brown made the appointment on the 3rd of january, my congressman only had two days of the five years. now, i understand this law goes back to 1945 when the california legislature made the intent that the object of being inactive meant you were not qualified. you could be active or inactive and still be not qualified. an example would be if a person is a member of a law firm that got either suspended by the secretary of state or suspended by the franchise tax board and they cannot practice outside the law firm. anyway, that's basically my concern. my concern is he does not meet their statutory requirements to serve at the office of attorney general. thank you sir.
[{'start': 70, 'end': 80, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 305, 'end': 310, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 315, 'end': 320, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 540, 'end': 545, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Craig DeLuz: mister chairman, members of the committee, deluz with the firearms policy coalition, in opposition. as was stated previously, civil right are basically those rights that are rendered to all citizens, not just groups of citizens and not just the rights that we agree with. it is up to the attorney general as the top law enforcement officer to enforce and protect and defend those laws and those rights, whether they agree with them or not. if one has the desire to enact their values in their job, that's the job of the legislature. the job of the attorney general is to enforce those laws and make sure that the rights of all californians are being protected. and in a day and age when the rights of californians who desire to exercise their right to keep and bear arms is under attack, it's an incumbent upon the chief law enforcement officer to make sure that their rights are not being violated. unfortunately based on the record, whether it is his comments during this confirmation process or his voting history, we lack the confidence that this particular candidate will have the ability to be able to do that. as was stated earlier, i would also like to say we do welcome the transparency. making sure that californians who seek to comply with california law have the ability to do so in a clear and concise manner is vitally important. it has not existed for years in the department of justice, and we look forward to working with you to at least make sure that happens. thank you.
[{'start': 43, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brett Sherlock: excuse me, my name is brett nora sherlock and they didn't have a block for undecided, so i'm not really in opposition, i'm undecided at this point. but with congressman becerra, i first met him in the fall of 2004 in reno, nevada when i was working veterans for kerry. i'm not a republican, i did not vote for donald trump, i'm a private attorney, i'm a retired jag officer from the united states army. i voted straight democratic ticket from 1998 to 2012. and while i'm no longer a democrat, i remain a liberal. i'm not a republican and i did not vote for donald trump. i'm proud of what we've accomplished as liberals in california today. the president of our senate, the speaker of the assembly, the secretary of state and soon, our attorney general are all first generation mexican americans they've come to the table to share the meal, and as a liberal native californian of this great state, they are welcome at the table. the mexican-american community and mexican national community in california have in some respects enriched our state and our nation. the mexican nationals have certainly enriched america's billionaire class. in iraq, i served alongside many mexican-americans who were fine soldiers, brave souls, and i was honored to serve with them. today, however, i come before this committee with a heavy heart and conflicted feelings concerning the confirmation of congressman becerra as our next attorney general. i consider myself an internationalist, not a nationalist. in fact, i abhor ethnic nationalism. the resurgence of white nationalist movement in our nation is disturbing on many levels.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 169, 'end': 176, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 262, 'end': 267, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 310, 'end': 322, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 557, 'end': 569, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1394, 'end': 1401, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Laurette Elsberry: my name is laurette brett elsberry. i've been a resident of sacramento here for many years. i own a business, i employ aliens, if you don't want to use the word, you can use immigrants if you'd like, and also dreamers in my business. i pay the full value of what the state says they owe and even more. and i'm very proud of my relationship with them. i also, and mr, becerra can relate to this, i also have an abiding interest in the overall citizen of california, all of them. my difficulty here with mr. becerra is again as mentioned, he says he's catholic. i'm concerned also with the catholics in this state, of which there are many. and if we have 200,000 babies a year killed here, just in california alone, many of whom are from catholic parents, then somebody's not giving the right information out. also worried, and i'm worried, mr. beccera, about how people like myself, who could be considered as a deplorable because i'm pro-life, how i might be treated in any situation by. for example former attorney general, kamala harris, who was out to prosecute, and actually persecute the people who put out the planned parenthood videos. i'm concerned that that could happen to me because i am pro-life, and i go about, and i do different pro-life things. none of which could be considered as violent but also basically just educational. so i am concerned about that. and i'm hoping when you take office, you will be cognizant of the persecution of catholics and other pro-life people in this state. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 367, 'end': 374, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 506, 'end': 513, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 843, 'end': 850, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1025, 'end': 1038, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Xavier Becerra: All right, you ready? I think so. Raise your right hand and say after me, I, Xavier Becerra. I, Xavier Becerra. Do solemnly swear. Do solemnly swear. That I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States. That I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States. And the constitution of the State of California. And the Constitution of the great State of California. Against all enemies foreign and domestic. Against all enemies foreign and domestic. That I'll bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States. That I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States. And to the constitution of the State of California. All right, you ready? I think so. Raise your right hand and say after me, I, Xavier Becerra. I, Xavier Becerra. Do solemnly swear. Do solemnly swear. That I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States. That I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States. And the constitution of the State of California. And the Constitution of the great State of California. Against all enemies foreign and domestic. Against all enemies foreign and domestic. That I'll bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States. That I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States. And to the constitution of the State of California. And to the constitution of California. That I take this obligation freely. That I take this obligation freely. Without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion. Without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion. And that I will well, and faithfully. And that I will well, and faithfully. Discharge the duties upon which I'm about to enter. Discharge the duties upon which I'm about to enter. That's it, congratulations. Thank you, Governor. Good job.
[{'start': 77, 'end': 91, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 96, 'end': 110, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 775, 'end': 789, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 794, 'end': 808, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Xavier Becerra: All right, you ready? I think so. Raise your right hand and say after me, I, Xavier Becerra. I, Xavier Becerra. Do solemnly swear. Do solemnly swear. That I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States. That I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States. And the constitution of the State of California. And the Constitution of the great State of California. Against all enemies foreign and domestic. Against all enemies foreign and domestic. That I'll bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States. That I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States. And to the constitution of the State of California. All right, you ready? I think so. Raise your right hand and say after me, I, Xavier Becerra. I, Xavier Becerra. Do solemnly swear. Do solemnly swear. That I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States. That I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States. And the constitution of the State of California. And the Constitution of the great State of California. Against all enemies foreign and domestic. Against all enemies foreign and domestic. That I'll bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States. That I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States. And to the constitution of the State of California. And to the constitution of California. That I take this obligation freely. That I take this obligation freely. Without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion. Without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion. And that I will well, and faithfully. And that I will well, and faithfully. Discharge the duties upon which I'm about to enter. Discharge the duties upon which I'm about to enter. That's it, congratulations. Thank you, Governor. Good job.
[{'start': 77, 'end': 91, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 96, 'end': 110, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 775, 'end': 789, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 794, 'end': 808, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jessica Peters: thank you chairman beall, senators and assembly members. jessica jonah peters with the legislative analysts office. the sergeant should have passed out to you a handout titled overview of state transportation funding.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 24, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 57, 'end': 77, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rony Berdugo: thank you, chairman. and good afternoon, members of the committee. thank you for having me today. i'm here, my name is rony. i'm here on behalf of the league of california cities. wanted to share our findings of the latest 2016 state-wide local streets and roads needs assessment report that we put out every two years. right, and you have a hand-out in front of you, as well, that's kind of a synopsis and some of the graphs that i'll be going over. we have a copy of the full-
[]
Chris Lee: Great, my name is Chris Lee. I'm a Legislative Analyst for the California State Association of Counties. Here covering for our lobbyist Kianna Valentine who's out on maternity leave. So, expect to see a lot of me for the next few months. So as Rony mentioned, and I just want to tear off some of the comments I heard earlier and his presentation and sort of reiterate the importance of that 65 PCI score. So, as Senator Beall indicated and I think as Senator Gaines sort of commented on in a different way, that score is really important because it's the point at which the depreciation of the quality of the pavement starts to go at a much faster rate. So what our goal is, in identifying this scenario for best management practices, is to say, what's the amount of funding that we would need so that the average road will only need a really cheap preservation treatment, rather than a full on reconstruction. So that's the difference between a treatment that costs a few dollars per square yard and totally rebuilding a road for a much greater price. So the problem with the 65 PCI is that we're at the precipice where the deterioration starts to happen faster, and we go much more quickly from those cheap treatments to needing to do very expensive rehab and rehabilitation work. So, we're sort of at this point where we really need to invest more, or we're going to see just a rapid increase in the cost to maintain the system. So in terms of giving taxpayers the best bang for their buck, it's a message you've all heard before, but fix it first is a much cheaper strategy than getting the roads to a failed condition and having to rebuild them completely. So, given that, our needs assessment isn't just about pavements. We also include an analysis of essential components and bridges. So, I'm going to talk a little bit about the essential components that we analyze. So, the things that we collected data on that are included in the analysis are things like your storm drains and gutters, your curbs and sidewalks, your curb ramps, traffic signals, street lights, sound walls and retaining walls, and then, all the signs and safety devices like that that you need to operate your system. So, we were able to get very good data on those eight key components. And we've used that to identify a needs analysis for those elements of the system as well. We have less data available on some of the other requirements. So beyond, ADA compliance needs in excess of just the curb ramps and sidewalks and then other needs related to storm water. But for those eight components, we had good data. And when you aggregate that all together, approximately 30% of our total funding needs are included in those sort of components. These items are funded a little bit differently than some of the pavement, which is largely reliant on gas tax revenue. And local revenues make up over two-thirds of the expenditures on your sidewalks, curbs, streetlights, and things of that nature. So, we have tried to incorporate in our analysis more information, especially in this round, about complete streets because I know that's something that's of interest to the state, given the direction we're going, in terms of looking at in field development and multimodal transportation. And so, in some regards it's a little bit difficult to parse out expenditures on complete streets. So I'll give you an example. If you're building an on road bike lane, once it's in there, you're going to maintain it along with the projects when you're doing a payment project for the road that it's on. So, while we can try to carve out some of these elements and give you good cause assessments, the reason we don't have a separate complete streets element perse is, just because those expenses are often co-mingled. And CSAC has actually been doing some work with our counties to try to pin down a little bit better information on this. And so, we surveyed all counties, and I think we have about 20 responses, about the extent to which they're using existing gas tax revenues and local revenues to pay for things like bike lanes and sidewalks. And I'll walk through a few examples of that in a little bit, but in the 2016 survey, we had a lot more respondents in the last year. Out of 421 agencies that responded, that are providing cost information on complete streets and complete streets policies. So, the policies that have been adopted at the local level and largely focused on bicycle infrastructure, pedestrian facilities, signage, and accessible ramps for ADA compliance. We also asked, I'm sorry, survey respondents what the biggest challenges were for complete streets at the local level. And number one as no surprise was, insufficient funding and the number two issue identified was, insufficient right of way. So, if you want to take an old local street and road that's narrow, you might have to buy right of way. if you want to add sidewalks or bike lanes, in some circumstances, which makes these projects really costly to do. So that's one of the reasons, actually, that it's very difficult for us to come up with a funding analysis for complete streets because the incremental costs that our respondents gave us ranged from $1 per square yard to $700 per square yard. And I'll explain a little bit why there's a huge divergence in that. So, the City of Glendale gave an example for their complete street installments, which included ball bouts, traffic circles, traffic signals, street trees, and interpretive signing. And said that that cost them, the incremental cost of adding those components, was $45 per square yard. The City of Concord had a similar complete street element package,which included bike lanes, curb and gutters, and sidewalks. And because they needed right of way and things of that nature, the incremental cost of that was $230 per square yard. So you get a drastically different set of funding estimates, depending on the type of elements here, including and how much room you have to incorporate them. So I do want to point out too that going back to the results of our more recent survey about existing expenditures, just a few factoids about some of the counties that are represented by Members of the Committee today. So the County of Los Angeles in fiscal year, the last two years, approximately 40% of the investments that they made in complete streets projects were funded by the state gas tax. So, I think we do hear a lot that the primary source for these things is grant programs. And while those are great, what we do know from this information is that local agencies are using their local streets and roads money that come primarily from the gas tax to do these sorts of projects already. So, to the extent that we want to encourage that and get more of it, we have to address the local network from this sort of holistic perspective. So in a more rural county, in Nevada County, they gave me some information that said approximately 85% of their roads don't have an adequate shoulder right now to accommodate, you know, a bike way or you know just for a ag vehicle or something else to move to the side of the road and let other traffic pass. So, while historically they added one to two miles of years of such shoulders to their roads to allow multimodal transportation that's appropriate in a rural area, which is just usually going to be bikes, they have had to cancel those projects due to the decline in gas tax revenues o over the last several years. So both in urban area and in rural areas, complete streets are consideration. It's difficult to parse out the investments that are going into them, but we're trying to do a little bit better job communicating of how these two parts of the multimodal system link together on our local streets and roads. So I'll move on and talk about the other element of our funding study which is local bridges. So we have a lot of bridges on the local system in California, approximately 12,500 bridges, which is just under half of the statewide total. And about half of those bridges are on the National Highway System. So, actually, the condition of those purchase is going to affect the statewide performance standards that are coming down as a result of the Map 21 bill at the federal level, which I imagine is something CalTrans might touch on. 4,000 other bridges are non-national bridge inventory things. So these are short bridges, bridges under 20 feet long, bridges that are pedestrian or bike bridges, rather than a typical vehicle bridge. So what's the condition of our local roads? So we've got a very interesting, colorful chart for you that's slide nine in your packet. It looks like this.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 136, 'end': 152, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 244, 'end': 248, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 420, 'end': 425, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 459, 'end': 465, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jeremy Smith: Thank you, Mr. Chair, Members of the Committee, Jeremy Smith here, on behalf of the State Building and Construction Trades Council. We've, I think, been partners with you and Mr. Frazier and everybody on this Committee, and in the Assembly too, on finding a path forward on this issue. We really do look forward to continuing that work with you all this year. This is a problem that must be solved, it's very complicated though, as we've heard today. But we stand ready to assist all of you, staff and members in finding a solution to this problem. We look forward to getting to the bottom of it by the end of session, thank you.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 60, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 179, 'end': 186, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Erica Arriaga: Erica Arriaga with the Transportation Agency of Monterey County, supporting the investment in transportation, especially the self-help set aside.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrew Antwih: Mr. Chairman and members, Andrew Antwih here on behalf of the Southern California Regional Rail Authority, Metro Link. We very much appreciate the element of SB 1, that includes funding for interstate rail and commuter rail, that's an overlooked category of mass transportation. But it plays a very significant role in helping folks get around. And most of the riders on our system are choice riders, meaning they could drive. And if they all did, we would see massive impacts on congestion on highways. And so, having some funding available for commuter rail is something we very much appreciate, and we'd like to see that in the final version of whatever deal gets puts together. If I can change my hat, I would also like to express support of behalf of Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti. He very much appreciates the balanced package. As you know, Los Angeles Mayor Garcetti led a successful effort to convince voters in Los Angeles County to invest $120 billion for various improvements over the system. We're going to transform the way LA looks, these are via the transit investments. And many of these improvements, we hope to have ready for the 2024 Olympics, assuming we're successful and we are the host city for that. So, we've, at the local level, stepped up and put money on the table. And we hope that the state will be a funding partner at a much higher level going forward. Thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 774, 'end': 787, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 867, 'end': 875, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kula Koenig: Good afternoon, my name is Kula Koenig, representing the American Heart Association, the American Stroke Association. And why we're here in terms of transportation is we're focusing on heart health and brain health and really want to thank the chair for including funding for the active transportation program in SB 1, also great to see that in AB 1. Understanding the importance of biking and walking, physical activity in preventing heart disease and stroke which is really important and heart disease being the number one killer in the United States of America. And so, really want to commend you on that and want to see that in there. Also, set asides for the safe route to school program. It's important for young people to be able to walk and bike to school and feel safe and encourage that behavior. And lastly, around complete streets. want to see neighborhoods that really facilitate biking and walking, for safety and also for health reasons as well. Thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roxanne Miller: yes, mr. chair and members, miller representing mayor samuel cardo and our city council in san jose. as the chair is very familiar, both the city of san jose and santa clara county have lead the way for self help solutions, and we continue to do that. we do want to acknowledge the chair and also mr. frasier, both of your pieces of legislation, the clarity that's coming now as progress continues in the discussion. and we certainly appreciate the effort and will want to continue to work with you. frankly, now is the time if ever there was the time for the legislature and the administration to work through these major issues and make sure that by the end of the spring we do have a clear direction and ready to move forward. thank you very much, mr chair.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 54, 'end': 66, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 301, 'end': 308, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mora Toff: Thank you Mr. Chairman and members. Mora Toff on behalf of Orange County Business Council. CEO Lucy Dunn, has the greatest respect for Mr. Metcalf. Workforce housing is a huge issue for OCBC and we couldn't find a better partner, a more responsive, measured individual who's at the home today. Thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 91, 'end': 104, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 139, 'end': 146, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Richard Lion: Richard Lion, California Building Industry Association. Our members provide the vast majority of the privately constructed, privately financed housing in California. Since Mr Metcalf came about 10 months ago, we've been very impressed with his knowledge, his deep knowledge of housing issues and his commitment to increasing supply and improving affordability. These are two problems that California based, that we look forward to working with him on and you all as well. So, also Mr. Metcalf has an open door, to listening to the private sector and the concerns we have. So, for those reasons and more, we look forward to his confirmation. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 175, 'end': 182, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 485, 'end': 492, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tiffany Fan: tiffany jonah fan, on behalf of bridge housing and stroud investment group. we strongly support mr. metcalf's confirmation. he always has his door open and is great, at bringing stakeholders together. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 100, 'end': 107, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Marina White: white, with the california housing consortium. i'm very happy to see ben in this position, and excited to see someone with the administration that has such a strong conviction, both to save subsidy for affordable housing and to can cause and string money. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 69, 'end': 72, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tyrone Buckley: Tyrone Buckley, on behalf of Housing California. I've had the opportunity to see Mr. Metcalf go across states speaking to our constituency, about the housing challenge. He's been very open, very gracious, and we really appreciate it. And we support his confirmation.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 85, 'end': 92, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brian Augusto: Brian Augusto, on behalf of the California Rural Legal Assistance Foundation and the California Coalition for Rural Housing. Pleased to support Mr. Metcalf and as you can see from this discussion today, from mobile homes to affordable housing, we need to get his department more resources. And we look forward to working with you all on that as well. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 148, 'end': 155, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tom Calishalf: good afternoon, tom self help enterprises non profit housing developer in the central valley we support mr. metcalf's nomination and appreciate his collaborative spirit. thank you.
[{'start': 108, 'end': 115, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Blair Cushing: good morning. my name is [unknown] i'm the resident blair jonah cushing from marin county. i want to speak in support of this resolution today. because i want to offer some perspective in terms of how this is actually affecting our patients. in marin county we actually only have two planned parenthoods, only one of which can you even receive an abortion. and then by that, only natural abortion which means i'm taking a series of pills. there is no procedural abortion in that entire county. so in the liberal bastion of california, unfortunately my patients are continuing to experience access issues. in the instance that planned parenthood were completely defunded and lost all medicaid funding, i cannot even tell you how dire the circumstances would become for my patients. furthermore, there is no capacity in our county to make up for the loss of these services. i work at a county hospital and a county health department clinic and a couple of months ago we actually had to close our clinic to any new medicaid patients. so the patients who are currently seeking services at the two planned parenthood facilities in my county were no longer able to access services there. there truly is nowhere else for them to go. so i cannot support enough why this is important. and that i think sometimes we're kind of taking for granted that we're living in this place where people are generally in support of this. but even the federal measures that could potentially come down could be incredibly be harmful to our population and our patients.
[{'start': 52, 'end': 63, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Keith Dunn: Thank you Mr Chairman, Members of the Committee. Keith Dunn here for the Self Help Counties Coalition. As the Chairman stated, this impacts everyone on this panel. We have a number of state projects, which I've included in a handout for you with my letter. What I also would like to tell you, is that you each have individual local projects that will be greatly impacted by this, and what I mean by impacted is they will lose some of their ability to move forward on projects that they have, by two-thirds margin, voted on to build and deliver in your local jurisdictions. This is a very important bill. This is a bill that, in the past, has received bipartisan support. We've, I believe this is our third time doing this. We've had sunsets on each measure. It's a successful program that on average has saved about 14 months. In the review process, we still must comply and do comply with all federal environmental laws. We just able to do it in a much more timely fashioned and more effectively. With that I'd be happy to answer any question you might have, and I'd like to ask for your support. [INAUDIBLE]
[{'start': 49, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eric Thronson: Thank you Chair and Committee. This is Eric Thronson with the California Transportation Commission. And as you know as part of our statutory charge, we advise the administration, and the Legislature in formulating, and evaluating state policies, and plans for California's transportation programs. The Commission has taken a support position on AB 28, because it will allow Caltrans to continue to assume the federal government's responsibility to review, and approve MEPA documents for projects. This program is intended to streamline the federal environmental review process by eliminating a layer of governmental review, and accelerating project delivery and reducing costs. And the program has proven successfully to do so. So, with that the Commission voted at its December meeting to take a support position for AB 28, and I'm here to convey our support for this bill. And I'm happy to answer any questions if you have them, but I think Ms Perron will have the best answer of all, from Caltrans.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 946, 'end': 952, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Steve Baker: thank you mr chair. member steve jonah baker with aaron read and associates representing the professional engineers in california government. like others have said, we've experienced, our members have experienced efficiencies in ways of getting projects done quicker using this authority, and we'd urge the committee to approve the measure.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Lee: Chris Lee on behalf of the California State Association of Counties in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Gonsalves: Mister Chairman and members, Jason Gonsalves on behalf of the City of Elk Grove. We want to thank the Chairman, and the Committee in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jonathan Clambath: Jonathan Clambath for the County of San Diego in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gus Corey: Gus Corey on behalf of the San Mateo County of Transportation Authority. Transportation Authority of Marin, and Santa Barbara County Association of Governments want to thank the author for your introduction, and ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrew Antwih: Mr Chairman and members, Andrew Antwih here today on behalf of the City County Association of Governments of San Mateo County. The Fresno County Transportation Authority, and the Los Angeles County Metropolitan, and Transportation Authority appreciate the fact that the Chair took quick action, and the legislatures proving that on the transportation problems that needs immediate intervention, and the solution that the legislatures in process to act quickly.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anthony Hernandez: Anthony Hernandez, of CH2M hill, in support of this measure. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Moira Topp: thank you mister chairman and members, moira steve topp on behalf of the orange county transportation authority, orange county business council, and the city of san diego, all in strong support.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kirk Blackburn: Kirk Blackburn on behalf of the San Diego Association of governments, SANDAG in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Benjamin Palmer: Benjamin Palmer on behalf the Marin County Board of Supervisors, and support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joshua Shaw: joshua moira shaw for the solano transportation authority in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Watts: hi, i'm mark joshua watts on behalf of the riverside county transportation commission we encourage your support for this measure, and thank you mr chairman.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gene Urban: Gene Urban representing the American Council of Engineering Companies we support the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Cremins: tim mark cremins, international union of operating engineers, saving the best for last. we're in full support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Seth Kerstein: thank you, mr. chair. seth jonah kerstein with the legislative analyst's office. we've got a handout to a company, my testimony available both on paper and on our website under publications. i'll start on page 1 of the handout, with a very brief overview of california sales tax, and then talk a little bit about the law that applies to technology transfer agreements. the tax that most people know as simply sales tax is actually a tax that has two complementary pieces called the sales and use tax. the first part is a sales tax on goods sold by california retailers, and the second part is a use tax on goods sold by other retailers. in the 2014-15 fiscal year tax payers paid an estimated $51 billion in california sales and use tax. and out of that $51 billion total, about $24 billion went to the state's general fund which makes the sales and use tax the second biggest general fund revenue source after the personal income tax. the remaining sales and use tax revenue, that other 27 million, or 27 billion rather, goes to a variety of funds that support local government programs. the state agency responsible for the sales and use tax is the state board of equalization, otherwise known as boe. boe is headed by a five-member elected board, and they perform both executive and quasi-judicial functions for the sales and use tax, and many other taxes and fees. so moving to page 2 of the handout, i'll elaborate on what i meant when i described the sales and use tax as a tax on goods. more precisely, the tax applies to retail sales of tangible, personal property. and this word tangible is at the center of some of the issues you'll be considering in this hearing. in california's tax code, something is tangible if it can be seen, weighed, measured, felt or touched or is in any other manner perceptible to the senses. as you can imagine, there are many instances where it's not entirely clear whether that definition applies to a particular transaction. so over time, different entities have tried to clarify this issue. boe has issued regulations and ruled on tax appeals, the legislature has made statutory changes, and the courts have ruled on a variety of disputes over the interpretation of those laws. so moving on to page three of the handout, the history of california's law on technology transfer agreements has all of those elements. the first step was in 1992 boe ruling on a tax appeal. what happened was, intel had made some sales to a couple other businesses and included both tangible goods and licenses to use intel's intellectual property. boe staff initially determined that intel owed sales tax on the full amount of those sales, but then intel appealed, and the board ruled in intel's favor. what the board concluded was that intel only owed sales tax on a specific piece of those transactions, which was the value of the tangible goods, not the combined value of the tangible goods and the licenses. then, the following year, the legislature passed a law addressing the sales tax treatment of a certain category of transactions similar to the sales in the intel appeal. the new law called these transactions technology transfer agreements, or tta for short. and over the last couple decades, courts have considered how to apply this law, most recently in the lucent case. so then moving to the last page of the handout, this 1993 law did two things, essentially. it first defined what a tta is, and second, it specified how sales tax applies to ttas. so to be a tta, a transaction has to meet three conditions. first, the seller has to hold a patent or copyright interest. second, the seller has to assign or license a particular kind of right to the buyer, the right to make and sell a product, or use a process. and then third, that right that the seller assigns to the buyer, has to be subject to the patent or copyright interest held by the seller. so then, once you've determined that a transaction is a tta, sales tax is due only on the tangible component of the sale, rather than the entire sale. so then you have to determine the value of the tangible property, and the law gives taxpayers a few different options for doing that. one last thing to keep in mind is although these transfers are called technology transfer agreements, and many of the businesses that make these kinds of sales include tech companies like lucent and intel. they aren't limited necessarily to technology in a narrow sense. they're really based on the use of intellectual properties. so for example, a sale that includes the right to reproduce copyrighted artwork could potentially be a tta. so that concludes my presentation, and at this time i would be happy to take questions, if you have any.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1199, 'end': 1202, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1204, 'end': 1207, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jay Chamberlain: go ahead. good afternoon, mr. chair and members. i'm jay seth chamberlain with the, i'm the chief of the revenue taxation section department of finance. and so i'd like to start off with sort of taking a big picture budgetary view of this issue. so state revenues which had surged for several years during the economic recovery have now started to fall below expectations. therefore the budget which has only been precariously balanced even in the best years, is now facing a deficit of almost $2 billion unless budgetary action is taken. so, therefore, how that regards issue is that any further deterioration of revenue due to an expansion of the current understanding of technology transfer agreement statutes. of what transactions those statutes apply to will result in additional deficits and will necessitate budgetary decisions to reduce programmatic spending, or to otherwise increase tax revenue. so that being said, there is a lot of uncertainly regarding what the cost of the court decision is. and as with any new law or new interpretation of a law, there's always uncertainty, there's always difficulty in estimating exactly what the impact is going to be. you don't know how many taxpayers necessarily are affected, how much economic activity is involves the affected activity. but, in additionally in this case, there's an additional level of uncertainly and that is that, it's not clear exactly where this court decision will lead us, okay? so let's start at a sort of the simplest level or the maybe narrowest level. if we just look at the taxation of the pre-packaged software. so, my colleagues at the board of equalization have estimated that that would cost us somewhere between 20 and $25 million annually. and that's both state and local sales tax revenues. now, as has been mentioned previously in this hearing, most or a lot of software is sold not on physical media but is downloaded. that's sort of out of the picture, that wouldn't be taxed under any circumstances, so this 20 to $25 million revenue estimate has already assumed that those are not going to be taxed. and that's just for the software that's sold separately and sold on a disk. okay, so if we take a little bit further and we look at software, not just that is pre-packaged and sold separately, but software that is preloaded onto a computer. so let's say you buy a new computer, it costs $1000 and let's say that the valuation of the software on that computer is $300, just pick a number. then under an interpretation where the preloaded software is not taxed. again, i've, my colleagues at the board of the equalization did an estimate of this and they estimated in that situation where the tax on that $1000 computer will only be the tax on $700 because 300 would be nontaxable. in that situation, the revenue lost would be over $200 million per year. again, both local and state taxes. so the two of those combined would be the revenue cost of that sort of scenario would be over $250 million annually. and then if you went beyond that to the sort of scenarios that mr. lambert was talking about where you talk about coffeemakers. or if you go beyond that, the cost can get very high and in fact can easily or could go into the billions of dollars on an annual basis. and so that concludes my comments, i'm happy to take questions.
[{'start': 53, 'end': 73, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 3067, 'end': 3074, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Therese Twomey: therese jay twomey with california taxpayers association, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Smith: Yes, thank you, I'm Karen Smith, Director of the California Department of Public Health. With respect to ensuring safety, I think edibles are more complicated, certainly. And from the perspective of testing they may actually be a little bit simpler once the product is manufactured. And the testing laboratories will be testing the manufactured products as well. And that will include total dose of various cannabinoids, including THC. But then also, we are going to propose regulations that will ensure that it's homogeneously distributed throughout the edible product.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Tong: Good afternoon, Chair and member of the Committee. Amy Tong, Director of California Department of Technology. And if I may, before I specifically addressed a question about what product and competitive process. If I could just briefly provide an overview of the effort that the Department of Technology have been engaged with the multiple partner here sitting as my panel member. As well as additional state entities are a part of this process in developing a technology strategy to fulfill the needs. As you are all aware, that in order to fulfill the requirement implementation that the cannabis regulation. There's combination of licensing systems, as well as track and trace that are predominately responsible for the departmental food and agriculture. In the study that we have engaged with these departments, in order to expedite, if that's the right word. The implementation of a solution to support that. As well as to reduce the redundancy of information that could possibly be required to collect from the industry user. We have decided to put together a common strategy to have a standard approach to achieve both the licensing systems needs as well as the track and trace system needs for those area that are common. With that, specifically to the licensing System. The competitive process was utilized to selling both the product as well as literally right now we are entering into a negotiation process for the system integrators, which is typically what we call the consulting firm that would be brought on board to implement the product that we have. Chosen. In this case the product they have chosen for the licensing system for Department of Consumer Affair, as well as CDFA is DSL a product. And the seller product is currently not the product that is being used for the grease system. And we decided to choose that product is based on its track record being used in both the industry for licensing as well as other state entity that have chosen this particular product to implement that licensing capability. In term of the cost I probably need to look into it and perhaps get back to you on that. And that product was chosen and the contract gets awarded by the end of the calendar year. In term of the system developer or the system integrator, this sort of consultant that we'd bring forward. As I mentioned earlier, we are literally in the negotiation process right now so I won't be able to share that information until that process is completed.
[{'start': 51, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jerred Kiloh: i'll try to be concise. my name is kiloh, i am currently the president of a trade association called the ucba in los angeles. we represent a group of illegally operating dispensaries under proposition d. proposition d was passed in 2013 in los angeles with about a 63% voter rating. and that proposition was there to regulate the number of dispensaries down to 135 that had been in compliance since 2007. this group now is working with the city of los angeles. we helped write an ordinance that was going on the march ballot. we also worked with the city in forming another ordinance, it's also going on the march ballot, of which we have dropped the support of our original authored ballot in support of the city's ballot, due to negotiations from our trade association and other members of the industry. and able to get priority licensing for the prop d compliant locations, as well as form regulatory boards for the city of los angeles, so that we can have a more robust industry, and that is focused on regulations. we currently work with the franchise tax board. we currently work with the office of finance in trying to come up with solutions on how to pay taxes, how to get cash into the city. so we work with all the local agencies in an effort to try to make sure that our industry is well represented both in taxation and in regulation. and the city's doing a very good job, i think on the past, it has been very unregulated. but i think in this current market now, the city of los angeles, as well as all the industry players, are doing a very good job on getting regulations and everything moving forward. the one thing that i'm asking this group here is that on the march 7th ballot, if the march 7th ballot that would regulate our industry does not pass. that the state would at least take into account that the property shops that are currently operating underneath our local ordinance that are currently under what we are calling probably a semantic version of licensed or permitted. they're calling us limitedly immune, so under a limited immunity, we'd like to be at least recognized that if the march ballot does not pass, that the state takes an active role in looking to see how they can regulate the currently legally operating shops inside los angeles. and i mean, i would like to thank this board for not only staying this long, but also taking this very seriously. been working with lori ajax, and what a task that has taken on. and she has worked with all the stakeholders in a very clear and concise way. that makes us all feel like we're not only being heard for the first time in a couple of decades, but also that we're being listened to to the point where rules and regulations are going to be mapped around what the needs of the industry are. so thank you all for taking this time.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2408, 'end': 2417, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Amy Jenkins: chairman hill and committee members, thank you very much for the opportunity. amy jonah jenkins with platinum advisors, i'm here on behalf of the california cannabis industry association, or ccia, as we're often known. ccia represents all segments of california's cannabis industry. we do have approximately 250 members throughout the state. we have been working on a licensure and regulatory framework since 2014, partnering with very nontraditional allies at the time. and we are very, very pleased to see the progress. we were instrumental in the drafting of the mcrsa, we endorsed proposition 64. as the regulatory agencies are looking to implement, i do want to commend them. as hezekiah pointed out, they have been incredibly accessible. we have been very appreciative of their proactive outreach to the industry. the stakeholder meetings were exceptional, and they were widely attended. and had very robust dialogs. so we have been very, very pleased with outreach to industry thus far and again, really feel like they are deeply committed to getting this done and getting this done right before the january 2018 implementation deadline. in terms of our priorities, i actually concur with a lot of the comments that were raised by my college hezekiah allen. we do have a series of legislative priorities that we're contemplating to try to address some of the implementation challenges associated with the medical and the recreational framework. one issue that was raised consistently during the regulatory agencies testimony was, again, kind of the medical and the recreational, and the reconciliation of those two models. there are a number of discrepancies between the two, that we think will make implementation challenging for state and local agencies, as well as for the industry itself. among them, i won't touch on those that have already been discussed, but phase in is certainly a big priority, but also the differences in licensure. there are 17 license categories in medical, there are 19 and they are a little bit different in the recreational model. we have a cross licensure restrictions in the medical framework. we have very limited licensure restrictions in the recreational. and then a big item that has been consistently discussed is, there is a third party independent to distribution mandate in the medical framework and that does not exist in the recreational framework. ccis preference is that, the prop 64 initiative was a mandate by the voters. we would like to see many of those distinctions reconciled so that we are adopting the prop 64 model. so that is something that we're going to be consistently advocating on throughout the year. but in the meantime, again, going back to the comments made about the licensing entities, we do think they are doing an exceptional job, and we will look forward to continuing to work with them and you as you contemplate, how to reconcile the two frameworks into one system. thank you.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 13, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 78, 'end': 95, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 684, 'end': 692, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1249, 'end': 1263, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Daniel Conway: good evening chairman hill. my name is daniel amy conway and i'm here with truth enterprises. we are an investment firm focused on the legal cannabis industry. and as i would note here today, that's much easier said than done. so frankly i'm here totruth entday to urge you all to find opportunity for angel and venture investors to play a role in this industry. with regard to the topic today, i had a couple of comments that i wanted to make. first of all, i just wanted to give a little background about myself. prior to moving into this industry just over a year ago i spent three years serving as the chief of staff to the mayor of sacramento and before that had worked with the california restaurant association and some firms downtown. so with that being said, i can sympathize very much with the challenges in front of you all and your staff. but with that being said, i think there's some things you can do here. let's all recognize, and i think this was noted, that you lack many of the common tools that you have in your policy making toolbox. as the last panel said, you have no data. and there is insufficient science in terms of the medical effects, the intoxication levels, as well as even just kind of the scope and the scale of the industry. secondly, there's really no blueprint. there's no model that you guys can look to. other states, whether it's colorado, washington, they're imperfect for their size, their scale, for many reasons that you have noted. thirdly, this is a high profile issue with many layers of complexity, which invites a lot of scrutiny and that's virtually never a good place to be for you all. it's a situation where everyone's going to tell you what you're doing wrong but no one's going to be really able to tell what to do right. so i think for all of us here, we also have to acknowledge that those three factors are compounded by the fact that for 20 years we have had this grey market that is related to prop 15. and now you have the realization that all of us, the decisions that are being made here over the next 12 to 24 months are going to shape this industry nationwide. so given these challenges, given the lack of tools in your tool box, becomes what can we all be doing. i would urge us all here, particularly the people on the dias to think of three questions which is, what does the future look like for this industry, how do we get there and what can we do now? so in terms of what the future looks like, i think there's a lot of fascinating explanations. i think, simply put, it's probably going to be three things. commercial cannabis is going to be commodity ag, it's going to be consumer products, and hopefully it's going to be pharmaceuticals, right? the good news is that california knows how to create and regulate all three of those things very well. so i think if we can kind of start from that framework, this starts to get a little bit easier. in terms of how do we get there? i think you have to focus on the fundamentals of good policy making. think about the defaults of the actors involved here, right? for both producers and consumers, there's a way to both produce and consume cannabis that exists regardless of how you're getting it, right? so for you all as policy makers, you have to think about the cost benefit analysis that's going to be done by all of these people to transition into the regulated market. secondly, as you're thinking about that, think about the trade-offs that each of those actors is facing. i think it has been acknowledged and i think mr. houston did an excellent job of articulating it, but basically the more friction points there are for producers and consumers to move into the regulated market, the less likely they're going to do it. and then thirdly, i think for you all, again, is you're trying to think about what can we do now to make this industry a reality. focus on what every industry needs to succeed, you need a supply chain. right now there's not a supply chain in the license market, and while there's a lot to talk about what that supply chain could look like, it doesn't exist, it's hypothetical right now. secondly, every industry needs access to capital. as i said, whether this was technology, whether this was food and ag, whether this was real estate, access to capital would be a given, in this industry it's not. and so i think we need to think very proactively about what we can do. thirdly, we need a clear set of rules. we need a clear set of rules for us to play by, for you to enforce. right now, we're already on this dangerous path where for you to be a part of this industry you have to have a team of lawyers or lobbyists to even explain to you how to participate. and so for many of you have expressed an interest in small businesses succeeding, minority groups being able to have an opportunity in this space, already we're off to a difficult start. so, then, my last point or the last question to be asking is what can we do now? i think right now, you guys should kind of embrace beta. embrace the concept of beta testing, right? so like when a software company rolls out a new app or whatever, they say hey, this is the beta version. we haven't worked out all the bugs, be patient and work with us, right? i think everyone in here should be thinking in terms of, this is beta and we're going to be in the beta mode for the next five to 10 years, probably. the second thing you guys should be looking for right now are signals that things aren't working. again, even if we don't know what things will ultimately look like in the space, i think there's still symptoms already that you can see of some problems. one i point to is the fact that you have agriculture production moving into urban areas, whether it's in the east bay, or here in sacramento, or others. the best example is blue diamond, which is down the street here. corporate headquarters, manufacturing, all this stuff, not a single almond tree. the more we can put ag in rural areas and value added in urban areas, i think the more we'll know we're on the right track, right? secondly, look at what's happened on the local level. it's already gridlocked, it's already a patchwork. having worked in other industries, that's already a red flag, in terms of how to regulate, and comply, and grow businesses. so i think we need to look for ways to really coordinate at the local level, and give people a place to participate. lastly, as i've already said, this industry's already getting too expensive to participate in. when we look at projects and investments, we assume it's going to be $3 to 5 million minimum by the time you get real estate, build it out, get licensed, get your business up and going, millions of dollars. and so not a lot of people in the space, believe it or not, have millions of dollars lying around to grow their businesses. so i think for all of you here, again, you need to be looking at those signals to know that there's a course correction needed. my last point, and again thank you for the time this evening, is to keep it simple. again, you shouldn't need a team of lawyers and lobbyists to tell you how to do your business. if we want people to do the right thing and we want them to have on-ramps to do this. it should be something that they can explain to their family at the thanksgiving table. so anyway, thank you all for your time and look forward to working with you all.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 26, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 39, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 3545, 'end': 3552, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rand Martin : mr chair and members, randon behalf of consortium management group and caliva. it's a large dispensary manufacturing and cultivation operation in san jose. first, i want to echo the compliments paid to this committee and to the members of the regulatory agencies for all the hard work that's being done. caliva comes from a history, with its leadership of a highly regulated industries in other fields under medicaid and medicare. so they have a lot of respect for strong regulation. they would like to see strong regulation here. regulation is not always agreed upon by even the people sitting at this table. and mr conway's comments bring to mind one point about where should cannabis be cultivated. there are some people who believe it should only happen in rural areas. and some who believe that enclosed, odor-free urban cultivation is a reasonable approach as well. so i respect the fact that the regulatory agencies have some work to do with the industry, and figuring out exactly how to thread these various needles. i do want to point out a few things, just relative to the very specifics of regulations, and won't get into any detail. i do want to echo some of the things that ms jenkins said about aligning amma with mcrsa. we agree with the points that she made, we would add one additional one. and that is the issue of ownership. ownership in mcrsa, at least where publicly traded, is at 5%, under amma, it's 20%. we'd like to see alignment there as well. another ownership issue, that is something that you may have to deal with this year in order to be helpful to some of us in the industry, is how quickly you can become a for-profit entity. mcrsa anticipates that happening january 1, 2018. businesses that want to get geared up for january 1st, who are looking for investments, need to know that they can transfer to a for-profit ownership structure earlier than january 1st. again, anticipated on january 1st, but if we can get it earlier, perhaps as an element in the budget trailer bill this year, that would be hugely helpful to a lot of entities out there that are looking forward to converting. the only other point i want to make, and one that has not been raised at all this evening, i've certainly not heard it discussed much, is what it is the department of public health expectations relative to implementation of its version of the food, drug, and cosmetic act that applies to cannabis. for those who have spent time with the sherman act in years past know that there are issues in which people get mired. the core issue here for us is what is considered misbranding of a product? is a product misbranded if you make therapeutic, beneficial claims about the product that cannot be backed up by the science? course we find ourselves caught between a rock and a hard place, because the science is not there, because it's been illegal. and so nobody has been able to study some of the therapeutic benefits. there is an operation down at uc san diego that has made some initial overtures in that regard, but they have a long way to go. it's going to be very important for the department of public health and others who are enforcing the sherman act to be more liberal in their interpretation of what therapeutic benefits are. otherwise it could be used as a hammer against the people who are actually seeking licensure and seeking to turn this into a well-regulated business. it deserves a lot of attention, not at this time. but certainly hope that the legislature will spend some time looking at this issue over the next few months. thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 35, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 617, 'end': 623, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1190, 'end': 1197, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1218, 'end': 1222, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1228, 'end': 1233, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2457, 'end': 2464, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dale Gieringer: Thank you, my name's Dale Gieringer. I'm the Director of California NORML, the National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws. And I also want to thank the Senate. And commend Lori Ajax and her colleagues on their really excellent job of outreach. We get a lot of inquires from people, calls that say, hey, how can I get involved in the business? I say, well fortunately, there are some websites that you can go out to and you can find out how the processes work and get notices. So I'm very encouraged by the way things have been developing so far. That much said, let me say, unlike other participants at this table, we're a consumer group as opposed to an industry group. And I wanted to raise a few different issues that haven't been brought up that are of particular relevance to consumers. Which may involve some new kinds of, new licensing categories, that should be considered. One of the first of these has to do with special events. There are now all sorts of cannabis expos, and conferences, and fairs, around California. Where cannabis and cannabis products are displayed, and used, and distributed. And a lot of these events are really an economic boon from a tourist standpoint. I think every hotel room in Sonoma was sold out for the Emerald Cup this December. So we need a category, a licensing category, so that events like this can proceed. Because they're a little bit outside the framework that was originally thought of when MRCSA was put together. That dovetails with another issue, on-site consumption. Prop 64 authorizes some on-site consumption. It would be good to have some sort of regulations out there that allow on-site consumption. Not just necessarily in dispensaries, but in places like cafes, or motels, or resorts, that don't necessarily sell the marijuana but want to have on-site consumption. So some sort of license like that, like we sometimes have for alcohol, could be useful. Third concern, a very important one actually, has to do with delivery of medical cannabis. Amma forbids local governments from interfering with any transport of licensed cannabis. However, we have this relic leftover in MRCSA that says local governments can somehow ban the delivery of medical marijuana from licensed providers to residents in their very districts. And this is really not tolerable. We can't have districts, where there is no legal access. So we hope that the distribution, that in particular delivery, is construed to allow medical access via delivery to every patient in need in the state. Fourth point has to do with non-profits. Prop 64 calls for the bureau, I think, to investigate one or more classifications of non-profit licenses and possibly exempting them from taxes. We hope they will do so. There remain a lot of small, sort of informal, patient collectives that In fact, distribute marijuana free or at-cost to truly needy patients. I think with the advent of new taxes, the economic squeeze on patients and especially the poorest ones is going to be Particularly severe so we hope that there remains some sort of system available to them where free or at cost medicine can be made available. And let me say in regard to the taxes we are scared about this 15% retail excise tax especially on medical patients. When you throw in all the other taxes I'm really concerned that this is going to sort of spur the black market. So anything that could cushion the tax burden especially on needy medical patients would be useful. And finally, just a word about scientific research, medical research, educational institutions, museums like that. Often such institutions have a need for marijuana in excess of just one ounce and six plants. So, it seems to be some sort of a licensing provision for this. We ran into this at the Oakland Museum when we were doing the cannabis exhibit there earlier this year. How can the museum do this? And not be outside, and still be within the law. So that's another licensing category that should be considered.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 184, 'end': 193, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1454, 'end': 1459, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dustin McDonald: thank you, sharing the mic here a little bit today. my name is dustin daniel mcdonald. first off, thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today. my name is dustin daniel mcdonald, i'm testifying on behalf of weedmaps. for those of you not familiar with weed maps, weedmaps is the oldest and largest technology company in the marijuana industry. while weedmaps began with a simple concept of connecting patients to doctors, delivery service providers and dispensaries. we since expanded ourselves to building out the tech backbone of the industry to include the development and sale of business to business software, business consumer software, point of sale software. we're in the process of organizing track and trace software to be compliant with what the state organizes related to those laws. in this role on the tech side weedmaps is very much in the tech space and has no intention of deviating from that. we're committed to maintaining our position in the tech industry and have no interest in being more closely associated with the product of marijuana. either selling it directly or cultivating or manufacturing or doing anything like that. echoing the comments of a lot of the panelists here today, there's been a considerable amount of work done by regulators to this point. and we certainly applaud them and commend them for the work they've tried to move forward on to organize regulations pertaining to the medical and adult use markets. and we recognize that they have their work cut out for them and are very supportive of the work that they're trying to do. from our perspective, i think the biggest challenge that the state faces, keeping in mind what the purpose of the exercise is here which is establishing legal medical and adult-use markets. we think the biggest challenge the state faces in doing that is addressing the illegal market issue. and i think that problem is particularly poignant for california given the enormous size of the illegal market here. a lot of folks may not be aware of this, but california is the largest marijuana market in the entire world. just los angeles by itself, that market is estimated to be at least twice the size of the entire state of colorado's market. so we're talking about a fairly substantial large market with a very large number of operators. as jerry can attest to in los angeles beyond dispensaries and delivery services you literally have thousands of cultivators and manufacturers to attest to facilities, etc. so you have a very large and sophisticated industry with thousands of industry participants. and due to the fact that regulations from the state won't be coming down until january 2018 with associated licenses being issued. 482 cities and 58 counties experimenting with their own version of local regulatory policy. you're going to see a slow phase in of regulatory compliant participants. so as that goes forward, there'll be this constant effort to rid the illegal market operators. but that's going to be a function of arriving at suitable tax rates, at organizing land use policies in a way that can license a large number of potential licensees. and trying to work cooperatively between the state and local governments to achieve that. i think one of the biggest challenges on the tax side, of course has to do with the high tax rate envisioned by prop 64. both on the retail side, the 15% tax rate, as well as the two separate cultivation taxes that are going to be applied. this is in addition to local taxes, which can be applied at any rate that locals envision. and i know the league of california cities and csac. had been working very hard to try to convince local governments to try to keep those taxes low, again, trying to get at this illegal market issue. but given those high tax rates presents a very daunting challenge for the state in trying to regulate those entities and bring them into compliance. one of the biggest challenges of course is you'll have a significant price difference between the legal and illegal markets. and some of the panelists have mentioned, it's going to be very difficult to bring illegal market actors into compliance if they can continue to do business kind of in the shadows in the gray market. those are some of the kind of critical issues. and borrowing off of some of those themes that some of the panelists have offered up here today. i think another critical one associated with cost and price and trying to establish something like price parody between legal and illegal markets. is addressing some of the issues in the supply chain that were created by mcrsa that we need to work on and one of the biggest ones there of course is the independent distribution layer. we understand the rationale. that was organized for justification of that model. however, it's not a model that currently exists in the industry today. it's one that we continue to hear rumors from folks who are interested in getting into that independent distribution space. with the intent to mark up distribution costs somewhere between 20 and 30%. so you're already looking at significantly high market costs. and mcrsa has done a fairly effective job of limiting the number of monopoly opportunities and really trying to ensure that there's a competitive equal market. this is the one exception to that, and it really doesn't have a place in the industry the way that it operates today. so those are some of the biggest issues that we see, is again, we're trying to establish legal adult-use, a legal medical model, ... is going to be eliminating the illegal market. and we're going to have to work very hard to get the tax rates and to establish some kind of price parody between the two markets. with that, that really kind of concludes my comments and i'm happy to take any questions.
[{'start': 63, 'end': 85, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 168, 'end': 190, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2328, 'end': 2333, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Josh Newman: my name is josh dustin newman, i'm the silent bob member of these days. and i was remiss in not introducing myself earlier. so, i'm newly elected, and i'm pleased to tell you all, this is my first hearing ever.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cara Martinson: sure thing, i'll kick it off. thank you very much, my name is cara josh martinson, and i'm with the california state association of counties. and thank you for being here and providing us the opportunity to provide our feedback tonight. csac has been very engaged in marijuana with the development of the mcrsa and with input into prop 64, and there is a lot happening at the local level currently. just to give you a brief snapshot, about two thirds of california counties voted in favor of proposition 64, and we do think that this will be sort of reflective of how marijuana is regulated at the local level moving forward. many local governments have started this process. on the november 2016 ballot, there were, i believe, 53 local city and county ballot measures. 39 of those were successful and out of those there were seven county tax measures. so, there is a lot happening at the local level. and we really fought hard and to retain that local control as we move forward to develop our regulatory program. so, we obviously have a vested interest in what's happening at the state level, because they're linked systems. we are creating sort of our own regulatory programs and taxation programs, but we want them to be work in concert with what's happening at the local level. and as was mentioned earlier, a lot of jurisdictions are holding back and waiting to see what that state regulatory process looks like. so, out of this, really, timing i think is one of our number one concerns. we want to help the state meet that january 1, 2018 statutory goal but we also have to develop our own programs at the local level, in order for the state to issue licenses because there is that discrepancy between the mcrsa and prop 64, whereas there's a dual licensing structure on the medical side and on the recreational side. it allows the state to issue a license as long as it's not in conflict with the local ordinance. so we're very interested to see what that regulatory process looks like, and what that timing will be. as was mentioned, there are a number of differences between the medical side and the recreational side. i think besides timing and process, issues of enforcement and how that will work at the local level, and what our role actually being in all the various licensing categories of interest to us as well. and then i'll let my colleagues speak to a lot of the other issues, but i think one of the concerns of everybody here too is the revenue collection piece and that taxation side of things. there's a lot happening at the federal level. there's a lot of uncertainty. csac is a member of the treasurer's banking working groups, so we're working collaboratively with the state and all the stakeholders to come up with a creative solution, but it's a daunting task. so we look forward to continued partnership on that issue as well. thank you very much.
[{'start': 62, 'end': 81, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2594, 'end': 2598, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Paul Smith: mr. chairman, members, paul cara smith with rural counties association. our association is 35 of the state's rural and remote, low population counties. our main concern in this conversation obviously is cultivation, as senator mcguire has articulated through the afternoon and evening. our members range from the north coast, where this is very prolific to other areas of the state, where the times are changing, given the passage of the mcrsa in prop 64. so our focus is predominantly with cdfa and their licensing scheme, as it relates to cultivation and moving that product off of the cultivation site. i think like all of the stakeholders that you'll hear from, local governments keenly are concerned about what this regulatory package could look like. and i'll highlight a couple of things that we will be really really focusing in on once they are released and available for comment. the biggest issue obviously is local approval. the mcrsa gave local governments a major role in citing, and permitting, and authorizing, however you may want to call it, in the process for cultivators, retailers, manufacturers, testers, etc. to participate in the program. yet, we don't know exactly what that local approval interchange between the state and local governments is going to be. complicating it is very clear in the mcrsa that you really can't operate unless you have some type of affirmative action from a local government. that's not the way prop 64 works. so harmonizing those two paradigms under local approval is very keen to us, and we'll want to see both the spring regulations for the mcrsa as well as what the various licensing agencies are going to come up with later in the process for the adult side. the other big issue for, i think, local governments and in particular rural counties is what is the expectations from the state for coordinating efforts in local governments. basically what are the obligations of the ag commissioner? what are the obligations of the environmental health director? what are the obligations of sheriffs and law enforcement? and also, i think, on points senator mcguire hit, what is the obligations of county tax collectors? you know that there's a bill already introduced. it's similar to a bill last year where counties would be the collectors of cash on behalf of all of the state agencies. to speak to, i think again, senator mcguire spoke to in his testimony, what do folks do in rural, humboldt county. do they have to go all the way to redding, do they have to go san francisco? our belief in supporting that effort is to try to get as much compliance cash wise and tax wise into local governments slash state governments coffers. so what will the role of tax collectors be at the local level? and then finally, transportation standards. we haven't really talked much about this, this evening. the licensing in these have to come up with some transportation standards. moving products here and there. very, very important when you're looking at thousands upon thousands of cultivators, particularly in concentrated areas. how is that product going to move, what's the role of the chp, what's the role of local law enforcement. all of those things we'll be keenly aware of. so we are really looking forward to the partnership with the state and all of the licensing entities. i would be remiss without thanking particularly cdfa and the bureau for addressing the rural concerns of this conversation, they've been very open, open door policy, one-on-one policy. we very much appreciate that and we're going to look forward to spending the several months ahead rolling up our sleeves and making a scheme work.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 227, 'end': 234, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2109, 'end': 2116, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2377, 'end': 2384, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lauren Michaels: Well, thank you and thank you all for being here and sticking it out. My name is Lauren Michaels, and I do cannabis policy for the California Police Chief's Association. And we thank you for including our perspective this evening. As a state-wide Association, we find ourselves in a very interesting position of supporting strongly the Medical Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act while opposing Proposition 64. We now join all of the stakeholders sitting behind me and many more, working together to balance the often conflicting interests behind MCRSA and the AMA. In doing so, we will continue to advocate for absolute local control, dual state and local licensing, limits on vertical integration and cross licensing, and thorough background checks for all licensees. However, in issuing in the commercial structure for marijuana through ballot initiatives, there's a new set of problems that we must face as the law enforcement community. The commercial structure is one that is based on increased use and sales, and we are very concerned about the increase in drug driving on our streets. And we are very grateful for the work of the California Highway Patrol in addressing this issue. We wish to work with stakeholders and the elected officials in working together to deter, identify, and successfully prosecute marijuana-impaired drivers. Second, we're concerned about advertising and branding of marijuana. We urge the Legislature and stakeholders to work to prevent another repeat of tobacco from entering our communities by ensuring the advertising that is attractive to minors does not become common fixture in our California society. Third, state and local law enforcement entities needed to work together across jurisdictional boundaries to ensure that our legal system is not exploited to embolden a black market. Something that we've seen happen in other states that have brought a commercial industry. And lastly, we cannot ignore the inflexible nature of a ballot initiative. As new challenges and needs present themselves, we'll be hard pressed to identify solutions that do not conflict with the language of Proposition 64. This will require creative thinking on behalf of leaders and stakeholders who cannot be deterred from solving real problems as a result of the initiative's language. Thank you.
[{'start': 81, 'end': 96, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Glenn Backes: Good evening, Glenn Backes for Drug Policy Alliance. We're a national organization of drug policy reform to replace the drug war with policies based on health, science, and human rights. I think I have less than two minutes of testimony, and I will try and keep to that. Thank you-
[{'start': 14, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sam Rodriguez: Good evening, Senator Hill, Senator Newman, Senator McGuire. Good to see you again. My name is Sam Rodriguez, and on behalf of the United Food and Commercial Workers State Council, we will like to express our appreciation of this oversight hearing. It's only 7:45 PM, so we really appreciate your efficiencies. One of the things that we want to talk about is the United Foods and Commercial Workers, we were instrumental in the passage of MRSA. And we want to thank all the major stakeholders, the governor's office, the state Legislature, and the agencies that provided input. More importantly is that UFCW is the only major union that actually represents cannabis workers in the State of California that sat down with the proponents of 64 and negotiated major items in Prop 64 that we would like to be preserved and be protected. So let me start with number one. Labor peace agreement requirement. Under the Prop 64, same as MRSA, carries over by reference the requirement that MRSA, that any marijuana business license with 20 or more employees enter a labor peace agreement as a condition of licensure. This is critical. I want to thank Lori Ajax's office for allowing us to have numerous meetings with her. It is critical that the submission of the labor peace agreement be done electronically to the agency, and then that document be signed by the employer and by the labor organization, and notarized for the following reasons. We have already identified fraud, and we want to make sure that we ensure compliance among all the segments of the industry. Number two, one of the other items that we negotiated with the proponents of 64 was enhancing the existing workplace protection statutes whereby cannabis employer license may be suspended or revoked in violation of labor laws. Ladies and gentlemen, what I'm trying to say here is don't forget the workers. We want to be part of the solution and not be part of the problem afterwards. Another item that we negotiated with the proponents of Prop 64 was allowing, by majority vote of the state Legislature, to amend the act to further enhance or increase worker protections and, doing so, being consistent in the proposed intent of AUMA. Fourth item, AUMA designates marijuana cultivators as agricultural employers, requiring that employees be paid in accordance with wage order 4-2001. And that is something that both my colleague Barry Broad and I submitted into MRSA and was carried over into AUMA. Fifth, AUMA requires CAL/OSHA to do a study to determine that workplace safety standards are necessary for cannabis businesses, including risks that may be unique to the industry, such as combustion, inhalation, armed robberies, or repetitive strain injuries. Just two more items. AUMA requires state licencing agencies to issue or deny a license application or renewal based on a number of factors, including whether license or renewal could allow unreasonable restraints on competition by creation or maintenance of unlawful monopoly power. We, our legal team, felt that this was very critical to ensure that we do not have big marijuana coming to the State of California. And last two items. AUMA sustains an open distribution model similar to the food, retail, and processing industry, and the California craft beer distribution industry. Our union is supportive of that provision for the sustains in Prop 64 and into the marketplace. And finally, as Mr. McGuire has mentioned, the Advisory Committee to advise the bureau and licensing authorities in development of standards and regulations, including the best practices and guidelines to protect public health and safety. Members will include, but not limited to, representatives of the cannabis industry, labor, state and local agencies, public health experts, and other subject matter experts. We ask that the Legislature really use your role as an oversight Committee to ensure that this Advisory Committee gets announced and in place as soon as possible. With that, I end my testimony, and thank you for your time.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 26, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 36, 'end': 42, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 52, 'end': 59, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 95, 'end': 108, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 439, 'end': 443, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 927, 'end': 931, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 980, 'end': 984, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1141, 'end': 1152, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2389, 'end': 2400, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3418, 'end': 3425, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Barry Broad: good evening mr. chairman, members. barry paul broad on behalf of the california teamsters public affairs council. i actually think that the harmonization of these two statutory schemes is probably not as difficult as it would be in other circumstances, because prop 64, in our view, contains an unusually large amount of discretion for the legislature and regulatory agencies to make changes consistent with the drafters of prop 64. therefore, a lot of issues, i think, will be resolved relatively easily. and they're not all that far apart, even though there are disagreements. for example, both statutory schemes require a mandatory distributor. the only difference is whether the distributor can hold other licenses, or is independent. that entity, and we support that independent distribution model, and we supported it in the medical marijuana model precisely because it is antithetical to the concentration of market power and monopoly. that's the point of it. and we sat down with the proponents of prop 64 during the campaign, and worked out language to implement, consistent with the drafters of prop 64, language to that effect, which you all undoubtedly be seeing, and will be weighing, and determine whether you want to support it or not. prop 64, as mr. rodriguez points out, contains very significant language, in fact, unusual language, preventing the concentration of market power, and licensing decisions that would result in the concentration of market power. therefore, something along the lines of a rebuttable presumption, that holding licenses in all categories to create vertical integration, might create unlawful competition, unlawful restraint on competition is something that, in our view, is fully consistent with prop 64, and i think the drafters understood that. it's been raised, i think, somewhat wildly, that having an independent distribution model, it is in itself a monopoly. however, the only licensed category in this entire system where there can be an unlimited number of licensees is distributors. there could be as many distributors who want to enter the market as they feel like. that's not the case with growers, that's not the case with dispensaries, that's not the case with manufacturers. it's not the case with anyone, except distributors. therefore, to suggest that it is a restraint on trade itself is actually hard to accept. we feel that this proposal has the support of law enforcement, it has the support of local government, it has support of large part of the marijuana industry. and it has the support, at least it had the support, in the medical model for marijuana. so, we support that model. secondly, i just want to point out that this is an industry that has been amply talked about today, that has existed in the shadows. it's existed in the underground economy, and therefore, it has to come out of the underground economy. and labor practices are an area that are common to every other business are not necessarily common in this business. for example, there are families that trim marijuana in agriculture areas, including children. we can't have child labor. that simply cannot happen, and it's bad for all the reasons that child labor are bad. it may have evolved that way, but that doesn't mean it's something that can stay. and finally, the third point is that we have to protect the people who want to operate legally from the people who will continue to operate illegally, including cartels and everybody else. and a lot of what law enforcement will switch to is commerce enforcement, that's what it will become, looking for the people that are cheating. if you cheat on your taxes, you've got a competitive advantage over everyone else. if you make it difficult to pay your taxes, that may have the same result. and therefore, we think that the legislature needs to look very closely at a model that will ensure that the taxes are paid, and it's easy to pay the taxes. for example, the state board of equalization is proposing that all three taxes be collected at the distribution level, remitted at the distribution level, as is done with diesel fuel, so that it happens in one part of commerce. it doesn't burden the farmers who, in this case, would have to pay, under prop 64, a harvest tax upon harvest, which they can't afford to pay in anticipation of selling their crop. it would put them in a position, or many of them, in a position of being forced to go to the underground economy, in order to try to pay their taxes. so, the legislature, as it crafts this model, needs to make it work and work, so that the players that are playing by the rules are not punished. that they can make a profit, that they can survive, and that the incentives are for them to operate within the above ground regulated economy. thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1268, 'end': 1277, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Carlos Campos: no, actually, i'm not. my name is carlos barry campos, i'm with the cnh auxiliary safety management. and i'm here to talk about the cal/osha side of things.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carlos Campos: my name again is carlos carlos campos, with hazzem inc.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Green: good evening, thank you for this hearing. michael carlos green, i'm from lake county, senator mcguire district. i'm also on the planning commission in the city of lakeport. came here for information to see how the state is doing. i'm going to go back and say they're working on it, but two key things. one, in terms of environmental damage, yeah some help from the state would be good. our key challenge is kind of surprising as lake county plows through it's ordinance some of the biggest pushback we've gotten is from the ag community. so whether we're talking about appellations they're trying to push us out of wine grape appellations right now. so we can have a dueling appellations and we think depending on how that flies. there's going to be a [unknown] document. as it turns out, there's not a lot of money for local governments to get [unknown]compliance. especially if they can't get an initial study and they need some eir's. so in terms of that, we need help for those counties that are going to regulate. for my hometown of fresno, i wanted to go back to what senator hernandez, dr. pan said, and not just focus on packaging and labeling. those are important for patients, but we have millions of patients who are currently behind enemy lines who have no safe access to any license business says it all. and i would hope that would be front and center with the health committees moving forward. we have a minimum level of service now of six plants for adult use but we have no minimum level of service for patients who need their medicine, thank you.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 62, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 94, 'end': 101, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1082, 'end': 1091, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1097, 'end': 1100, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Molly Fry: I'm Dr. Molly Fry, and I just want to thank you for taking this subject so seriously. I agree with the gentleman previously. That there are many places in this State of California where patients are suffering because they don't have access to their medicine. The three and so please keep that in consideration especially since health insurance does not pay for any of this medicine. And although it's a common conception that there is no research available about the medical use of this medicine that is within the United States. And there's plenty of research available in Israel that does provide for a lot of documentation for how medicinally useful it is. But I also wanted to address the DUI problem. Driving under the influence and impairment can be tested with our new modern technology. And I just wanted to bring that up to you if you hadn't been aware of it. They have a program that is available on a smart phone that will test your reaction time. And so by using a very simple, mechanical computers generated test we can identify what drivers are impaired. And therefore possible develop a system that that would be admissible in court. And eliminate the necessity of drug testing either cheek swab or urine because it's ineffective to reflect impairment in a particular patient. The other point I wanted to make was CBD, which is a component of cannabis, is an antidote to the toxicity of the THC. So, we need to increase education and awareness, and that's what I'm doing primarily, I'm not practicing medicine. I'm a cannabis educator, and I'm trying to reach the seniors. And the population of patients who are taking a tremendous amount of medications and need to be on a safe and effective, nontoxic herbal remedy. And the reality is that I give them all CBD. And CBD at eight to one to THC will completely reverse the negative effects of the THC. So it's a wonderful medical awareness, but this would eliminate those emergency room visits that you're worried about. If patients know, I've gotten too much, I need to take the antidote, we will have much more success. And the last thing point I wanted to make, was that those bacteria, and the aspergillus that he mentioned. If that was a significant problem in marijuana with the 21 years of marijuana, medical marijuana use unregulated. We would have seen emergency room visits and sick patients. So I think that's a little bit of hysteria. We need to focus on the real problems, and there are a lot of them, thank you.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
James Sweeney: (Thank you Dr. Fry. Our next speaker, good evening.) Good evening, my name is James Sweeney. It is a pleasure to have you so meticulously go through the issues impacting marijuana in this state. And as the Vice President of the Black American Political Association of, California, I want you to know that we are following this. We are looking at this and we are also doing outreach because we know statistically. That's 75% of those arrested for marijuana possession are black and brown. And we also know that the criminal justice aspects were addressed with Prop 64 and it has been a major hell. But we also know, that people want to take a look and examine is this something that we want to be involved with? Is this a gold rush that African Americans and other minorities, should be getting involved with? And that is why on February 24th, at the Capital Events Center all day. We will be discussing this issue hopefully with some of the decision makers in this room. So I'm going to reflect the five B's, you're familiar with the five B's?
[{'start': 15, 'end': 18, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 78, 'end': 91, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rich Miller: good afternoon, miller from the american alliance medical cannabis. i am the state director and i'm coming before you to discuss patients' rights. we know that the industry has been founded on the patients' rights that have helped move this industry forward. most, and i would say 95% of the patients that i work with, will not come into the regulatory scheme. either because they medically can't do it, they financially can't afford it, or they don't have the whereforall to do it. most of the patients that i deal with are catastrophically illness, terminally ill and chronically ill. so it's important as we move forward that we do not forget the compassionate aspects of this for the patients. that have brought this community forward and brought the industry forward. it's important that we have some sort of compassion program so they can have access to their medicine, like we have for pharmaceuticals. we have medicare and medical that will cover a variety of medical conditions and their prescriptions. we have nothing for medical cannabis, so it's extremely important imperative that we set up some sort of regulatory system that includes that for the patients. i thank you for your time.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jackie McGowen: hi, my name is jackie michael mcgowen. i'm a licensing consultant in the industry, and i wanted to bring up the fact that the first customer that i assisted with getting a local permit was in yellow county. they were then raided by an outside tri county task force called trident, who does not govern that jurisdiction. and so i want you to consider offering immunity to anyone that has gone and jumped through the hoops to get a local permit. while waiting for whatever agency they need to wait for to come online to get their state permit. because otherwise, they're exposed, in this legal limbo situation. and right now, that client that has a local permit from yolo county is being charged with conspiracy to illegally sell the legal marijuana that they were growing. and so this is sort of ridiculous. so we don't continue to see these types of patterns around the state. i would really like you to consider offering immunity to anyone that has received a local permit, thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Smith: yes, thank you, i'm karen jonah smith, director of the california department of public health. with respect to ensuring safety, i think edibles are more complicated, certainly. and from the perspective of testing they may actually be a little bit simpler once the product is manufactured. and the testing laboratories will be testing the manufactured products as well. and that will include total dose of various cannabinoids, including thc. but then also, we are going to propose regulations that will ensure that it's homogeneously distributed throughout the edible product.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Tong: good afternoon, chair and member of the committee. amy karen tong, director of california department of technology. and if i may, before i specifically addressed a question about what product and competitive process. if i could just briefly provide an overview of the effort that the department of technology have been engaged with the multiple partner here sitting as my panel member. as well as additional state entities are a part of this process in developing a technology strategy to fulfill the needs. as you are all aware, that in order to fulfill the requirement implementation that the cannabis regulation. there's combination of licensing systems, as well as track and trace that are predominately responsible for the departmental food and agriculture. in the study that we have engaged with these departments, in order to expedite, if that's the right word. the implementation of a solution to support that. as well as to reduce the redundancy of information that could possibly be required to collect from the industry user. we have decided to put together a common strategy to have a standard approach to achieve both the licensing systems needs as well as the track and trace system needs for those area that are common. with that, specifically to the licensing system. the competitive process was utilized to selling both the product as well as literally right now we are entering into a negotiation process for the system integrators, which is typically what we call the consulting firm that would be brought on board to implement the product that we have. chosen. in this case the product they have chosen for the licensing system for department of consumer affair, as well as cdfa is dsl a product. and the seller product is currently not the product that is being used for the grease system. and we decided to choose that product is based on its track record being used in both the industry for licensing as well as other state entity that have chosen this particular product to implement that licensing capability. in term of the cost i probably need to look into it and perhaps get back to you on that. and that product was chosen and the contract gets awarded by the end of the calendar year. in term of the system developer or the system integrator, this sort of consultant that we'd bring forward. as i mentioned earlier, we are literally in the negotiation process right now so i won't be able to share that information until that process is completed.
[{'start': 51, 'end': 65, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jerred Kiloh: i'll try to be concise. my name is jerred, i am currently the president of a trade association called the ucba in los angeles. we represent a group of illegally operating dispensaries under proposition d. proposition d was passed in 2013 in los angeles with about a 63% voter rating. and that proposition was there to regulate the number of dispensaries down to 135 that had been in compliance since 2007. this group now is working with the city of los angeles. we helped write an ordinance that was going on the march ballot. we also worked with the city in forming another ordinance, it's also going on the march ballot, of which we have dropped the support of our original authored ballot in support of the city's ballot, due to negotiations from our trade association and other members of the industry. and able to get priority licensing for the prop d compliant locations, as well as form regulatory boards for the city of los angeles, so that we can have a more robust industry, and that is focused on regulations. we currently work with the franchise tax board. we currently work with the office of finance in trying to come up with solutions on how to pay taxes, how to get cash into the city. so we work with all the local agencies in an effort to try to make sure that our industry is well represented both in taxation and in regulation. and the city's doing a very good job, i think on the past, it has been very unregulated. but i think in this current market now, the city of los angeles, as well as all the industry players, are doing a very good job on getting regulations and everything moving forward. the one thing that i'm asking this group here is that on the march 7th ballot, if the march 7th ballot that would regulate our industry does not pass. that the state would at least take into account that the property shops that are currently operating underneath our local ordinance that are currently under what we are calling probably a semantic version of licensed or permitted. they're calling us limitedly immune, so under a limited immunity, we'd like to be at least recognized that if the march ballot does not pass, that the state takes an active role in looking to see how they can regulate the currently legally operating shops inside los angeles. and i mean, i would like to thank this board for not only staying this long, but also taking this very seriously. been working with lori ajax, and what a task that has taken on. and she has worked with all the stakeholders in a very clear and concise way. that makes us all feel like we're not only being heard for the first time in a couple of decades, but also that we're being listened to to the point where rules and regulations are going to be mapped around what the needs of the industry are. so thank you all for taking this time.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2409, 'end': 2418, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Amy Jenkins: chairman hill and committee members, thank you very much for the opportunity. amy amy jenkins with platinum advisors, i'm here on behalf of the california cannabis industry association, or ccia, as we're often known. ccia represents all segments of california's cannabis industry. we do have approximately 250 members throughout the state. we have been working on a licensure and regulatory framework since 2014, partnering with very nontraditional allies at the time. and we are very, very pleased to see the progress. we were instrumental in the drafting of the mcrsa, we endorsed proposition 64. as the regulatory agencies are looking to implement, i do want to commend them. as hezekiah pointed out, they have been incredibly accessible. we have been very appreciative of their proactive outreach to the industry. the stakeholder meetings were exceptional, and they were widely attended. and had very robust dialogs. so we have been very, very pleased with outreach to industry thus far and again, really feel like they are deeply committed to getting this done and getting this done right before the january 2018 implementation deadline. in terms of our priorities, i actually concur with a lot of the comments that were raised by my college hezekiah allen. we do have a series of legislative priorities that we're contemplating to try to address some of the implementation challenges associated with the medical and the recreational framework. one issue that was raised consistently during the regulatory agencies testimony was, again, kind of the medical and the recreational, and the reconciliation of those two models. there are a number of discrepancies between the two, that we think will make implementation challenging for state and local agencies, as well as for the industry itself. among them, i won't touch on those that have already been discussed, but phase in is certainly a big priority, but also the differences in licensure. there are 17 license categories in medical, there are 19 and they are a little bit different in the recreational model. we have a cross licensure restrictions in the medical framework. we have very limited licensure restrictions in the recreational. and then a big item that has been consistently discussed is, there is a third party independent to distribution mandate in the medical framework and that does not exist in the recreational framework. ccis preference is that, the prop 64 initiative was a mandate by the voters. we would like to see many of those distinctions reconciled so that we are adopting the prop 64 model. so that is something that we're going to be consistently advocating on throughout the year. but in the meantime, again, going back to the comments made about the licensing entities, we do think they are doing an exceptional job, and we will look forward to continuing to work with them and you as you contemplate, how to reconcile the two frameworks into one system. thank you.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 13, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 78, 'end': 93, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 682, 'end': 690, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1247, 'end': 1261, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Daniel Conway: Good evening Chairman Hill. My name is Daniel Conway and I'm here with Truth Enterprises. We are an investment firm focused on the legal cannabis industry. And as I would note here today, that's much easier said than done. So frankly I'm here totruth entday to urge you all to find opportunity for angel and venture investors to play a role in this industry. With regard to the topic today, I had a couple of comments that I wanted to make. First of all, I just wanted to give a little background about myself. Prior to moving into this industry just over a year ago I spent three years serving as the Chief of Staff to the mayor of Sacramento and before that had worked with the California Restaurant Association and some firms downtown. So with that being said, I can sympathize very much with the challenges in front of you all and your staff. But with that being said, I think there's some things you can do here. Let's all recognize, and I think this was noted, that you lack many of the common tools that you have in your policy making toolbox. As the last panel said, you have no data. And there is insufficient science in terms of the medical effects, the intoxication levels, as well as even just kind of the scope and the scale of the industry. Secondly, there's really no blueprint. There's no model that you guys can look to. Other states, whether it's Colorado, Washington, they're imperfect for their size, their scale, for many reasons that you have noted. Thirdly, this is a high profile issue with many layers of complexity, which invites a lot of scrutiny and that's virtually never a good place to be for you all. It's a situation where everyone's going to tell you what you're doing wrong but no one's going to be really able to tell what to do right. So I think for all of us here, we also have to acknowledge that those three factors are compounded by the fact that for 20 years we have had this grey market that is related to Prop 15. And now you have the realization that all of us, the decisions that are being made here over the next 12 to 24 months are going to shape this industry nationwide. So given these challenges, given the lack of tools in your tool box, becomes what can we all be doing. I would urge us all here, particularly the people on the Dias to think of three questions which is, what does the future look like for this industry, how do we get there and what can we do now? So in terms of what the future looks like, I think there's a lot of fascinating explanations. I think, simply put, it's probably going to be three things. Commercial cannabis is going to be commodity ag, it's going to be consumer products, and hopefully it's going to be pharmaceuticals, right? The good news is that California knows how to create and regulate all three of those things very well. So I think if we can kind of start from that framework, this starts to get a little bit easier. In terms of how do we get there? I think you have to focus on the fundamentals of good policy making. Think about the defaults of the actors involved here, right? For both producers and consumers, there's a way to both produce and consume cannabis that exists regardless of how you're getting it, right? So for you all as policy makers, you have to think about the cost benefit analysis that's going to be done by all of these people to transition into the regulated market. Secondly, as you're thinking about that, think about the trade-offs that each of those actors is facing. I think it has been acknowledged and I think Mr. Houston did an excellent job of articulating it, but basically the more friction points there are for producers and consumers to move into the regulated market, the less likely they're going to do it. And then thirdly, I think for you all, again, is you're trying to think about what can we do now to make this industry a reality. Focus on what every industry needs to succeed, you need a supply chain. Right now there's not a supply chain in the license market, and while there's a lot to talk about what that supply chain could look like, it doesn't exist, it's hypothetical right now. Secondly, every industry needs access to capital. As I said, whether this was technology, whether this was food and ag, whether this was real estate, access to capital would be a given, in this industry it's not. And so I think we need to think very proactively about what we can do. Thirdly, we need a clear set of rules. We need a clear set of rules for us to play by, for you to enforce. Right now, we're already on this dangerous path where for you to be a part of this industry you have to have a team of lawyers or lobbyists to even explain to you how to participate. And so for many of you have expressed an interest in small businesses succeeding, minority groups being able to have an opportunity in this space, already we're off to a difficult start. So, then, my last point or the last question to be asking is what can we do now? I think right now, you guys should kind of embrace beta. Embrace the concept of beta testing, right? So like when a software company rolls out a new app or whatever, they say hey, this is the beta version. We haven't worked out all the bugs, be patient and work with us, right? I think everyone in here should be thinking in terms of, this is beta and we're going to be in the beta mode for the next five to 10 years, probably. The second thing you guys should be looking for right now are signals that things aren't working. Again, even if we don't know what things will ultimately look like in the space, I think there's still symptoms already that you can see of some problems. One I point to is the fact that you have agriculture production moving into urban areas, whether it's in the East Bay, or here in Sacramento, or others. The best example is Blue Diamond, which is down the street here. Corporate headquarters, manufacturing, all this stuff, not a single almond tree. The more we can put ag in rural areas and value added in urban areas, I think the more we'll know we're on the right track, right? Secondly, look at what's happened on the local level. It's already gridlocked, it's already a patchwork. Having worked in other industries, that's already a red flag, in terms of how to regulate, and comply, and grow businesses. So I think we need to look for ways to really coordinate at the local level, and give people a place to participate. Lastly, as I've already said, this industry's already getting too expensive to participate in. When we look at projects and investments, we assume it's going to be $3 to 5 million minimum by the time you get real estate, build it out, get licensed, get your business up and going, millions of dollars. And so not a lot of people in the space, believe it or not, have millions of dollars lying around to grow their businesses. So I think for all of you here, again, You need to be looking at those signals to know that there's a course correction needed. My last point, and again thank you for the time this evening, is to keep it simple. Again, you shouldn't need a team of lawyers and lobbyists to tell you how to do your business. If we want people to do the right thing and we want them to have on-ramps to do this. It should be something that they can explain to their family at the Thanksgiving table. So anyway, thank you all for your time and look forward to working with you all.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 26, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 39, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 3541, 'end': 3548, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rand Martin : Mr Chair and members, Rand Martin on behalf of Consortium Management Group and CALIVA. It's a large dispensary manufacturing and cultivation operation in San Jose. First, I want to echo the compliments paid to this Committee and to the members of the regulatory agencies for all the hard work that's being done. CALIVA comes from a history, with its leadership of a highly regulated industries in other fields under Medicaid and Medicare. So they have a lot of respect for strong regulation. They would like to see strong regulation here. Regulation is not always agreed upon by even the people sitting at this table. And Mr Conway's comments bring to mind one point about where should cannabis be cultivated. There are some people who believe it should only happen in rural areas. And some who believe that enclosed, odor-free urban cultivation is a reasonable approach as well. So I respect the fact that the regulatory agencies have some work to do with the industry, and figuring out exactly how to thread these various needles. I do want to point out a few things, just relative to the very specifics of regulations, and won't get into any detail. I do want to echo some of the things that Ms Jenkins said about aligning Amma with MCRSA. We agree with the points that she made, we would add one additional one. And that is the issue of ownership. Ownership in MCRSA, at least where publicly traded, is at 5%, under Amma, it's 20%. We'd like to see alignment there as well. Another ownership issue, that is something that you may have to deal with this year in order to be helpful to some of us in the industry, is how quickly you can become a for-profit entity. MCRSA anticipates that happening January 1, 2018. Businesses that want to get geared up for January 1st, who are looking for investments, need to know that they can transfer to a for-profit ownership structure earlier than January 1st. Again, anticipated on January 1st, but if we can get it earlier, perhaps as an element in the budget trailer bill this year, that would be hugely helpful to a lot of entities out there that are looking forward to converting. The only other point I want to make, and one that has not been raised at all this evening, I've certainly not heard it discussed much, is what it is the Department of Public Health expectations relative to implementation of its version of the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act that applies to cannabis. For those who have spent time with the Sherman Act in years past know that there are issues in which people get mired. The core issue here for us is what is considered misbranding of a product? Is a product misbranded if you make therapeutic, beneficial claims about the product that cannot be backed up by the science? Course we find ourselves caught between a rock and a hard place, because the science is not there, because it's been illegal. And so nobody has been able to study some of the therapeutic benefits. There is an operation down at UC San Diego that has made some initial overtures in that regard, but they have a long way to go. It's going to be very important for the Department of Public Health and others who are enforcing the Sherman Act to be more liberal in their interpretation of what therapeutic benefits are. Otherwise it could be used as a hammer against the people who are actually seeking licensure and seeking to turn this into a well-regulated business. It deserves a lot of attention, not at this time. But certainly hope that the Legislature will spend some time looking at this issue over the next few months. Thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 33, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 625, 'end': 631, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1198, 'end': 1205, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1226, 'end': 1230, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1236, 'end': 1241, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2465, 'end': 2472, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dale Gieringer: thank you, my name's dale amy gieringer. i'm the director of california norml, the national organization for the reform of marijuana laws. and i also want to thank the senate. and commend lori ajax and her colleagues on their really excellent job of outreach. we get a lot of inquires from people, calls that say, hey, how can i get involved in the business? i say, well fortunately, there are some websites that you can go out to and you can find out how the processes work and get notices. so i'm very encouraged by the way things have been developing so far. that much said, let me say, unlike other participants at this table, we're a consumer group as opposed to an industry group. and i wanted to raise a few different issues that haven't been brought up that are of particular relevance to consumers. which may involve some new kinds of, new licensing categories, that should be considered. one of the first of these has to do with special events. there are now all sorts of cannabis expos, and conferences, and fairs, around california. where cannabis and cannabis products are displayed, and used, and distributed. and a lot of these events are really an economic boon from a tourist standpoint. i think every hotel room in sonoma was sold out for the emerald cup this december. so we need a category, a licensing category, so that events like this can proceed. because they're a little bit outside the framework that was originally thought of when mrcsa was put together. that dovetails with another issue, on-site consumption. prop 64 authorizes some on-site consumption. it would be good to have some sort of regulations out there that allow on-site consumption. not just necessarily in dispensaries, but in places like cafes, or motels, or resorts, that don't necessarily sell the marijuana but want to have on-site consumption. so some sort of license like that, like we sometimes have for alcohol, could be useful. third concern, a very important one actually, has to do with delivery of medical cannabis. amma forbids local governments from interfering with any transport of licensed cannabis. however, we have this relic leftover in mrcsa that says local governments can somehow ban the delivery of medical marijuana from licensed providers to residents in their very districts. and this is really not tolerable. we can't have districts, where there is no legal access. so we hope that the distribution, that in particular delivery, is construed to allow medical access via delivery to every patient in need in the state. fourth point has to do with non-profits. prop 64 calls for the bureau, i think, to investigate one or more classifications of non-profit licenses and possibly exempting them from taxes. we hope they will do so. there remain a lot of small, sort of informal, patient collectives that in fact, distribute marijuana free or at-cost to truly needy patients. i think with the advent of new taxes, the economic squeeze on patients and especially the poorest ones is going to be particularly severe so we hope that there remains some sort of system available to them where free or at cost medicine can be made available. and let me say in regard to the taxes we are scared about this 15% retail excise tax especially on medical patients. when you throw in all the other taxes i'm really concerned that this is going to sort of spur the black market. so anything that could cushion the tax burden especially on needy medical patients would be useful. and finally, just a word about scientific research, medical research, educational institutions, museums like that. often such institutions have a need for marijuana in excess of just one ounce and six plants. so, it seems to be some sort of a licensing provision for this. we ran into this at the oakland museum when we were doing the cannabis exhibit there earlier this year. how can the museum do this? and not be outside, and still be within the law. so that's another licensing category that should be considered.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 188, 'end': 197, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1458, 'end': 1463, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dustin McDonald: thank you, sharing the mic here a little bit today. my name is dustin dale mcdonald. first off, thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today. my name is dustin dale mcdonald, i'm testifying on behalf of weedmaps. for those of you not familiar with weed maps, weedmaps is the oldest and largest technology company in the marijuana industry. while weedmaps began with a simple concept of connecting patients to doctors, delivery service providers and dispensaries. we since expanded ourselves to building out the tech backbone of the industry to include the development and sale of business to business software, business consumer software, point of sale software. we're in the process of organizing track and trace software to be compliant with what the state organizes related to those laws. in this role on the tech side weedmaps is very much in the tech space and has no intention of deviating from that. we're committed to maintaining our position in the tech industry and have no interest in being more closely associated with the product of marijuana. either selling it directly or cultivating or manufacturing or doing anything like that. echoing the comments of a lot of the panelists here today, there's been a considerable amount of work done by regulators to this point. and we certainly applaud them and commend them for the work they've tried to move forward on to organize regulations pertaining to the medical and adult use markets. and we recognize that they have their work cut out for them and are very supportive of the work that they're trying to do. from our perspective, i think the biggest challenge that the state faces, keeping in mind what the purpose of the exercise is here which is establishing legal medical and adult-use markets. we think the biggest challenge the state faces in doing that is addressing the illegal market issue. and i think that problem is particularly poignant for california given the enormous size of the illegal market here. a lot of folks may not be aware of this, but california is the largest marijuana market in the entire world. just los angeles by itself, that market is estimated to be at least twice the size of the entire state of colorado's market. so we're talking about a fairly substantial large market with a very large number of operators. as jerry can attest to in los angeles beyond dispensaries and delivery services you literally have thousands of cultivators and manufacturers to attest to facilities, etc. so you have a very large and sophisticated industry with thousands of industry participants. and due to the fact that regulations from the state won't be coming down until january 2018 with associated licenses being issued. 482 cities and 58 counties experimenting with their own version of local regulatory policy. you're going to see a slow phase in of regulatory compliant participants. so as that goes forward, there'll be this constant effort to rid the illegal market operators. but that's going to be a function of arriving at suitable tax rates, at organizing land use policies in a way that can license a large number of potential licensees. and trying to work cooperatively between the state and local governments to achieve that. i think one of the biggest challenges on the tax side, of course has to do with the high tax rate envisioned by prop 64. both on the retail side, the 15% tax rate, as well as the two separate cultivation taxes that are going to be applied. this is in addition to local taxes, which can be applied at any rate that locals envision. and i know the league of california cities and csac. had been working very hard to try to convince local governments to try to keep those taxes low, again, trying to get at this illegal market issue. but given those high tax rates presents a very daunting challenge for the state in trying to regulate those entities and bring them into compliance. one of the biggest challenges of course is you'll have a significant price difference between the legal and illegal markets. and some of the panelists have mentioned, it's going to be very difficult to bring illegal market actors into compliance if they can continue to do business kind of in the shadows in the gray market. those are some of the kind of critical issues. and borrowing off of some of those themes that some of the panelists have offered up here today. i think another critical one associated with cost and price and trying to establish something like price parody between legal and illegal markets. is addressing some of the issues in the supply chain that were created by mcrsa that we need to work on and one of the biggest ones there of course is the independent distribution layer. we understand the rationale. that was organized for justification of that model. however, it's not a model that currently exists in the industry today. it's one that we continue to hear rumors from folks who are interested in getting into that independent distribution space. with the intent to mark up distribution costs somewhere between 20 and 30%. so you're already looking at significantly high market costs. and mcrsa has done a fairly effective job of limiting the number of monopoly opportunities and really trying to ensure that there's a competitive equal market. this is the one exception to that, and it really doesn't have a place in the industry the way that it operates today. so those are some of the biggest issues that we see, is again, we're trying to establish legal adult-use, a legal medical model, ... is going to be eliminating the illegal market. and we're going to have to work very hard to get the tax rates and to establish some kind of price parody between the two markets. with that, that really kind of concludes my comments and i'm happy to take any questions.
[{'start': 63, 'end': 83, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 166, 'end': 186, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2324, 'end': 2329, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Josh Newman: my name is josh dustin newman, i'm the silent bob member of these days. and i was remiss in not introducing myself earlier. so, i'm newly elected, and i'm pleased to tell you all, this is my first hearing ever.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cara Martinson: sure thing, i'll kick it off. thank you very much, my name is cara josh martinson, and i'm with the california state association of counties. and thank you for being here and providing us the opportunity to provide our feedback tonight. csac has been very engaged in marijuana with the development of the mcrsa and with input into prop 64, and there is a lot happening at the local level currently. just to give you a brief snapshot, about two thirds of california counties voted in favor of proposition 64, and we do think that this will be sort of reflective of how marijuana is regulated at the local level moving forward. many local governments have started this process. on the november 2016 ballot, there were, i believe, 53 local city and county ballot measures. 39 of those were successful and out of those there were seven county tax measures. so, there is a lot happening at the local level. and we really fought hard and to retain that local control as we move forward to develop our regulatory program. so, we obviously have a vested interest in what's happening at the state level, because they're linked systems. we are creating sort of our own regulatory programs and taxation programs, but we want them to be work in concert with what's happening at the local level. and as was mentioned earlier, a lot of jurisdictions are holding back and waiting to see what that state regulatory process looks like. so, out of this, really, timing i think is one of our number one concerns. we want to help the state meet that january 1, 2018 statutory goal but we also have to develop our own programs at the local level, in order for the state to issue licenses because there is that discrepancy between the mcrsa and prop 64, whereas there's a dual licensing structure on the medical side and on the recreational side. it allows the state to issue a license as long as it's not in conflict with the local ordinance. so we're very interested to see what that regulatory process looks like, and what that timing will be. as was mentioned, there are a number of differences between the medical side and the recreational side. i think besides timing and process, issues of enforcement and how that will work at the local level, and what our role actually being in all the various licensing categories of interest to us as well. and then i'll let my colleagues speak to a lot of the other issues, but i think one of the concerns of everybody here too is the revenue collection piece and that taxation side of things. there's a lot happening at the federal level. there's a lot of uncertainty. csac is a member of the treasurer's banking working groups, so we're working collaboratively with the state and all the stakeholders to come up with a creative solution, but it's a daunting task. so we look forward to continued partnership on that issue as well. thank you very much.
[{'start': 62, 'end': 81, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2594, 'end': 2598, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Paul Smith: Mr. Chairman, members, Paul Smith with Rural Counties Association. Our Association is 35 of the state's rural and remote, low population counties. Our main concern in this conversation obviously is cultivation, as Senator McGuire has articulated through the afternoon and evening. Our members range from the north coast, where this is very prolific to other areas of the state, where the times are changing, given the passage of the MCRSA in Prop 64. So our focus is predominantly with CDFA and their licensing scheme, as it relates to cultivation and moving that product off of the cultivation site. I think like all of the stakeholders that you'll hear from, local governments keenly are concerned about what this regulatory package could look like. And I'll highlight a couple of things that we will be really really focusing in on once they are released and available for comment. The biggest issue obviously is local approval. The MCRSA gave local governments a major role in citing, and permitting, and authorizing, however you may want to call it, in the process for cultivators, retailers, manufacturers, testers, etc. to participate in the program. Yet, we don't know exactly what that local approval interchange between the state and local governments is going to be. Complicating it is very clear in the MCRSA that you really can't operate unless you have some type of affirmative action from a local government. That's not the way Prop 64 works. So harmonizing those two paradigms under local approval is very keen to us, and we'll want to see both the spring regulations for the MCRSA as well as what the various licensing agencies are going to come up with later in the process for the adult side. The other big issue for, I think, local governments and in particular rural counties is what is the expectations from the state for coordinating efforts in local governments. Basically what are the obligations of the ag Commissioner? What are the obligations of the Environmental Health Director? What are the obligations of sheriffs and law enforcement? And also, I think, on points Senator McGuire hit, what is the obligations of county tax collectors? You know that there's a bill already introduced. It's similar to a bill last year where counties would be the collectors of cash on behalf of all of the state agencies. To speak to, I think again, Senator McGuire spoke to in his testimony, what do folks do in rural, Humboldt County. Do they have to go all the way to Redding, do they have to go San Francisco? Our belief in supporting that effort is to try to get as much compliance cash wise and tax wise into local governments slash state governments coffers. So what will the role of tax collectors be at the local level? And then finally, transportation standards. We haven't really talked much about this, this evening. The licensing in these have to come up with some transportation standards. Moving products here and there. Very, very important when you're looking at thousands upon thousands of cultivators, particularly in concentrated areas. How is that product going to move, what's the role of the CHP, what's the role of local law enforcement. All of those things we'll be keenly aware of. So we are really looking forward to the partnership with the state and all of the licensing entities. I would be remiss without thanking particularly CDFA and the bureau for addressing the rural concerns of this conversation, they've been very open, open door policy, one-on-one policy. We very much appreciate that and we're going to look forward to spending the several months ahead rolling up our sleeves and making a scheme work.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 222, 'end': 229, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2104, 'end': 2111, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2372, 'end': 2379, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lauren Michaels: well, thank you and thank you all for being here and sticking it out. my name is lauren, and i do cannabis policy for the california police chief's association. and we thank you for including our perspective this evening. as a state-wide association, we find ourselves in a very interesting position of supporting strongly the medical cannabis regulation and safety act while opposing proposition 64. we now join all of the stakeholders sitting behind me and many more, working together to balance the often conflicting interests behind mcrsa and the ama. in doing so, we will continue to advocate for absolute local control, dual state and local licensing, limits on vertical integration and cross licensing, and thorough background checks for all licensees. however, in issuing in the commercial structure for marijuana through ballot initiatives, there's a new set of problems that we must face as the law enforcement community. the commercial structure is one that is based on increased use and sales, and we are very concerned about the increase in drug driving on our streets. and we are very grateful for the work of the california highway patrol in addressing this issue. we wish to work with stakeholders and the elected officials in working together to deter, identify, and successfully prosecute marijuana-impaired drivers. second, we're concerned about advertising and branding of marijuana. we urge the legislature and stakeholders to work to prevent another repeat of tobacco from entering our communities by ensuring the advertising that is attractive to minors does not become common fixture in our california society. third, state and local law enforcement entities needed to work together across jurisdictional boundaries to ensure that our legal system is not exploited to embolden a black market. something that we've seen happen in other states that have brought a commercial industry. and lastly, we cannot ignore the inflexible nature of a ballot initiative. as new challenges and needs present themselves, we'll be hard pressed to identify solutions that do not conflict with the language of proposition 64. this will require creative thinking on behalf of leaders and stakeholders who cannot be deterred from solving real problems as a result of the initiative's language. thank you.
[{'start': 81, 'end': 87, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Glenn Backes: good evening, glenn for drug policy alliance. we're a national organization of drug policy reform to replace the drug war with policies based on health, science, and human rights. i think i have less than two minutes of testimony, and i will try and keep to that. thank you-
[{'start': 14, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sam Rodriguez: Good evening, Senator Hill, Senator Newman, Senator McGuire. Good to see you again. My name is Sam Rodriguez, and on behalf of the United Food and Commercial Workers State Council, we will like to express our appreciation of this oversight hearing. It's only 7:45 PM, so we really appreciate your efficiencies. One of the things that we want to talk about is the United Foods and Commercial Workers, we were instrumental in the passage of MRSA. And we want to thank all the major stakeholders, the governor's office, the state Legislature, and the agencies that provided input. More importantly is that UFCW is the only major union that actually represents cannabis workers in the State of California that sat down with the proponents of 64 and negotiated major items in Prop 64 that we would like to be preserved and be protected. So let me start with number one. Labor peace agreement requirement. Under the Prop 64, same as MRSA, carries over by reference the requirement that MRSA, that any marijuana business license with 20 or more employees enter a labor peace agreement as a condition of licensure. This is critical. I want to thank Lori Ajax's office for allowing us to have numerous meetings with her. It is critical that the submission of the labor peace agreement be done electronically to the agency, and then that document be signed by the employer and by the labor organization, and notarized for the following reasons. We have already identified fraud, and we want to make sure that we ensure compliance among all the segments of the industry. Number two, one of the other items that we negotiated with the proponents of 64 was enhancing the existing workplace protection statutes whereby cannabis employer license may be suspended or revoked in violation of labor laws. Ladies and gentlemen, what I'm trying to say here is don't forget the workers. We want to be part of the solution and not be part of the problem afterwards. Another item that we negotiated with the proponents of Prop 64 was allowing, by majority vote of the state Legislature, to amend the act to further enhance or increase worker protections and, doing so, being consistent in the proposed intent of AUMA. Fourth item, AUMA designates marijuana cultivators as agricultural employers, requiring that employees be paid in accordance with wage order 4-2001. And that is something that both my colleague Barry Broad and I submitted into MRSA and was carried over into AUMA. Fifth, AUMA requires CAL/OSHA to do a study to determine that workplace safety standards are necessary for cannabis businesses, including risks that may be unique to the industry, such as combustion, inhalation, armed robberies, or repetitive strain injuries. Just two more items. AUMA requires state licencing agencies to issue or deny a license application or renewal based on a number of factors, including whether license or renewal could allow unreasonable restraints on competition by creation or maintenance of unlawful monopoly power. We, our legal team, felt that this was very critical to ensure that we do not have big marijuana coming to the State of California. And last two items. AUMA sustains an open distribution model similar to the food, retail, and processing industry, and the California craft beer distribution industry. Our union is supportive of that provision for the sustains in Prop 64 and into the marketplace. And finally, as Mr. McGuire has mentioned, the Advisory Committee to advise the bureau and licensing authorities in development of standards and regulations, including the best practices and guidelines to protect public health and safety. Members will include, but not limited to, representatives of the cannabis industry, labor, state and local agencies, public health experts, and other subject matter experts. We ask that the Legislature really use your role as an oversight Committee to ensure that this Advisory Committee gets announced and in place as soon as possible. With that, I end my testimony, and thank you for your time.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 26, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 36, 'end': 42, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 52, 'end': 59, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 95, 'end': 108, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 439, 'end': 443, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 927, 'end': 931, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 980, 'end': 984, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1141, 'end': 1152, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2389, 'end': 2400, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3418, 'end': 3425, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Barry Broad: Good evening Mr. Chairman, members. Barry Broad on behalf of the California Teamsters Public Affairs Council. I actually think that the harmonization of these two statutory schemes is probably not as difficult as it would be in other circumstances, because Prop 64, in our view, contains an unusually large amount of discretion for the Legislature and regulatory agencies to make changes consistent with the drafters of Prop 64. Therefore, a lot of issues, I think, will be resolved relatively easily. And they're not all that far apart, even though there are disagreements. For example, both statutory schemes require a mandatory distributor. The only difference is whether the distributor can hold other licenses, or is independent. That entity, and we support that independent distribution model, and we supported it in the medical marijuana model precisely because it is antithetical to the concentration of market power and monopoly. That's the point of it. And we sat down with the proponents of Prop 64 during the campaign, and worked out language to implement, consistent with the drafters of Prop 64, language to that effect, which you all undoubtedly be seeing, and will be weighing, and determine whether you want to support it or not. Prop 64, as Mr. Rodriguez points out, contains very significant language, in fact, unusual language, preventing the concentration of market power, and licensing decisions that would result in the concentration of market power. Therefore, something along the lines of a rebuttable presumption, that holding licenses in all categories to create vertical integration, might create unlawful competition, unlawful restraint on competition is something that, in our view, is fully consistent with Prop 64, and I think the drafters understood that. It's been raised, I think, somewhat wildly, that having an independent distribution model, it is in itself a monopoly. However, the only licensed category in this entire system where there can be an unlimited number of licensees is distributors. There could be as many distributors who want to enter the market as they feel like. That's not the case with growers, that's not the case with dispensaries, that's not the case with manufacturers. It's not the case with anyone, except distributors. Therefore, to suggest that it is a restraint on trade itself is actually hard to accept. We feel that this proposal has the support of law enforcement, it has the support of local government, it has support of large part of the marijuana industry. And it has the support, at least it had the support, in the medical model for marijuana. So, we support that model. Secondly, I just want to point out that this is an industry that has been amply talked about today, that has existed in the shadows. It's existed in the underground economy, and therefore, it has to come out of the underground economy. And labor practices are an area that are common to every other business are not necessarily common in this business. For example, there are families that trim marijuana in agriculture areas, including children. We can't have child labor. That simply cannot happen, and it's bad for all the reasons that child labor are bad. It may have evolved that way, but that doesn't mean it's something that can stay. And finally, the third point is that we have to protect the people who want to operate legally from the people who will continue to operate Illegally, including cartels and everybody else. And a lot of what law enforcement will switch to is commerce enforcement, that's what it will become, looking for the people that are cheating. If you cheat on your taxes, you've got a competitive advantage over everyone else. If you make it difficult to pay your taxes, that may have the same result. And therefore, we think that the Legislature needs to look very closely at a model that will ensure that the taxes are paid, and it's easy to pay the taxes. For example, the State Board of Equalization is proposing that all three taxes be collected at the distribution level, remitted at the distribution level, as is done with diesel fuel, so that it happens in one part of commerce. It doesn't burden the farmers who, in this case, would have to pay, under Prop 64, a harvest tax upon harvest, which they can't afford to pay in anticipation of selling their crop. It would put them in a position, or many of them, in a position of being forced to go to the underground economy, in order to try to pay their taxes. So, the Legislature, as it crafts this model, needs to make it work and work, so that the players that are playing by the rules are not punished. That they can make a profit, that they can survive, and that the incentives are for them to operate within the above ground regulated economy. Thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1263, 'end': 1272, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Carlos Campos: no, actually, i'm not. my name is carlos cara campos, i'm with the cnh auxiliary safety management. and i'm here to talk about the cal/osha side of things.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carlos Campos: my name again is carlos carlos campos, with hazzem inc.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Green: Good evening, thank you for this hearing. Michael Green, I'm from Lake county, Senator Mcguire district. I'm also on the planning Commission in the City of Lakeport. Came here for information to see how the state is doing. I'm going to go back and say they're working on it, but two key things. One, in terms of environmental damage, yeah some help from the state would be good. Our key challenge is kind of surprising as Lake County plows through it's ordinance some of the biggest pushback we've gotten is from the ag community. So whether we're talking about appellations they're trying to push us out of wine grape appellations right now. So we can have a dueling appellations and we think depending on how that flies. There's going to be a [UNKNOWN] document. As it turns out, there's not a lot of money for local governments to get [UNKNOWN]compliance. Especially if they can't get an initial study and they need some EIR's. So in terms of that, we need help for those counties that are going to regulate. For my hometown of Fresno, I wanted to go back to what Senator Hernandez, Dr. Pan said, and not just focus on packaging and labeling. Those are important for patients, but we have millions of patients who are currently behind enemy lines who have no safe access to any license business says it all. And I would hope that would be front and center with the Health Committees moving forward. We have a minimum level of service now of six plants for adult use but we have no minimum level of service for patients who need their Medicine, thank you.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 87, 'end': 94, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1075, 'end': 1084, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1090, 'end': 1093, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Molly Fry: I'm Dr. Molly Fry, and I just want to thank you for taking this subject so seriously. I agree with the gentleman previously. That there are many places in this State of California where patients are suffering because they don't have access to their medicine. The three and so please keep that in consideration especially since health insurance does not pay for any of this medicine. And although it's a common conception that there is no research available about the medical use of this medicine that is within the United States. And there's plenty of research available in Israel that does provide for a lot of documentation for how medicinally useful it is. But I also wanted to address the DUI problem. Driving under the influence and impairment can be tested with our new modern technology. And I just wanted to bring that up to you if you hadn't been aware of it. They have a program that is available on a smart phone that will test your reaction time. And so by using a very simple, mechanical computers generated test we can identify what drivers are impaired. And therefore possible develop a system that that would be admissible in court. And eliminate the necessity of drug testing either cheek swab or urine because it's ineffective to reflect impairment in a particular patient. The other point I wanted to make was CBD, which is a component of cannabis, is an antidote to the toxicity of the THC. So, we need to increase education and awareness, and that's what I'm doing primarily, I'm not practicing medicine. I'm a cannabis educator, and I'm trying to reach the seniors. And the population of patients who are taking a tremendous amount of medications and need to be on a safe and effective, nontoxic herbal remedy. And the reality is that I give them all CBD. And CBD at eight to one to THC will completely reverse the negative effects of the THC. So it's a wonderful medical awareness, but this would eliminate those emergency room visits that you're worried about. If patients know, I've gotten too much, I need to take the antidote, we will have much more success. And the last thing point I wanted to make, was that those bacteria, and the aspergillus that he mentioned. If that was a significant problem in marijuana with the 21 years of marijuana, medical marijuana use unregulated. We would have seen emergency room visits and sick patients. So I think that's a little bit of hysteria. We need to focus on the real problems, and there are a lot of them, thank you.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
James Sweeney: (thank you dr. fry. our next speaker, good evening.) good evening, my name is sweeney. it is a pleasure to have you so meticulously go through the issues impacting marijuana in this state. and as the vice president of the black american political association of, california, i want you to know that we are following this. we are looking at this and we are also doing outreach because we know statistically. that's 75% of those arrested for marijuana possession are black and brown. and we also know that the criminal justice aspects were addressed with prop 64 and it has been a major hell. but we also know, that people want to take a look and examine is this something that we want to be involved with? is this a gold rush that african americans and other minorities, should be getting involved with? and that is why on february 24th, at the capital events center all day. we will be discussing this issue hopefully with some of the decision makers in this room. so i'm going to reflect the five b's, you're familiar with the five b's?
[{'start': 15, 'end': 18, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 78, 'end': 85, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rich Miller: good afternoon, miller from the american alliance medical cannabis. i am the state director and i'm coming before you to discuss patients' rights. we know that the industry has been founded on the patients' rights that have helped move this industry forward. most, and i would say 95% of the patients that i work with, will not come into the regulatory scheme. either because they medically can't do it, they financially can't afford it, or they don't have the whereforall to do it. most of the patients that i deal with are catastrophically illness, terminally ill and chronically ill. so it's important as we move forward that we do not forget the compassionate aspects of this for the patients. that have brought this community forward and brought the industry forward. it's important that we have some sort of compassion program so they can have access to their medicine, like we have for pharmaceuticals. we have medicare and medical that will cover a variety of medical conditions and their prescriptions. we have nothing for medical cannabis, so it's extremely important imperative that we set up some sort of regulatory system that includes that for the patients. i thank you for your time.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jackie McGowen: hi, my name is mcgowen. i'm a licensing consultant in the industry, and i wanted to bring up the fact that the first customer that i assisted with getting a local permit was in yellow county. they were then raided by an outside tri county task force called trident, who does not govern that jurisdiction. and so i want you to consider offering immunity to anyone that has gone and jumped through the hoops to get a local permit. while waiting for whatever agency they need to wait for to come online to get their state permit. because otherwise, they're exposed, in this legal limbo situation. and right now, that client that has a local permit from yolo county is being charged with conspiracy to illegally sell the legal marijuana that they were growing. and so this is sort of ridiculous. so we don't continue to see these types of patterns around the state. i would really like you to consider offering immunity to anyone that has received a local permit, thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Smith: Yes, thank you, I'm Karen Smith, Director of the California Department of Public Health. With respect to ensuring safety, I think edibles are more complicated, certainly. And from the perspective of testing they may actually be a little bit simpler once the product is manufactured. And the testing laboratories will be testing the manufactured products as well. And that will include total dose of various cannabinoids, including THC. But then also, we are going to propose regulations that will ensure that it's homogeneously distributed throughout the edible product.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Tong: good afternoon, chair and member of the committee. amy jonah tong, director of california department of technology. and if i may, before i specifically addressed a question about what product and competitive process. if i could just briefly provide an overview of the effort that the department of technology have been engaged with the multiple partner here sitting as my panel member. as well as additional state entities are a part of this process in developing a technology strategy to fulfill the needs. as you are all aware, that in order to fulfill the requirement implementation that the cannabis regulation. there's combination of licensing systems, as well as track and trace that are predominately responsible for the departmental food and agriculture. in the study that we have engaged with these departments, in order to expedite, if that's the right word. the implementation of a solution to support that. as well as to reduce the redundancy of information that could possibly be required to collect from the industry user. we have decided to put together a common strategy to have a standard approach to achieve both the licensing systems needs as well as the track and trace system needs for those area that are common. with that, specifically to the licensing system. the competitive process was utilized to selling both the product as well as literally right now we are entering into a negotiation process for the system integrators, which is typically what we call the consulting firm that would be brought on board to implement the product that we have. chosen. in this case the product they have chosen for the licensing system for department of consumer affair, as well as cdfa is dsl a product. and the seller product is currently not the product that is being used for the grease system. and we decided to choose that product is based on its track record being used in both the industry for licensing as well as other state entity that have chosen this particular product to implement that licensing capability. in term of the cost i probably need to look into it and perhaps get back to you on that. and that product was chosen and the contract gets awarded by the end of the calendar year. in term of the system developer or the system integrator, this sort of consultant that we'd bring forward. as i mentioned earlier, we are literally in the negotiation process right now so i won't be able to share that information until that process is completed.
[{'start': 51, 'end': 65, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jerred Kiloh: i'll try to be concise. my name is jerred amy kiloh, i am currently the president of a trade association called the ucba in los angeles. we represent a group of illegally operating dispensaries under proposition d. proposition d was passed in 2013 in los angeles with about a 63% voter rating. and that proposition was there to regulate the number of dispensaries down to 135 that had been in compliance since 2007. this group now is working with the city of los angeles. we helped write an ordinance that was going on the march ballot. we also worked with the city in forming another ordinance, it's also going on the march ballot, of which we have dropped the support of our original authored ballot in support of the city's ballot, due to negotiations from our trade association and other members of the industry. and able to get priority licensing for the prop d compliant locations, as well as form regulatory boards for the city of los angeles, so that we can have a more robust industry, and that is focused on regulations. we currently work with the franchise tax board. we currently work with the office of finance in trying to come up with solutions on how to pay taxes, how to get cash into the city. so we work with all the local agencies in an effort to try to make sure that our industry is well represented both in taxation and in regulation. and the city's doing a very good job, i think on the past, it has been very unregulated. but i think in this current market now, the city of los angeles, as well as all the industry players, are doing a very good job on getting regulations and everything moving forward. the one thing that i'm asking this group here is that on the march 7th ballot, if the march 7th ballot that would regulate our industry does not pass. that the state would at least take into account that the property shops that are currently operating underneath our local ordinance that are currently under what we are calling probably a semantic version of licensed or permitted. they're calling us limitedly immune, so under a limited immunity, we'd like to be at least recognized that if the march ballot does not pass, that the state takes an active role in looking to see how they can regulate the currently legally operating shops inside los angeles. and i mean, i would like to thank this board for not only staying this long, but also taking this very seriously. been working with lori ajax, and what a task that has taken on. and she has worked with all the stakeholders in a very clear and concise way. that makes us all feel like we're not only being heard for the first time in a couple of decades, but also that we're being listened to to the point where rules and regulations are going to be mapped around what the needs of the industry are. so thank you all for taking this time.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2419, 'end': 2428, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Amy Jenkins: chairman hill and committee members, thank you very much for the opportunity. amy jerred jenkins with platinum advisors, i'm here on behalf of the california cannabis industry association, or ccia, as we're often known. ccia represents all segments of california's cannabis industry. we do have approximately 250 members throughout the state. we have been working on a licensure and regulatory framework since 2014, partnering with very nontraditional allies at the time. and we are very, very pleased to see the progress. we were instrumental in the drafting of the mcrsa, we endorsed proposition 64. as the regulatory agencies are looking to implement, i do want to commend them. as hezekiah pointed out, they have been incredibly accessible. we have been very appreciative of their proactive outreach to the industry. the stakeholder meetings were exceptional, and they were widely attended. and had very robust dialogs. so we have been very, very pleased with outreach to industry thus far and again, really feel like they are deeply committed to getting this done and getting this done right before the january 2018 implementation deadline. in terms of our priorities, i actually concur with a lot of the comments that were raised by my college hezekiah allen. we do have a series of legislative priorities that we're contemplating to try to address some of the implementation challenges associated with the medical and the recreational framework. one issue that was raised consistently during the regulatory agencies testimony was, again, kind of the medical and the recreational, and the reconciliation of those two models. there are a number of discrepancies between the two, that we think will make implementation challenging for state and local agencies, as well as for the industry itself. among them, i won't touch on those that have already been discussed, but phase in is certainly a big priority, but also the differences in licensure. there are 17 license categories in medical, there are 19 and they are a little bit different in the recreational model. we have a cross licensure restrictions in the medical framework. we have very limited licensure restrictions in the recreational. and then a big item that has been consistently discussed is, there is a third party independent to distribution mandate in the medical framework and that does not exist in the recreational framework. ccis preference is that, the prop 64 initiative was a mandate by the voters. we would like to see many of those distinctions reconciled so that we are adopting the prop 64 model. so that is something that we're going to be consistently advocating on throughout the year. but in the meantime, again, going back to the comments made about the licensing entities, we do think they are doing an exceptional job, and we will look forward to continuing to work with them and you as you contemplate, how to reconcile the two frameworks into one system. thank you.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 13, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 78, 'end': 96, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 685, 'end': 693, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1250, 'end': 1264, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Daniel Conway: good evening chairman hill. my name is conway and i'm here with truth enterprises. we are an investment firm focused on the legal cannabis industry. and as i would note here today, that's much easier said than done. so frankly i'm here totruth entday to urge you all to find opportunity for angel and venture investors to play a role in this industry. with regard to the topic today, i had a couple of comments that i wanted to make. first of all, i just wanted to give a little background about myself. prior to moving into this industry just over a year ago i spent three years serving as the chief of staff to the mayor of sacramento and before that had worked with the california restaurant association and some firms downtown. so with that being said, i can sympathize very much with the challenges in front of you all and your staff. but with that being said, i think there's some things you can do here. let's all recognize, and i think this was noted, that you lack many of the common tools that you have in your policy making toolbox. as the last panel said, you have no data. and there is insufficient science in terms of the medical effects, the intoxication levels, as well as even just kind of the scope and the scale of the industry. secondly, there's really no blueprint. there's no model that you guys can look to. other states, whether it's colorado, washington, they're imperfect for their size, their scale, for many reasons that you have noted. thirdly, this is a high profile issue with many layers of complexity, which invites a lot of scrutiny and that's virtually never a good place to be for you all. it's a situation where everyone's going to tell you what you're doing wrong but no one's going to be really able to tell what to do right. so i think for all of us here, we also have to acknowledge that those three factors are compounded by the fact that for 20 years we have had this grey market that is related to prop 15. and now you have the realization that all of us, the decisions that are being made here over the next 12 to 24 months are going to shape this industry nationwide. so given these challenges, given the lack of tools in your tool box, becomes what can we all be doing. i would urge us all here, particularly the people on the dias to think of three questions which is, what does the future look like for this industry, how do we get there and what can we do now? so in terms of what the future looks like, i think there's a lot of fascinating explanations. i think, simply put, it's probably going to be three things. commercial cannabis is going to be commodity ag, it's going to be consumer products, and hopefully it's going to be pharmaceuticals, right? the good news is that california knows how to create and regulate all three of those things very well. so i think if we can kind of start from that framework, this starts to get a little bit easier. in terms of how do we get there? i think you have to focus on the fundamentals of good policy making. think about the defaults of the actors involved here, right? for both producers and consumers, there's a way to both produce and consume cannabis that exists regardless of how you're getting it, right? so for you all as policy makers, you have to think about the cost benefit analysis that's going to be done by all of these people to transition into the regulated market. secondly, as you're thinking about that, think about the trade-offs that each of those actors is facing. i think it has been acknowledged and i think mr. houston did an excellent job of articulating it, but basically the more friction points there are for producers and consumers to move into the regulated market, the less likely they're going to do it. and then thirdly, i think for you all, again, is you're trying to think about what can we do now to make this industry a reality. focus on what every industry needs to succeed, you need a supply chain. right now there's not a supply chain in the license market, and while there's a lot to talk about what that supply chain could look like, it doesn't exist, it's hypothetical right now. secondly, every industry needs access to capital. as i said, whether this was technology, whether this was food and ag, whether this was real estate, access to capital would be a given, in this industry it's not. and so i think we need to think very proactively about what we can do. thirdly, we need a clear set of rules. we need a clear set of rules for us to play by, for you to enforce. right now, we're already on this dangerous path where for you to be a part of this industry you have to have a team of lawyers or lobbyists to even explain to you how to participate. and so for many of you have expressed an interest in small businesses succeeding, minority groups being able to have an opportunity in this space, already we're off to a difficult start. so, then, my last point or the last question to be asking is what can we do now? i think right now, you guys should kind of embrace beta. embrace the concept of beta testing, right? so like when a software company rolls out a new app or whatever, they say hey, this is the beta version. we haven't worked out all the bugs, be patient and work with us, right? i think everyone in here should be thinking in terms of, this is beta and we're going to be in the beta mode for the next five to 10 years, probably. the second thing you guys should be looking for right now are signals that things aren't working. again, even if we don't know what things will ultimately look like in the space, i think there's still symptoms already that you can see of some problems. one i point to is the fact that you have agriculture production moving into urban areas, whether it's in the east bay, or here in sacramento, or others. the best example is blue diamond, which is down the street here. corporate headquarters, manufacturing, all this stuff, not a single almond tree. the more we can put ag in rural areas and value added in urban areas, i think the more we'll know we're on the right track, right? secondly, look at what's happened on the local level. it's already gridlocked, it's already a patchwork. having worked in other industries, that's already a red flag, in terms of how to regulate, and comply, and grow businesses. so i think we need to look for ways to really coordinate at the local level, and give people a place to participate. lastly, as i've already said, this industry's already getting too expensive to participate in. when we look at projects and investments, we assume it's going to be $3 to 5 million minimum by the time you get real estate, build it out, get licensed, get your business up and going, millions of dollars. and so not a lot of people in the space, believe it or not, have millions of dollars lying around to grow their businesses. so i think for all of you here, again, you need to be looking at those signals to know that there's a course correction needed. my last point, and again thank you for the time this evening, is to keep it simple. again, you shouldn't need a team of lawyers and lobbyists to tell you how to do your business. if we want people to do the right thing and we want them to have on-ramps to do this. it should be something that they can explain to their family at the thanksgiving table. so anyway, thank you all for your time and look forward to working with you all.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 26, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 39, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 3534, 'end': 3541, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rand Martin : Mr Chair and members, Rand Martin on behalf of Consortium Management Group and CALIVA. It's a large dispensary manufacturing and cultivation operation in San Jose. First, I want to echo the compliments paid to this Committee and to the members of the regulatory agencies for all the hard work that's being done. CALIVA comes from a history, with its leadership of a highly regulated industries in other fields under Medicaid and Medicare. So they have a lot of respect for strong regulation. They would like to see strong regulation here. Regulation is not always agreed upon by even the people sitting at this table. And Mr Conway's comments bring to mind one point about where should cannabis be cultivated. There are some people who believe it should only happen in rural areas. And some who believe that enclosed, odor-free urban cultivation is a reasonable approach as well. So I respect the fact that the regulatory agencies have some work to do with the industry, and figuring out exactly how to thread these various needles. I do want to point out a few things, just relative to the very specifics of regulations, and won't get into any detail. I do want to echo some of the things that Ms Jenkins said about aligning Amma with MCRSA. We agree with the points that she made, we would add one additional one. And that is the issue of ownership. Ownership in MCRSA, at least where publicly traded, is at 5%, under Amma, it's 20%. We'd like to see alignment there as well. Another ownership issue, that is something that you may have to deal with this year in order to be helpful to some of us in the industry, is how quickly you can become a for-profit entity. MCRSA anticipates that happening January 1, 2018. Businesses that want to get geared up for January 1st, who are looking for investments, need to know that they can transfer to a for-profit ownership structure earlier than January 1st. Again, anticipated on January 1st, but if we can get it earlier, perhaps as an element in the budget trailer bill this year, that would be hugely helpful to a lot of entities out there that are looking forward to converting. The only other point I want to make, and one that has not been raised at all this evening, I've certainly not heard it discussed much, is what it is the Department of Public Health expectations relative to implementation of its version of the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act that applies to cannabis. For those who have spent time with the Sherman Act in years past know that there are issues in which people get mired. The core issue here for us is what is considered misbranding of a product? Is a product misbranded if you make therapeutic, beneficial claims about the product that cannot be backed up by the science? Course we find ourselves caught between a rock and a hard place, because the science is not there, because it's been illegal. And so nobody has been able to study some of the therapeutic benefits. There is an operation down at UC San Diego that has made some initial overtures in that regard, but they have a long way to go. It's going to be very important for the Department of Public Health and others who are enforcing the Sherman Act to be more liberal in their interpretation of what therapeutic benefits are. Otherwise it could be used as a hammer against the people who are actually seeking licensure and seeking to turn this into a well-regulated business. It deserves a lot of attention, not at this time. But certainly hope that the Legislature will spend some time looking at this issue over the next few months. Thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 33, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 625, 'end': 631, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1198, 'end': 1205, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1226, 'end': 1230, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1236, 'end': 1241, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2465, 'end': 2472, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dale Gieringer: thank you, my name's dale amy gieringer. i'm the director of california norml, the national organization for the reform of marijuana laws. and i also want to thank the senate. and commend lori ajax and her colleagues on their really excellent job of outreach. we get a lot of inquires from people, calls that say, hey, how can i get involved in the business? i say, well fortunately, there are some websites that you can go out to and you can find out how the processes work and get notices. so i'm very encouraged by the way things have been developing so far. that much said, let me say, unlike other participants at this table, we're a consumer group as opposed to an industry group. and i wanted to raise a few different issues that haven't been brought up that are of particular relevance to consumers. which may involve some new kinds of, new licensing categories, that should be considered. one of the first of these has to do with special events. there are now all sorts of cannabis expos, and conferences, and fairs, around california. where cannabis and cannabis products are displayed, and used, and distributed. and a lot of these events are really an economic boon from a tourist standpoint. i think every hotel room in sonoma was sold out for the emerald cup this december. so we need a category, a licensing category, so that events like this can proceed. because they're a little bit outside the framework that was originally thought of when mrcsa was put together. that dovetails with another issue, on-site consumption. prop 64 authorizes some on-site consumption. it would be good to have some sort of regulations out there that allow on-site consumption. not just necessarily in dispensaries, but in places like cafes, or motels, or resorts, that don't necessarily sell the marijuana but want to have on-site consumption. so some sort of license like that, like we sometimes have for alcohol, could be useful. third concern, a very important one actually, has to do with delivery of medical cannabis. amma forbids local governments from interfering with any transport of licensed cannabis. however, we have this relic leftover in mrcsa that says local governments can somehow ban the delivery of medical marijuana from licensed providers to residents in their very districts. and this is really not tolerable. we can't have districts, where there is no legal access. so we hope that the distribution, that in particular delivery, is construed to allow medical access via delivery to every patient in need in the state. fourth point has to do with non-profits. prop 64 calls for the bureau, i think, to investigate one or more classifications of non-profit licenses and possibly exempting them from taxes. we hope they will do so. there remain a lot of small, sort of informal, patient collectives that in fact, distribute marijuana free or at-cost to truly needy patients. i think with the advent of new taxes, the economic squeeze on patients and especially the poorest ones is going to be particularly severe so we hope that there remains some sort of system available to them where free or at cost medicine can be made available. and let me say in regard to the taxes we are scared about this 15% retail excise tax especially on medical patients. when you throw in all the other taxes i'm really concerned that this is going to sort of spur the black market. so anything that could cushion the tax burden especially on needy medical patients would be useful. and finally, just a word about scientific research, medical research, educational institutions, museums like that. often such institutions have a need for marijuana in excess of just one ounce and six plants. so, it seems to be some sort of a licensing provision for this. we ran into this at the oakland museum when we were doing the cannabis exhibit there earlier this year. how can the museum do this? and not be outside, and still be within the law. so that's another licensing category that should be considered.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 188, 'end': 197, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1458, 'end': 1463, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dustin McDonald: Thank you, sharing the mic here a little bit today. My name is Dustin Mcdonald. First off, thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today. My name is Dustin Mcdonald, I'm testifying on behalf of Weedmaps. For those of you not familiar with Weed Maps, Weedmaps is the oldest and largest technology company in the marijuana industry. While Weedmaps began with a simple concept of connecting patients to doctors, delivery service providers and dispensaries. We since expanded ourselves to building out the tech backbone of the industry to include the development and sale of business to business software, business consumer software, point of sale software. We're in the process of organizing track and trace software to be compliant with what the state organizes related to those laws. In this role on the tech side Weedmaps is very much in the tech space and has no intention of deviating from that. We're committed to maintaining our position in the tech industry and have no interest in being more closely associated with the product of marijuana. Either selling it directly or cultivating or manufacturing or doing anything like that. Echoing the comments of a lot of the panelists here today, there's been a considerable amount of work done by regulators to this point. And we certainly applaud them and commend them for the work they've tried to move forward on to organize regulations pertaining to the medical and adult use markets. And we recognize that they have their work cut out for them and are very supportive of the work that they're trying to do. From our perspective, I think the biggest challenge that the state faces, keeping in mind what the purpose of the exercise is here which is establishing legal medical and adult-use markets. We think the biggest challenge the state faces in doing that is addressing the illegal market issue. And I think that problem is particularly poignant for California given the enormous size of the illegal market here. A lot of folks may not be aware of this, but California is the largest marijuana market in the entire world. Just Los Angeles by itself, that market is estimated to be at least twice the size of the entire State of Colorado's market. So we're talking about a fairly substantial large market with a very large number of operators. As Jerry can attest to in Los Angeles beyond dispensaries and delivery services you literally have thousands of cultivators and manufacturers to attest to facilities, etc. So you have a very large and sophisticated industry with thousands of industry participants. And due to the fact that regulations from the state won't be coming down until January 2018 with associated licenses being issued. 482 cities and 58 counties experimenting with their own version of local regulatory policy. You're going to see a slow phase in of regulatory compliant participants. So as that goes forward, there'll be this constant effort to rid the illegal market operators. But that's going to be a function of arriving at suitable tax rates, at organizing land use policies in a way that can license a large number of potential licensees. And trying to work cooperatively between the state and local governments to achieve that. I think one of the biggest challenges on the tax side, of course has to do with the high tax rate envisioned by Prop 64. Both on the retail side, the 15% tax rate, as well as the two separate cultivation taxes that are going to be applied. This is in addition to local taxes, which can be applied at any rate that locals envision. And I know the League of California Cities and CSAC. Had been working very hard to try to convince local governments to try to keep those taxes low, again, trying to get at this illegal market issue. But given those high tax rates presents a very daunting challenge for the state in trying to regulate those entities and bring them into compliance. One of the biggest challenges of course is you'll have a significant price difference between the legal and illegal markets. And some of the panelists have mentioned, it's going to be very difficult to bring illegal market actors into compliance if they can continue to do business kind of in the shadows in the gray market. Those are some of the kind of critical issues. And borrowing off of some of those themes that some of the panelists have offered up here today. I think another critical one associated with cost and price and trying to establish something like price parody between legal and illegal markets. Is addressing some of the issues in the supply chain that were created by MCRSA that we need to work on and one of the biggest ones there of course is the independent distribution layer. We understand the rationale. That was organized for justification of that model. However, it's not a model that currently exists in the industry today. It's one that we continue to hear rumors from folks who are interested in getting into that independent distribution space. With the intent to mark up distribution costs somewhere between 20 and 30%. So you're already looking at significantly high market costs. And MCRSA has done a fairly effective job of limiting the number of monopoly opportunities and really trying to ensure that there's a competitive equal market. This is the one exception to that, and it really doesn't have a place in the industry the way that it operates today. So those are some of the biggest issues that we see, is again, we're trying to establish legal adult-use, a legal medical model, ... is going to be eliminating the illegal market. And we're going to have to work very hard to get the tax rates and to establish some kind of price parody between the two markets. With that, that really kind of concludes my comments and I'm happy to take any questions.
[{'start': 63, 'end': 78, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 161, 'end': 176, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2314, 'end': 2319, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Josh Newman: My name is Josh Newman, I'm the silent Bob member of these days. And I was remiss in not introducing myself earlier. So, I'm newly elected, and I'm pleased to tell you all, this is my first hearing ever.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cara Martinson: Sure thing, I'll kick it off. Thank you very much, my name is Cara Martinson, and I'm with the California State Association of Counties. And thank you for being here and providing us the opportunity to provide our feedback tonight. CSAC has been very engaged in marijuana with the development of the MCRSA and with input into Prop 64, and there is a lot happening at the local level currently. Just to give you a brief snapshot, about two thirds of California counties voted in favor of Proposition 64, and we do think that this will be sort of reflective of how marijuana is regulated at the local level moving forward. Many local governments have started this process. On the November 2016 ballot, there were, I believe, 53 local city and county ballot measures. 39 of those were successful and out of those there were seven county tax measures. So, there is a lot happening at the local level. And we really fought hard and to retain that local control as we move forward to develop our regulatory program. So, we obviously have a vested interest in what's happening at the state level, because they're linked systems. We are creating sort of our own regulatory programs and taxation programs, but we want them to be work in concert with what's happening at the local level. And as was mentioned earlier, a lot of jurisdictions are holding back and waiting to see what that state regulatory process looks like. So, out of this, really, timing I think is one of our number one concerns. We want to help the state meet that January 1, 2018 statutory goal but we also have to develop our own programs at the local level, in order for the state to issue licenses because there is that discrepancy between the MCRSA and Prop 64, whereas there's a dual licensing structure on the medical side and on the recreational side. It allows the state to issue a license as long as it's not in conflict with the local ordinance. So we're very interested to see what that regulatory process looks like, and what that timing will be. As was mentioned, there are a number of differences between the medical side and the recreational side. I think besides timing and process, issues of enforcement and how that will work at the local level, and what our role actually being in all the various licensing categories of interest to us as well. And then I'll let my colleagues speak to a lot of the other issues, but I think one of the concerns of everybody here too is the revenue collection piece and that taxation side of things. There's a lot happening at the federal level. There's a lot of uncertainty. CSAC is a member of the Treasurer's Banking working groups, so we're working collaboratively with the state and all the stakeholders to come up with a creative solution, but it's a daunting task. So we look forward to continued partnership on that issue as well. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 62, 'end': 76, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2589, 'end': 2593, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Paul Smith: mr. chairman, members, paul dale smith with rural counties association. our association is 35 of the state's rural and remote, low population counties. our main concern in this conversation obviously is cultivation, as senator mcguire has articulated through the afternoon and evening. our members range from the north coast, where this is very prolific to other areas of the state, where the times are changing, given the passage of the mcrsa in prop 64. so our focus is predominantly with cdfa and their licensing scheme, as it relates to cultivation and moving that product off of the cultivation site. i think like all of the stakeholders that you'll hear from, local governments keenly are concerned about what this regulatory package could look like. and i'll highlight a couple of things that we will be really really focusing in on once they are released and available for comment. the biggest issue obviously is local approval. the mcrsa gave local governments a major role in citing, and permitting, and authorizing, however you may want to call it, in the process for cultivators, retailers, manufacturers, testers, etc. to participate in the program. yet, we don't know exactly what that local approval interchange between the state and local governments is going to be. complicating it is very clear in the mcrsa that you really can't operate unless you have some type of affirmative action from a local government. that's not the way prop 64 works. so harmonizing those two paradigms under local approval is very keen to us, and we'll want to see both the spring regulations for the mcrsa as well as what the various licensing agencies are going to come up with later in the process for the adult side. the other big issue for, i think, local governments and in particular rural counties is what is the expectations from the state for coordinating efforts in local governments. basically what are the obligations of the ag commissioner? what are the obligations of the environmental health director? what are the obligations of sheriffs and law enforcement? and also, i think, on points senator mcguire hit, what is the obligations of county tax collectors? you know that there's a bill already introduced. it's similar to a bill last year where counties would be the collectors of cash on behalf of all of the state agencies. to speak to, i think again, senator mcguire spoke to in his testimony, what do folks do in rural, humboldt county. do they have to go all the way to redding, do they have to go san francisco? our belief in supporting that effort is to try to get as much compliance cash wise and tax wise into local governments slash state governments coffers. so what will the role of tax collectors be at the local level? and then finally, transportation standards. we haven't really talked much about this, this evening. the licensing in these have to come up with some transportation standards. moving products here and there. very, very important when you're looking at thousands upon thousands of cultivators, particularly in concentrated areas. how is that product going to move, what's the role of the chp, what's the role of local law enforcement. all of those things we'll be keenly aware of. so we are really looking forward to the partnership with the state and all of the licensing entities. i would be remiss without thanking particularly cdfa and the bureau for addressing the rural concerns of this conversation, they've been very open, open door policy, one-on-one policy. we very much appreciate that and we're going to look forward to spending the several months ahead rolling up our sleeves and making a scheme work.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 227, 'end': 234, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2109, 'end': 2116, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2377, 'end': 2384, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lauren Michaels: Well, thank you and thank you all for being here and sticking it out. My name is Lauren Michaels, and I do cannabis policy for the California Police Chief's Association. And we thank you for including our perspective this evening. As a state-wide Association, we find ourselves in a very interesting position of supporting strongly the Medical Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act while opposing Proposition 64. We now join all of the stakeholders sitting behind me and many more, working together to balance the often conflicting interests behind MCRSA and the AMA. In doing so, we will continue to advocate for absolute local control, dual state and local licensing, limits on vertical integration and cross licensing, and thorough background checks for all licensees. However, in issuing in the commercial structure for marijuana through ballot initiatives, there's a new set of problems that we must face as the law enforcement community. The commercial structure is one that is based on increased use and sales, and we are very concerned about the increase in drug driving on our streets. And we are very grateful for the work of the California Highway Patrol in addressing this issue. We wish to work with stakeholders and the elected officials in working together to deter, identify, and successfully prosecute marijuana-impaired drivers. Second, we're concerned about advertising and branding of marijuana. We urge the Legislature and stakeholders to work to prevent another repeat of tobacco from entering our communities by ensuring the advertising that is attractive to minors does not become common fixture in our California society. Third, state and local law enforcement entities needed to work together across jurisdictional boundaries to ensure that our legal system is not exploited to embolden a black market. Something that we've seen happen in other states that have brought a commercial industry. And lastly, we cannot ignore the inflexible nature of a ballot initiative. As new challenges and needs present themselves, we'll be hard pressed to identify solutions that do not conflict with the language of Proposition 64. This will require creative thinking on behalf of leaders and stakeholders who cannot be deterred from solving real problems as a result of the initiative's language. Thank you.
[{'start': 81, 'end': 96, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Glenn Backes: good evening, backes for drug policy alliance. we're a national organization of drug policy reform to replace the drug war with policies based on health, science, and human rights. i think i have less than two minutes of testimony, and i will try and keep to that. thank you-
[]
Sam Rodriguez: good evening, senator hill, senator newman, senator mcguire. good to see you again. my name is sam paul rodriguez, and on behalf of the united food and commercial workers state council, we will like to express our appreciation of this oversight hearing. it's only 7:45 pm, so we really appreciate your efficiencies. one of the things that we want to talk about is the united foods and commercial workers, we were instrumental in the passage of mrsa. and we want to thank all the major stakeholders, the governor's office, the state legislature, and the agencies that provided input. more importantly is that ufcw is the only major union that actually represents cannabis workers in the state of california that sat down with the proponents of 64 and negotiated major items in prop 64 that we would like to be preserved and be protected. so let me start with number one. labor peace agreement requirement. under the prop 64, same as mrsa, carries over by reference the requirement that mrsa, that any marijuana business license with 20 or more employees enter a labor peace agreement as a condition of licensure. this is critical. i want to thank lori ajax's office for allowing us to have numerous meetings with her. it is critical that the submission of the labor peace agreement be done electronically to the agency, and then that document be signed by the employer and by the labor organization, and notarized for the following reasons. we have already identified fraud, and we want to make sure that we ensure compliance among all the segments of the industry. number two, one of the other items that we negotiated with the proponents of 64 was enhancing the existing workplace protection statutes whereby cannabis employer license may be suspended or revoked in violation of labor laws. ladies and gentlemen, what i'm trying to say here is don't forget the workers. we want to be part of the solution and not be part of the problem afterwards. another item that we negotiated with the proponents of prop 64 was allowing, by majority vote of the state legislature, to amend the act to further enhance or increase worker protections and, doing so, being consistent in the proposed intent of auma. fourth item, auma designates marijuana cultivators as agricultural employers, requiring that employees be paid in accordance with wage order 4-2001. and that is something that both my colleague barry broad and i submitted into mrsa and was carried over into auma. fifth, auma requires cal/osha to do a study to determine that workplace safety standards are necessary for cannabis businesses, including risks that may be unique to the industry, such as combustion, inhalation, armed robberies, or repetitive strain injuries. just two more items. auma requires state licencing agencies to issue or deny a license application or renewal based on a number of factors, including whether license or renewal could allow unreasonable restraints on competition by creation or maintenance of unlawful monopoly power. we, our legal team, felt that this was very critical to ensure that we do not have big marijuana coming to the state of california. and last two items. auma sustains an open distribution model similar to the food, retail, and processing industry, and the california craft beer distribution industry. our union is supportive of that provision for the sustains in prop 64 and into the marketplace. and finally, as mr. mcguire has mentioned, the advisory committee to advise the bureau and licensing authorities in development of standards and regulations, including the best practices and guidelines to protect public health and safety. members will include, but not limited to, representatives of the cannabis industry, labor, state and local agencies, public health experts, and other subject matter experts. we ask that the legislature really use your role as an oversight committee to ensure that this advisory committee gets announced and in place as soon as possible. with that, i end my testimony, and thank you for your time.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 26, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 36, 'end': 42, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 52, 'end': 59, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 95, 'end': 113, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 444, 'end': 448, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 932, 'end': 936, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 985, 'end': 989, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1146, 'end': 1157, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2394, 'end': 2405, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3423, 'end': 3430, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Barry Broad: good evening mr. chairman, members. barry sam broad on behalf of the california teamsters public affairs council. i actually think that the harmonization of these two statutory schemes is probably not as difficult as it would be in other circumstances, because prop 64, in our view, contains an unusually large amount of discretion for the legislature and regulatory agencies to make changes consistent with the drafters of prop 64. therefore, a lot of issues, i think, will be resolved relatively easily. and they're not all that far apart, even though there are disagreements. for example, both statutory schemes require a mandatory distributor. the only difference is whether the distributor can hold other licenses, or is independent. that entity, and we support that independent distribution model, and we supported it in the medical marijuana model precisely because it is antithetical to the concentration of market power and monopoly. that's the point of it. and we sat down with the proponents of prop 64 during the campaign, and worked out language to implement, consistent with the drafters of prop 64, language to that effect, which you all undoubtedly be seeing, and will be weighing, and determine whether you want to support it or not. prop 64, as mr. rodriguez points out, contains very significant language, in fact, unusual language, preventing the concentration of market power, and licensing decisions that would result in the concentration of market power. therefore, something along the lines of a rebuttable presumption, that holding licenses in all categories to create vertical integration, might create unlawful competition, unlawful restraint on competition is something that, in our view, is fully consistent with prop 64, and i think the drafters understood that. it's been raised, i think, somewhat wildly, that having an independent distribution model, it is in itself a monopoly. however, the only licensed category in this entire system where there can be an unlimited number of licensees is distributors. there could be as many distributors who want to enter the market as they feel like. that's not the case with growers, that's not the case with dispensaries, that's not the case with manufacturers. it's not the case with anyone, except distributors. therefore, to suggest that it is a restraint on trade itself is actually hard to accept. we feel that this proposal has the support of law enforcement, it has the support of local government, it has support of large part of the marijuana industry. and it has the support, at least it had the support, in the medical model for marijuana. so, we support that model. secondly, i just want to point out that this is an industry that has been amply talked about today, that has existed in the shadows. it's existed in the underground economy, and therefore, it has to come out of the underground economy. and labor practices are an area that are common to every other business are not necessarily common in this business. for example, there are families that trim marijuana in agriculture areas, including children. we can't have child labor. that simply cannot happen, and it's bad for all the reasons that child labor are bad. it may have evolved that way, but that doesn't mean it's something that can stay. and finally, the third point is that we have to protect the people who want to operate legally from the people who will continue to operate illegally, including cartels and everybody else. and a lot of what law enforcement will switch to is commerce enforcement, that's what it will become, looking for the people that are cheating. if you cheat on your taxes, you've got a competitive advantage over everyone else. if you make it difficult to pay your taxes, that may have the same result. and therefore, we think that the legislature needs to look very closely at a model that will ensure that the taxes are paid, and it's easy to pay the taxes. for example, the state board of equalization is proposing that all three taxes be collected at the distribution level, remitted at the distribution level, as is done with diesel fuel, so that it happens in one part of commerce. it doesn't burden the farmers who, in this case, would have to pay, under prop 64, a harvest tax upon harvest, which they can't afford to pay in anticipation of selling their crop. it would put them in a position, or many of them, in a position of being forced to go to the underground economy, in order to try to pay their taxes. so, the legislature, as it crafts this model, needs to make it work and work, so that the players that are playing by the rules are not punished. that they can make a profit, that they can survive, and that the incentives are for them to operate within the above ground regulated economy. thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1267, 'end': 1276, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Carlos Campos: No, actually, I'm not. My name is Carlos Campos, I'm with the CNH auxiliary safety management. And I'm here to talk about the Cal/OSHA side of things.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carlos Campos: my name again is carlos barry campos, with hazzem inc.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Green: Good evening, thank you for this hearing. Michael Green, I'm from Lake county, Senator Mcguire district. I'm also on the planning Commission in the City of Lakeport. Came here for information to see how the state is doing. I'm going to go back and say they're working on it, but two key things. One, in terms of environmental damage, yeah some help from the state would be good. Our key challenge is kind of surprising as Lake County plows through it's ordinance some of the biggest pushback we've gotten is from the ag community. So whether we're talking about appellations they're trying to push us out of wine grape appellations right now. So we can have a dueling appellations and we think depending on how that flies. There's going to be a [UNKNOWN] document. As it turns out, there's not a lot of money for local governments to get [UNKNOWN]compliance. Especially if they can't get an initial study and they need some EIR's. So in terms of that, we need help for those counties that are going to regulate. For my hometown of Fresno, I wanted to go back to what Senator Hernandez, Dr. Pan said, and not just focus on packaging and labeling. Those are important for patients, but we have millions of patients who are currently behind enemy lines who have no safe access to any license business says it all. And I would hope that would be front and center with the Health Committees moving forward. We have a minimum level of service now of six plants for adult use but we have no minimum level of service for patients who need their Medicine, thank you.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 87, 'end': 94, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1075, 'end': 1084, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1090, 'end': 1093, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Molly Fry: i'm dr. molly carlos fry, and i just want to thank you for taking this subject so seriously. i agree with the gentleman previously. that there are many places in this state of california where patients are suffering because they don't have access to their medicine. the three and so please keep that in consideration especially since health insurance does not pay for any of this medicine. and although it's a common conception that there is no research available about the medical use of this medicine that is within the united states. and there's plenty of research available in israel that does provide for a lot of documentation for how medicinally useful it is. but i also wanted to address the dui problem. driving under the influence and impairment can be tested with our new modern technology. and i just wanted to bring that up to you if you hadn't been aware of it. they have a program that is available on a smart phone that will test your reaction time. and so by using a very simple, mechanical computers generated test we can identify what drivers are impaired. and therefore possible develop a system that that would be admissible in court. and eliminate the necessity of drug testing either cheek swab or urine because it's ineffective to reflect impairment in a particular patient. the other point i wanted to make was cbd, which is a component of cannabis, is an antidote to the toxicity of the thc. so, we need to increase education and awareness, and that's what i'm doing primarily, i'm not practicing medicine. i'm a cannabis educator, and i'm trying to reach the seniors. and the population of patients who are taking a tremendous amount of medications and need to be on a safe and effective, nontoxic herbal remedy. and the reality is that i give them all cbd. and cbd at eight to one to thc will completely reverse the negative effects of the thc. so it's a wonderful medical awareness, but this would eliminate those emergency room visits that you're worried about. if patients know, i've gotten too much, i need to take the antidote, we will have much more success. and the last thing point i wanted to make, was that those bacteria, and the aspergillus that he mentioned. if that was a significant problem in marijuana with the 21 years of marijuana, medical marijuana use unregulated. we would have seen emergency room visits and sick patients. so i think that's a little bit of hysteria. we need to focus on the real problems, and there are a lot of them, thank you.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
James Sweeney: (Thank you Dr. Fry. Our next speaker, good evening.) Good evening, my name is James Sweeney. It is a pleasure to have you so meticulously go through the issues impacting marijuana in this state. And as the Vice President of the Black American Political Association of, California, I want you to know that we are following this. We are looking at this and we are also doing outreach because we know statistically. That's 75% of those arrested for marijuana possession are black and brown. And we also know that the criminal justice aspects were addressed with Prop 64 and it has been a major hell. But we also know, that people want to take a look and examine is this something that we want to be involved with? Is this a gold rush that African Americans and other minorities, should be getting involved with? And that is why on February 24th, at the Capital Events Center all day. We will be discussing this issue hopefully with some of the decision makers in this room. So I'm going to reflect the five B's, you're familiar with the five B's?
[{'start': 15, 'end': 18, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 78, 'end': 91, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rich Miller: Good afternoon, Rich Miller from the American Alliance Medical Cannabis. I am the State Director and I'm coming before you to discuss patients' rights. We know that the industry has been founded on the patients' rights that have helped move this industry forward. Most, and I would say 95% of the patients that I work with, will not come into the regulatory scheme. Either because they medically can't do it, they financially can't afford it, or they don't have the whereforall to do it. Most of the patients that I deal with are catastrophically illness, terminally ill and chronically ill. So it's important as we move forward that we do not forget the compassionate aspects of this for the patients. That have brought this community forward and brought the industry forward. It's important that we have some sort of compassion program so they can have access to their medicine, like we have for pharmaceuticals. We have Medicare and MediCal that will cover a variety of Medical conditions and their prescriptions. We have nothing for medical cannabis, so it's extremely important imperative that we set up some sort of regulatory system that includes that for the patients. I thank you for your time.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jackie McGowen: hi, my name is jackie molly mcgowen. i'm a licensing consultant in the industry, and i wanted to bring up the fact that the first customer that i assisted with getting a local permit was in yellow county. they were then raided by an outside tri county task force called trident, who does not govern that jurisdiction. and so i want you to consider offering immunity to anyone that has gone and jumped through the hoops to get a local permit. while waiting for whatever agency they need to wait for to come online to get their state permit. because otherwise, they're exposed, in this legal limbo situation. and right now, that client that has a local permit from yolo county is being charged with conspiracy to illegally sell the legal marijuana that they were growing. and so this is sort of ridiculous. so we don't continue to see these types of patterns around the state. i would really like you to consider offering immunity to anyone that has received a local permit, thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sal Tinajero: Thank you, Madam Chair. My name is Sal Tinajero and I'm a member of the Santa Ana City Council. I traveled here today to ask you to vote yes on SB 54. The California Values Act places urgent need to protect all of Californians against Trump's attacks on our diverse immigrant community. We need our community members to feel safe coming forward to report crimes to police and to access vital services, including schools, health care facilities and court houses. I'd like to tell you a story that one of my constituents. One that represents the stories of many others concerned residents in the City of Santa Anna. Dahlia approached me two days ago and she said, Senior Tinajero, let me tell you what my life is like now. Every morning, I go hug my daughter and give her a kiss before she goes to school. She says, but today, she doesn't let go. She doesn't let go and I have to pull her arms off and send her to school in tears, because she's fearful that I may not come home that night and this is the way I send her to school every morning and this is the way I have to go to work. Ladies and gentlemen, my constituents are living in fear right now. Our City Council voted unanimously to become a sanctuary city at prohibit entanglement between law enforcement and federal immigration deportations, because we don't want our residents to live in terror within our city. I'm here today, because my residents in Santa Ana are supported within the boundaries of our city, but we live in Orange County or other cities like Orange and Tustin are not opposing the President's orders on immigration. My constituents worry day in and day out if they're going to be safe on their way to work, and on their way home. Each of us want a better life for our children. We want them to be able to walk on any street without fear. The City of Santa Ana is a city that embraces all residents. Now is the time not to be shy or meek. The time is now to be bold and to send a message to Washington, and to the President that we will not take this. And send a message to our constituents that before they get to them, they have to get through us. We need to show our residents that we're here for them. And that is why I urge, in fact, beg that this establishment vote yes on SB 54 to protect all Californians. Thank you.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 235, 'end': 240, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 614, 'end': 620, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 669, 'end': 677, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Victor Alvarez: Victor Alvarez.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Angela Chan: i'm just here to answer. my name is angela, i'm a senior staff attorney and policy director at advancing justice asian law caucus and we helped to draft this legislation. so, just here to answer any technical questions.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Lovell: John Lovell of the California College and University Police Chief Association. We're in support of this bill. It actually dove tails with a campus policies. It's just axiomatic that if you intertwine immigration enforcement with Frontline law enforcement, Frontline law enforcement will suffer. People are less likely to come forward. And that is particularly aggravating for us in a campus situation. We protect 3 million people. We have a number of people we protect, who are immigrants, and we do not want people to be reluctant to come forward. It's an unhappy reality that college campuses have sexual assaults disproportionately. And it is very, very difficult to get people to come forward under the best of circumstances. This bill is a very important, good sense, public safety bill and we're in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Young: michael jonah young, on behalf of the california labor federation in strong support with the strong likelihood of increased works i raise and are very timely and we are in dry vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joshua Golka: joshua michael golka with the american federation of state, county, and municipal employees, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amparo Diaz: good afternoon, amparo joshua diaz on behalf of the california state student association. we represent students of the csu system, and we want to offer our support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christopher Castrillo: thank you madame chair and members. christopher amparo castrillo, on behalf of the california faculty association in strong support.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 64, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bruce Palmer: palmer, jewish community relations council of sacramento, in strong support
[]
Matthew Hernandez: matthew christopher hernandez, on behalf of the california attorneys for criminal justice of statewide association of criminal defense attorneys, in support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Becky Gonzales: becky matthew gonzales, nationalist association of social workers california chapter, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Kando-Kaiser: Danielle Kando-Kaiser, on behalf of the Electronic Frontier Foundation, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jim Lenberg: jim, on behalf of the friends committee on legislation of california, we're in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barbara Beren: hi, barbara becky beren, statewide policy advocate for the national council of jewish women, in strong support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Patricia Sturdevant: patricia barbara sturdevant, policy advocate for sacramento section of national council of jewish women. we strongly support and urge passage of this important community and public safety measure.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sandra Fluke: Sandra Fluke, on behalf of Voices for Progress members, business leaders, entrepreneurs, and philanthropists, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maya Ingram: Maya Ingram with the ACLU of California, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Casas: Morning, Senator Skinner, Senator De Leon, my name is Mike Casas from Asian Law Alliance of Santa Clara County. And we are definitely in strong support.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 24, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 34, 'end': 41, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 54, 'end': 64, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cesar Diaz: mr chair, members, cesar, on behalf of the state building and construction trades council also in strong support.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Yannina Casillas: Yannina Casillas with the Council on American-Islamic Relations the nation's largest muslim civil rights group, we are in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Galeano: chris patricia galeano from the california immigrant policy center, in strong support of sb 54 must be passed to ensure that we don't remain complicit in the nation wide witch hunt against immigrants.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Xena Ozaire: Yes. Asian Americans Advancing Justice, Xena Ozaire.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robin Pomeranke: Robin Pomeranke, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Donna Cullinan: Donna Cullinan from MomsRising and on behalf of 100,000 members here in California and 5,000 signatures today, we are in very strong support of SB 54. Thank you. Mara Dero, licensed clinical social worker and member of MomsRising, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 162, 'end': 171, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Christine Smith: Christine Smith, on behalf of the California Partnership to End Domestic Violence, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jenny Kwan: jenny for the east bay california coalition for a sanctuary state and former mayor of oakland which has 1300 central american refugee accompanied minors, 4000 dreamers, and a huge haiti community. so, we really want to thank you senator de leon for your work.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 237, 'end': 244, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jen Florry: jen chris florry, on behalf of western center on law and poverty, we proudly support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Victor Christy: good morning, victor jen christy, on behalf of california health plus advocates. we are the advocacy arm of the california primary care association representing 1200 community clinics across the state, in strong support. thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marcus McKinney: Marcus Mckinney with PICO California, policy director, on behalf of our half a million members, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sandy Valenciano: Good morning, Sandy Valenciano, on behalf of California Immigrant Youth Justice Alliance, on behalf of our 13 affiliates from San Diego to Sonoma County, we're in strong support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jesse Strecker: Morning, Jesse Strecker with Jazzwood Justice and the Greaton Day Labor Center based in Sonoma County, in strong support.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Salvador Salmiento: Good morning, folks. Salvador Salmiento with the National Day Labor Organizing Network. On behalf of our California affiliates and our affiliates across the country and a heck of a lot of day laborers in places like Orange County, California. In cities like Costa Mesa and Tusten and the City of Orange that have been dealing with a lot of stuff for a long time. Strongly support. Let's not do Trump any favors. Thank you. Jonathan Solorsano, Long Beach Immigrant Rights Coalition. We strongly support.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 423, 'end': 441, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Pedro Rios: good morning. rios with american friends service committee and also with the san diego immigrant rights consotion, strongly support. especially pleased with the provisions that protect border communities, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Daniel Meyer: daniel victor meyer, ecology center berkeley, strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Generoso Pena: generoso. i'm with norway organization project, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kwang Kwandon: Hi my name is Kwang kwandon, I am for the Labor Center Layton and Endilon, in strong support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pamela Drake: Pamela Drake also with Wellstone Democratic Renewal Club in the California Sanctuary Campaign, very strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Avnee Dusigh: good morning, dusigh from community housing partnership in san francisco, on behalf of the 1,200 formerly homeless that we serve. we strongly support this.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jonathan Feldman: madame chair and members, feldman with the california police chiefs association. we don't have a position on the bill at the time, but we would like to thank the senator for sitting down with us last week to talk about our concerns. we're going to continue to work with his office on addressing those, but we do agree that local law enforcement doesn't want to be put in a position of tearing families apart. so thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cory Salzillo: Thank you, Madam Chair, good morning. Good morning Committee Members, pro tem, Cory Salzillo here on behalf of the California State Sheriffs Association, respectfully in opposition to the bill as it sits today. We definitely appreciate the sensitivity of the issue. We stand ready to continue discussing it with the pro tem, with the Committee, with all interested parties. And we definitely appreciate the pro tem's willingness to continue to discuss this. We always had a good relationship with him, his office and this Committee and we intend to continue that, particularly on this bill as it moves forward throughout the process. We are concerned, however, that SB 54 limits communication and cooperation with our law enforcement partners and that's really the crux of our concern here today. This issue precedes the new President. It's not really an immigration issue, we dealt with this issue last year on a bill that also dealt with immigration, AB 2792, that would have restricted law enforcement communication with federal authorities. There was a similar issue a few years back, when there was a bill that would have attempted to restrict law enforcement at the local level from communicating with federal law enforcement on issues relating to marijuana enforcement. That bill didn't go through but it was the same subject matter in terms of the policy of this cooperation and communication between law enforcement. So again, it's a desire and a need to allow law enforcement to continue to work together on their own issues, but on whether our issues of significant overlap which there are many, that again is the crux of our concern, that it restricts that ability to communicate. We have a need and a desire to work together with law enforcement on all levels of government to keep our communities safe. We look forward to future discussions on this issue, and again appreciate the pro tem's willingness to continue to discuss and this Committee as well. At this time, we are opposed to the bill, thank you.
[{'start': 79, 'end': 92, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shaun Rundle: Good morning, Madam Chair, members, Shaun Rundle with the California Peace Officers Association. A membership of over 11,000 officers throughout the state. Our opposition is similar to what my colleague mentioned about the communication between all of law enforcement and their federal partners. Officers in the state are not immigration enforcers, but they do enforce the law. And in instances where an agency may need to work with their federal partners, whether it is a crime that came about from somebody who started out going through the immigration to be able to not communicate, respond to requests, whatever it may be. Similar to our colleagues is our basis of opposition but we do make a pledge to the author and to any interested parties that we're happy to sit down as well and discuss what may be common ground that we can all get behind to ensure that the communities are safe going forward, but we do oppose it at the time.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Elica Vafaie: thank you, madam chair and thank you to distinguished members of this committee. my name is elica jonah vafaie. i'm iranian-american and i'm a staff attorney at asian americans invest in justice-asian law caucus, which is a member of asian-americans advancing justice california. we're a nonprofit organization that was founded by attorneys working to overturn the conviction of fred korematsu who refuse to register and be detained in japanese interment camp during world war ii. for the past 10 years, we've served arab, middle eastern, muslim and south asian communities. the passage of sb 31 will prohibit local and state agencies from participating in discriminatory registration programs, also known as the muslim registry. for example, past programs let the national security entry exit registration system, also known as nseers, which trump has threatened to bring back. nseers was rolled out in the wake of 9/11 and required non-citizen men, from 25 countries which were predominantly muslim to register with immigration offices solely because of their national origin registrants were fingerprinted, photographed, and questions. and as a result, over 83,000 registered which resulted in over 13,000 who landed in the pipeline for deportation. this program resulted in zero terrorism convictions. i'll be sharing today the experiences of two iranians who went through this program. one community member shared that when the program was announced, there was such confusion, stress, and fear in the community. he arrived at the immigration building at approximately 5 am and waited in a long line for hours to register. he was taken into a separate room, where he was fingerprinted and asked to answer additional questions, which he had already submitted to during the immigration process. subsequently, he felt great uncertainty and fear about traveling to see family members, and there was quite a bit of anxiety. another community member who was a graduate student, had to travel extremely long distances over several cities to register, which resulted in missing time needed for his school work etc. over this past weekend, after trump issued the muslim ban in the form of a harmful and un-american executive order, i've spent day and night at sfo providing legal services to fellow iranians and other communities impacted. we've seen muslim-american families separated, elderly detained, and every individual subjected to interrogations at the airports. we need california to lead the way in protecting against a revival of a muslim registry program and any possible variation. as a co-sponsor of sb 31, along with the aclu and care california, we urge an aye vote on sb 31. thank you.
[{'start': 92, 'end': 110, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 379, 'end': 393, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 843, 'end': 848, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2141, 'end': 2146, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Yanita Casillas: thank you, madame chair and members of the committee. my name is yanita elica casillas, and i represent the council on american-islamic relations california, the nation's largest muslim civil rights group. here in california we represent and advocate on behalf of 1 million muslims. as elica was saying the, nseers program did not only result in not a single conviction based on terrorism, but it was a complete and utter failure both ethically and in protecting our country. what's important to note as well that because president trump has come forth on his campaign promises, members that he's been working on, which include kris kobach who was one of the authors for arizona's racist bill sb 1070, was also part of formulating the nseers program. he is currently working with president trump, and for us it is very likely given the track record of president trump within the past week or two of his presidency, that he will make good on his promise to create a muslim registry. in 2007, the lapd created a muslim mapping program. sb 31 is key because it will ensure that state and local government, and law enforcement agencies, won't create their own registry or mapping programs. this is extremely relevant because it has happened before and it can happen again, so we want to be proactive in protecting the community. i myself am a convert to islam, and prior to hearing about the la mapping program, i was muslim for only a day. and on my first friday prayer i heard from a local civil rights attorney that i may have to register within 30 days of becoming muslim for me, as someone who not only was a first generation college student as a child of mexican immigrants dealing with and just grappling with the reality of being a university student, now i had to face the very reality of being persecuted based on my faith. and i saw other new students, other new muslims and the fear. and, thankfully, after the community protested along with civil rights organizations, the program was scrapped. however, we are here because we want you to know who muslims are. we are your neighbors, we are your doctors, we are your friends, we are your teachers. and just in the small community that i was a part of at ucla for four years, our muslim community is one of the most active student groups in the united states. while i was there from 2007 to 2011, muslim students created the first food closet to help students suffering from the economic downturn in 2008. we also help put on a program to help homeless students and create a fund for them. we are very much invested in the community, and that's just there in la. thank you.
[{'start': 65, 'end': 86, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 532, 'end': 537, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 628, 'end': 639, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 735, 'end': 741, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 790, 'end': 795, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 862, 'end': 867, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Peter Bibring: Peter Bibring for ACLU of California in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: Ignacio Hernandez on behalf of the California Attorneys for Criminal Justice in support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Basim Elkarra: Basim Elkarra, Executive Director of CARE Sacramento Valley, in support of this bill and also honored to be a plaintiff in a lawsuit against President Trump's executive order.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 151, 'end': 156, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Christy Walters: christy yanita walters, with the secular coalition for california. we support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shireen Gozi: my name is shireen christy gozi, i'm an engineer. i have three boys, and i'm a citizen. and i hope to find a safe community for my family.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tarik Cassouna: My name is Dr. Tarik Cassouna. I represent myself, my family, and 38 million Californians who believe in the first amendment, protecting our freedom of religion. I just want to say that there was many examples of Muslim doctors from Iran, Syria, Sudan, over the weekend who were barred entry into this country and were deported. So this was a huge material loss to our country and this is only the beginning for Trump. He just started actually. Thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 412, 'end': 417, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Abdullah Haram: good afternoon, i'm dr. abdullah shireen haram, and i'm representing also my family and community.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lena Bronstein: Lena Bronstein, member of Jewish Voice for Peace, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christopher Castrillo: Thank you, Madam Chair and members. Christopher Castrillo on behalf of the California Faculty Association in strong support.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bruce Palmer: Bruce Palmer, Jewish Community Relations Council of Sacramento, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Teran: Michelle Teran, the United Farm Workers in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Galeano: Chris Galeano of the California Immigrant Policy Center in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Goodchild: Rebecca Goodchild for Invisible Sacramento, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susan Howe: susan abdullah howe from invisible sacramento in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rosa Aqeel: rosa with policy link and the alliance for boys and men of color in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Braverman-Birch: Jessica Braverman-Birch on behalf of the ADL, the Anti-Defamation League, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sandra Fluke: Sandra Fluke, on behalf of the members of Voices for Progress, philanthropists, business owners, and entrepreneurs in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Kando-Kaiser: danielle susan kando-kaiser on behalf of the electronic frontier foundation in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Helyne Meshar: helyne danielle meshar on behalf of the city of west hollywood in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeannette Zanipatin: jeannette helyne zanipatin on behalf of maldef, the mexican american legal defense and educational fund also in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Elizabeth Sholes: Elizabeth Sholes, Director of public policy for California Church Impact, on 1.5 million mainline and progressive Protestants in very strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Kuruhara: Linda Kuruhara, the Chair of the Immigration Taskforce of the California Nevada annual Conference of the United Methodist Church.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Yasmin Fathallah: My name is Yasmin Fathallah and I'm a Muslim student at Sac State, and I support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Horne: rebecca jeannette horne, ordinary citizen in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Mandel: david rebecca mandel, representing 12 california chapters of jewish voice for peace around the state. we mobilized quickly just to make sure that we could express our support for this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Minha Javed: Minha Javed, private immigration attorney in Sacramento, and I strongly support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marques Castrejon: castrejon, on behalf of the california pan-ethnic health network, in support.
[]
Mara Darryl: darryl licensed clinical social worker and member of moms rising in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susan Keen: susan, san francisco california member of the aclu as well as the national lawyers guild, san francisco branch, supporting this as a private individual in support of my family.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jo Michael: Jo Michael for Equality California in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dennis Seaton: Dennis Seaton, Church State Council in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kelly Martinez: kelly david martinez on behalf of ufcw western states council in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joe Duffel: Joe Duffel, UFCW Local 1167, strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Zana Ozera: ozera with the asian americans advancing justice in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christian Brown: Christian Brown with the California Federation of Teachers in support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amir Ansari: Amir Ansari, I'm a student at Mira Loma High School, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Daniel Meyer: Daniel Meyer, College of Science, Berkeley in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Yusi Benmura: My name's Yusi Benmura, I'm also a Muslim student at Mira Loma High School, and I'm in support.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Isabelle Tellier: my name is isabelle kelly tellier and i am social work student, and i am in support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Zachariah Sala: Zachariah Sala from Modesto, and behalf of family, I support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Gonzales: gonzales national association of social workers, california chapter, in support. thank you.
[]
Christopher Christrie: Thank you, Madame Chair. Christopher Christrie on behalf of the California Faculty Association and on behalf of Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti, both in strong support. Thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 130, 'end': 143, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michelle Teran: Thank you, Madame Chair. Michelle Teran, the United Farm Workers, in support.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Young: Michael Young, Go Back to California Labor Federation here, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Qadisha Allamjavit: qadisha isabelle allamjavit with advancement project, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Martha Guerrero: Martha Guerrero representing the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Myriam Valdez: Myriam Valdez, Heath Access, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Goodchild: rebecca qadisha goodchild from indivisible sacramento, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susan Howe: susan with indivisible sacramento, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tristan Brown: thank you madame, chair members. brown with the california federation of teachers, in support, took our position on friday. thanks.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Elizabeth Imholz: Elizabeth Imholz, California Church Impact, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Kuruhara: Linda Kuruhara, the California-Nevada Annual Conference of the United Methodist Church, the Immigration Task Force, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Victor Christy: good afternoon, victor rebecca christy with california health plus advocates, representing 1200 community health centers across the state, in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Serene Mensour: serene victor mensour from immigration inc, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Luis Moglion: My name is Luis Moglion, from Immigration Inc in support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Francisco Garte: My name is Francisco Garte. I'm an immigration attorney at the San Francisco Public Defender's Office, I have around 10 years experience defending immigrants against deportation. I'm here on behalf of Jeff Adarchi. The elected public defender of San Francisco who vigorously opposes any limitation of services to non-citizens, including lawful permanent residents, on the basis of a prior criminal conviction. The Constitution of the United States guarantees due process and the right to counsel for all. There is no disclaimer that says, the due process clause does not apply to individuals with criminal convictions. The idea behind universal representation does not mean that people aren't held accountable if they commit acts which constitute a crime. Anyone in deportation proceedings, whether they be lawful permanent residents or refugees, if they have a criminal conviction, they will have paid their dues to society, and have suffered their criminal sentence. But if this legislative body decides to strip access to counsel, for individuals convicted of certain types of criminal offenses. Not only will the State of California be abdicating it's duty to uphold the Constitution of the United States. But it will also set a dangerous precedent throughout the country for other initiatives where we are fighting for the right to counsel. And most dangerously, this bill which ironically was proposed as a means to challenge Donald Trump's mass deportation program, actually follows Donald Trump's talking points. He uses the word criminal to forment hate against immigrants in the same way he uses the word terrorist to moment hate against refugees. Ultimately, the right to counsel on this country has never been widdled away or limited on the basis of someone's criminal record, please don't start that today. If you do we will take California on a slippery slope which will result in the denial of access to counsel based on a status and not a case by case review, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 201, 'end': 213, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1432, 'end': 1446, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1490, 'end': 1504, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Gideon Kracov: Thank you, Honorable Chair Wieckowski, Vice Chair Stone, Senators Mcguire, Senator Skinner, Senator Hill, Chair Quirk. My name is Gideon Kracov. I'm the Chair of the Department of Toxic Substances Control Independent Review Panel. I serve as the Senate Rules Committee appointee to the community representative seat. I'm an environmental lawyer from Los Angeles, proud resident of Pro temp De Leon's 24th Senate District. Former chair of the State Bar Environmental Law section. And also privileged to currently chair the State Mining and Geology Board under the Resources Agency, serving as one of Governor Brown's appointees. Last April, the DTSC independent review panel presented about its work to Budget Subcommittee Two. Thank you for inviting us again to discuss first what the DTSC Independent Review Panel or IRP is. Second, our activities today and third, the observations and recommendation we've made about the DTSC. Including in our recent annual report, which you have before you in the agenda pockets. To begin, in June 2015, Senate Bill 83 established the Independent Review Panel within DTSC. As the chair indicated, the panels comprise of three volunteers tasked with conducting independent review and making recommendations regarding improvements to DTSC's programs. In addition to me, our diverse group of panel members include an appointee of the Assembly Speaker with scientific experience. Dr. Arezoo Campbell, a PhD toxicologists at Western University of Health Sciences. You can probably talk to her on the same level, Chair Quirk. And also we have an appointee of Governor Brown, with local government management experience. That's our Vice Chair Mike Vizzier, former chief of the County of San Diego hazardous waste program. Our statue requires the panel to report to the Governor and you the Legislature, every 90 days until we sunset which is soon December 31st of this year 2017. The panel adopted a work plan that devotes two or three months to intensive study of each of six topics. Permitting, enforcement, public outreach, fiscal management, site cleanup and source reduction. We write a report on each topic that includes recommendations to the Legislature and DTSC and performance metrics for the department to measure its progress. You have a list of the recommendations and metrics so far that we've made to DTSC. They're in your agenda packet today. The panel has painstakingly deliberated, and debated, and voted on each and every word of each report. An open public session under the Bagley-Keene law, it's like our reports to the Declaration of Independence or the Talmud or something. It's a site to see, Senators, and I'm sure, and actually not sure we would do it again if given the choice. Then finally, at the end of the year, before the panel sunsets, the workplant calls for the panel to publicly measure DTSCs progress in meeting these recommendations and performance metrics. And a last report will publish before December 31st of this year. To be clear Senators, Chair Clerk, the panel has no decision making authority over the department or any particular site. You've given us limited tools of asking questions, holding meetings, writing reports. Our work is sort of like a monitor appointed by the Governor and you, the Legislature. So to date the panels convene 20 public meetings to hear testimony and write our reports. At least one meeting every month usually web cast throughout the state in full compliance with Bagley Keen and staffed by the AG's office. I'm so proud to tell you that each panel member has attended every meeting. No panel member has missed even 1 of the 20 meetings. We tried to maximize public participation, seven meetings outside Sacramento. We heard presentations from many stakeholders, including the Chamber of Commerce and the People's Environmental Justice Senate. Meeting agendas are translated into Spanish, and we hire translators for meetings if needed. We held a meeting in commerce, and received detailed presentations on the [UNKNOWN] Technologies closure plan and residential clean-up and applaud the $176 million appropriation crafted by the Governor, the Senate, and the Assembly to fund those efforts. How the department carries out the x side work, in the months and the years ahead is a key fundamental measurement of the department's performance. And there have been some special moments. Seeing the pride of DTSC Scientist when we showed the departments Burkley lab. A desire to excel they have there at that lab. The sense of promise when director Barbara Lee introduced the department's first new Deputy Director public participation, General Lopez Mendoza. The almost 10 hour meeting we had in Bakersfield that went late when families brought children to speak about environmental issues in the central valley. Our meeting just weeks ago in January, where we met the dozen division heads of DTSC Site Cleanup Program, brought together from throughout this state, in one room, to present on their important work. And Chair, the vast majority of their cleanup sites go pretty well. The panel's grateful to Director Lee and the department for the considerable time and effort they've dedicated to the panel. Hiring our two intrepid panel staff members including Analyst Larry Rolfes and Office Tech Mike Singer who are here today for offices or phones helping pay our lawyer, the website. We couldn't do these tasks without the support of DTSC and its resources which we know are limited. This is awkward for the Director, Senators, having a review panel within her department. I know, and she's done her best. Now your committees have asked us to report today on the panels observations and recommendations to date. 15 months into our work, particularly whats in this annual report. Now it is true, our panels work is not complete, we do not know at the end of this year how things will turn out with the panels recommendations and performance metrics to DTSC. You can see a lot of work remains to be done. And there are timelines. But the department is working on most of it and it is only fair to allow time to measure that work. And report on it in our final December report, and we'll get that to you. We sympathize, and we acknowledge that DTSC is a big ship with a lot of priorities plus the huge job that is exide. And of course, we panelists are lay people, trying our best to understand a complex DTSC bureaucracy We have limitations. And I imagine there are many things we could have done differently, or understood better, or mistakes we've made. We created this panel from scratch. So there are things we don't know. It's too early to tell, maybe. That is true. However, there are things we do know. Things are panel believes we do know enough about, to make observations and legislative recommendations to you and the annual report, even though our work may not be done. Things after 15 months are panel reach consensus on, with confidence. After hearing and examining the facts, my understanding is that several of the panel's specific legislative recommendations are incorporated into Assembly bills Chair Quirk introduced yesterday. They address topics that the panel supports, like adequate financial assurances for clean up, and fence line monitoring for permit sites. He will ensure that we never have another x side in our state again. With contaminated neighborhoods and the tax payers holding the bag to assure adequate assets. The Legislative Analyst's office made the same recommendation back in 2006. We all know and agree, don't we? That DTSC must function at its best, firing on all cylinders. Specially in light up uncertainty at the federal level with the USCP in DC and Region Nine, and areas like grant funding and enforcement given the uncertainties of the federal situation, we Californians may be depending on DTSC more than ever in the years ahead. And to ensure the department's long term strength, the panel unanimously agreed, Senators, Chair Quirk In our annual report, on four big picture requirements for DTSC. One, longevity in executive leadership. Two, organizational excellence. Three, a stable budget. And four, transparency and accountability. Most of our specific more gradual recommendations relate to these topics. But in our annual report, this four topics came first. Mr. Chair could I please spend the rest of my time explaining this topics? Please. First, longevity in leadership. DTSC has had significant turnover in leadership, with five directors since 2010, any organization, or business, would suffer with that. This turnover in personnel has been damaging to institutional memory and continuity, it's essential for the current director, and her leadership team, to have longevity in office. Of its 15 executive leadership team positions, eight were staff with hirers made just in 2016, more than half. A lot of brand new faces. We applaud the governor's office for appointing this positions and hope that the department now has a stable leadership team in place. Senators, continuity and increased experience should give the Director the authority to make the tough decisions and inspire confidence in those decisions, both internally within the administration and DTSC staff and externally to all stakeholders. So we know DTSC needs longevity in leadership. And also second, a focus on human resources. DTSC has 1,034 employees working in different locations on many different programs. And there's room for improvement when it comes to the department's human resources. For example, DTSC staff tells us the department may lack best management practices and appropriate supervision between Sacramento and at the field offices. And DTSC leadership agrees improvement is needed. New Chief Deputy Francesca Negry, hired in 2016, will oversee what she's calling organizational excellence. She presented to the panel on those efforts in December and identified actions to strengthen DTSC's diversity policies, develop an all staff survey, create an organizational culture task group, and prepare a new, overall strategic plan for DTSC. With measurable performance objectives. The panel agrees, the Chief Deputy Director should be given the authority and resources to improve staff morale. Training, supervision, evaluation, accountability, cultural sensitivity from top to bottom, throughout DTSC in all its fields offices, it's the basics. So we know DTSC needs organizational excellence. Three, a stable budget. DTSC's funding from 1991 when it was split from the Department of Health Services and fiscal year 2013-14, the client in real dollars, 26% Senators, even though legislative mandates increased a lot during that period. However, the Legislature recently has made significant financial investments in this department. The Legislature approved all the Governor's DTSC funding requests in fiscal year 16-17. To department's budgets increase from 234 million to 280 million this fiscal year, an almost 20% increase. Although this mostly is for Exide. The panel applauds you, for these investments in DTSC. And we recognize the departments obligation to wisely administer the massive general fund expenditures the state has dedicated to Exide. Our report also notes the projected shortfall, quickly, in DTSC's site remediation account for orphan sites and maintenance of certain federal super fund sites. Unless the SRA account is increased, there's a strong chance that little or no funding could be available for certain orphan sites in future years. Especially given grant funding uncertainty, Senators, at the federal level now. So we know DTSC needs a stable budget. And then finally, transparency, accountability. In 2015, the Legislature created an Assistant Director of Environmental Justice. And then in 2016 a new office of Environmental Justice and Tribal Affairs. The panel strongly supports these. In September Director Lee announced the Governor had approved a new Office of Public Participation, another great idea. It's tough for scientists to communicate DTSC's work and this could help. Also, last year DTSC signed a landmark agreement to resolve civil rights complaints about Kettleman Hills that enhances the transparency and rigor of the department's compliance with civil rights laws. Very positive, and yet a widespread perception exists that DTSC is insular and in need of increased accountability. Just yesterday the California Environmental Justice Alliance agency assessment rated DTSC poor or fair noting that approximately a year and a half since the IRP's creation, the continued lack of progress and responsiveness to both agency wide and site-specific concerns is unacceptable. Now that's their words. But frankly, this is a discouraging assessment about the effectiveness of our panel's advisory report-writing function and whether it really is making a difference on the ground at DTSC. We also heard last month in January from the regulated community concerns about their justification and transparency of DTSC's billing which cause the panel to make a specific recommendation on that topic. It's important for DTSC to set realistic timelines and be accountable for deadlines. For example, the department missed recent deadlines for work you approved and budget change proposals to finalize it's improving enforcement performance work plan, and to release and implement the UC Davis Collaboration Center recommendations for DTSCs public engagement records, as set forth in the PCPs. And simply adding to DTSC's code more rules and laws may not be the answer. Why? Look at DTSC's authorizing statutes. This is two columns, double sided, eight font type. And this is just the statutes not even the regs. It is a beast. The statutes, in all fairness, are in need of significant updating and simplification, and that's for everybody's benefit. This is part of the problem. And I'm not sure I want to be the one responsible for that editing job. Our panel was open the curtain to DTSC by taking comment in public, requesting information, prodding with our reports. However, the IRP sunsets in 11 months. The panel therefore unanimously recommended, Senators, that you consider creating a permit Appeals Board to decide hazardous waste facility permits that DTSC does not timely process. And an oversight board or other permanent structural change within DTSC to improve accountability and transparency. Because we do know DTSC needs to be more transparent and timely. In closing, Chair Wieckowski, Senators, Chair Quirk, the panel's been at it for 15 months, and there's things we do know. Observations and recommendations we can make about DTSC after examining the facts. There are undoubted strengths at this department and there are needs and our reports talk about all of it. You have all of them here. If we address these fundamental issues I just discussed we can leave a strong, stable foundation at DTSC for years to come. What we all want, right, is quality, authoritative decision making that inspires confidence in DTSC. A proud legacy that will live on for this Governor, for you legislators, and the current DTSC director. Thank you so much for the opportunity to come present, Chair Wieckowski, Senators. On behalf of the other panel members, Doctor Campbell, Vice Chair Vizier, and our staff, we look forward to presenting you with the remainder of our reports throughout the rest of this year thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 37, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 50, 'end': 55, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 66, 'end': 73, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 83, 'end': 90, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 100, 'end': 104, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 112, 'end': 117, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 130, 'end': 143, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 608, 'end': 613, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1417, 'end': 1432, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1599, 'end': 1604, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1673, 'end': 1685, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4552, 'end': 4563, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4648, 'end': 4661, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5119, 'end': 5122, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5273, 'end': 5285, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5302, 'end': 5313, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7125, 'end': 7130, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 9759, 'end': 9774, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 11900, 'end': 11903, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 14483, 'end': 14493, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 14511, 'end': 14516, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 15194, 'end': 15204, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 15261, 'end': 15269, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ingrid Brostrom: hi, my name is ingrid jonah brostrom and i'm an attorney with the center on race poverty and the environment and i coordinate the people's senate which is a coalition of community, about 13 communities that are directly impacted by toxics and a dtsc has a regulatory rule. the people senate has been engaged in irp process, i, myself have also attended almost all of the 20 meetings. and in the outset of this, the communities impacted and developed it's own road map to develop the set of bench marks upon which it could gauged dtsc's and improvements over the years, really base on the gram approvements and community needs. so we recently did a ground truthing of where we believe dtsc at in terms of these improvement and the dtsc did not fair well. and so from our perspective, we've seen the different reform efforts, we've helped support passed and passed several bills on dtsc. but our land is always going to be are these changes at dtsc resulting in on the ground improvements and they are not. yesterday, we were part of the california environmental justice alliance. and we released our environmental justice agency assessment and dtsc is one of two agencies that we reviewed, looking through a lens of environmental justice principles. so, i did want to leave this with you and it's scored poor on virtually all of them and we did recognize a few improvements such as adding environmental justice staff, as well as working on some improvements in some of the program areas. in terms of the irp, we do appreciate all the work that the irp has done over the past year and a half. and, we do believe that they did the best with what they had. however, as mr crackoff said, we have, ourselves, noticed a lot of deficiencies on the tasks that they have before them is very daunting. they don't have an auditor. they themselves, they come with various experiences. but dtsc is a complex agency with a lot of different roles. and we did set the irp up to not be able to do the job that's really necessary. and i do say that with the utmost respect for mr. crackoff. because the staffing is so few, they have had to rely primarily on dtsc itself for information on dtsc's own programming. so, dtsc does paint a rosy picture often times at these meetings. and there's often not a lot of contrary information because, the public and myself included. we don't have access to the information that we believe the irp needs to consider. the three person structure has presented a lot of difficulties because of badly kin. and the issue of the site specific, the role of the irp and site specific issues has been difficult. because the residents that i work with, they're concerned about their communities. and the irp is the only place they have to go to voice their concerns. and there has been different appetites on that irp to listen to the communities and to consider what's going on in their lives. so it's very difficult to have residents continue to participate in the irp when their questions are not answered. and then finally, the structure of where we move forward, i do think this is the time right now,as irp is set to sunset to look at the bigger structural issues. we cannot continue to put bandaids on the agency into this piecemeal type of improvements. the preview is vast, there is no oversight, decisions are made behind closed doors, they review their own permit appeals and communities remain disillusioned. people are dying in these communities, they're very upset at dtsc and we continue to have the lack of community trust, that has not been improving. and so until there's some real oversight and accountability, i don't think that we'll be able to move forward from the community perspective, thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1668, 'end': 1676, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2062, 'end': 2070, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jean Urban: Good morning Mr. Chairman, I'm Jean Urban. I'll take just a few minutes. I represent a couple permitees, some controversial, Exside, Waste Management at Kettleman Hills facility. I also represent some permitees, who are in that class of permits that the chairperson of the IRP identified. The 80, 85% for which there is no controversy and they should be processed routinely. I have said for quite a while that it is the tail wagging the dog. Of the 100 permits there are 12 to 18 at any time that are controversial for any number of reasons, pure politics, science, communities changing around them. I have no principle position on why they become controversial, but you have to acknowledge that those 12 or 18 should be moved outside the system. Some elasticity and flexibility needs to be built into the system. You're never going to make mandated times. Do not impose systemic change on the other 100 permits for which there is really no difficulty or objection. It's always a process of accretion and addition, you never integrate. I'm aware of very few permits issued by DTSC that do not also have accompanying local permits, and in most instances regional permits from either air quality or water, or both. There are numerous sequel documents. The number of public hearings can be daunting, starting at the conditional use permit and moving all the way up to DTSC. So I implore you to try to integrate any changes into what is in fact a pretty comprehensive system. If you just look at the DTSC permit in isolation, you will not see a significant percentage of the reality that these operations confront. It's not easy, it is daunting, it's a mess. It's also thankless, but I think the Chairman has volunteered to single-handedly rewrite the codes. Lastly, with regard to my Waste Management client, Kettleman Hills, I have said this before I'm going to continue to repeat it Mr. Chairman until you upbraid me about this. 80 to 85% of the material deposited, Kettleman is only hazardous in the State of California. it is non-RCRA waste. When the Kettleman Facility was ensnared in a very long permit modification process, it had to curtail its operations. That material went elsewhere. Much of it went out of state. To my knowledge, no one in this state has ever asked what happened to it. It is my observation that the implicit public policy of the State of California is too frequently label something hazardous, but let's not greatly concern ourselves about the manner in which it's treated, stored, or deposited. So as long as we remain eager to label something hazardous, I think we also have the obligation, moral, legal, otherwise, to be prepared to permit these facilities in a realistic and not cost-prohibitive manner. Lastly, I think it may have been you, Senator Stern, who asked this question, I was with Director Lee once, she said she spent 90% of her time on Kettleman, Exide, and Santa Susana. She also told me in some cases there's no good answer. There are no good answers, these are tough, tough decisions. Which is why I think you need to just write a statue that acknowledges you're going to pull 6 to 8 to 12 permits out of the process. Don't try to change the whole law to address that one or two, but acknowledge some of these are uniquely challenging. They're going to take different standards, more flexibility, elasticity, call it what you will, and they may require some general fund money. If you fully want to involve the public, etc, hire experts, retained by the public, to do their own epidemiology or hydrology, etc. These are very challenging permits, but don't disrupt the entire mechanism for those. Lastly, on the Appeals Hearing Board, the Chairman of the IRPN, we've had these discussions. Some of it is perfectly acceptable, some of it scares the hell out of us. The volume of documents submitted on some of these permits is voluminous, shelves of documents. If an Appeals Hearing Board engages in that type of quasi-adjudicatory review, you'll never get a permit. You will have prolonged the process that you're supposed to be shortening. So we don't necessarily object to oversight, a statutory sort of oversight mechanism. But if it comes down to the quasi adjudicatory politicization of that permit, we would oppose that, thanks.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1806, 'end': 1821, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2781, 'end': 2786, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2833, 'end': 2836, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2903, 'end': 2915, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Randal Friedman: Thank you Senators and welcome Senator Stern, Randal Friedman, Navy Region South West. The military has almost 10% of the permitted facilities that we're talking about, and I'd like to think that we are part of the dog and not the tail. Our facilities essentially do not change, they do the same mission. It's a question about, again, the amount of work that has to go in every 10 years to re-permit something that essentially is the same purpose. I would also point out that if there is a change, there is a permit modification process that we go through, and that is a robust process in and of itself where some of these different circumstances surrounding the facility are taken into account. So even a slight change requires the permit modification process, which is its own process, and these factors are considered. So again, our facilities are very important to implementing our military mission in California. California has a number of very important military bases, and I would certainly assure you, ask you to take that into account. And finally, I just also want to applaud the work that IRP has done. We've been a participant in most of their meetings and they've done a fantastic job, and we look forward to continue working with you and the IRP, thank you.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 44, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 46, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gideon Kracov: thank you, honorable chair wieckowski, vice chair stone, senators mcguire, senator skinner, senator hill, chair quirk. my name is gideon jonah kracov. i'm the chair of the department of toxic substances control independent review panel. i serve as the senate rules committee appointee to the community representative seat. i'm an environmental lawyer from los angeles, proud resident of pro temp de leon's 24th senate district. former chair of the state bar environmental law section. and also privileged to currently chair the state mining and geology board under the resources agency, serving as one of governor brown's appointees. last april, the dtsc independent review panel presented about its work to budget subcommittee two. thank you for inviting us again to discuss first what the dtsc independent review panel or irp is. second, our activities today and third, the observations and recommendation we've made about the dtsc. including in our recent annual report, which you have before you in the agenda pockets. to begin, in june 2015, senate bill 83 established the independent review panel within dtsc. as the chair indicated, the panels comprise of three volunteers tasked with conducting independent review and making recommendations regarding improvements to dtsc's programs. in addition to me, our diverse group of panel members include an appointee of the assembly speaker with scientific experience. dr. arezoo campbell, a phd toxicologists at western university of health sciences. you can probably talk to her on the same level, chair quirk. and also we have an appointee of governor brown, with local government management experience. that's our vice chair mike vizzier, former chief of the county of san diego hazardous waste program. our statue requires the panel to report to the governor and you the legislature, every 90 days until we sunset which is soon december 31st of this year 2017. the panel adopted a work plan that devotes two or three months to intensive study of each of six topics. permitting, enforcement, public outreach, fiscal management, site cleanup and source reduction. we write a report on each topic that includes recommendations to the legislature and dtsc and performance metrics for the department to measure its progress. you have a list of the recommendations and metrics so far that we've made to dtsc. they're in your agenda packet today. the panel has painstakingly deliberated, and debated, and voted on each and every word of each report. an open public session under the bagley-keene law, it's like our reports to the declaration of independence or the talmud or something. it's a site to see, senators, and i'm sure, and actually not sure we would do it again if given the choice. then finally, at the end of the year, before the panel sunsets, the workplant calls for the panel to publicly measure dtscs progress in meeting these recommendations and performance metrics. and a last report will publish before december 31st of this year. to be clear senators, chair clerk, the panel has no decision making authority over the department or any particular site. you've given us limited tools of asking questions, holding meetings, writing reports. our work is sort of like a monitor appointed by the governor and you, the legislature. so to date the panels convene 20 public meetings to hear testimony and write our reports. at least one meeting every month usually web cast throughout the state in full compliance with bagley keen and staffed by the ag's office. i'm so proud to tell you that each panel member has attended every meeting. no panel member has missed even 1 of the 20 meetings. we tried to maximize public participation, seven meetings outside sacramento. we heard presentations from many stakeholders, including the chamber of commerce and the people's environmental justice senate. meeting agendas are translated into spanish, and we hire translators for meetings if needed. we held a meeting in commerce, and received detailed presentations on the [unknown] technologies closure plan and residential clean-up and applaud the $176 million appropriation crafted by the governor, the senate, and the assembly to fund those efforts. how the department carries out the x side work, in the months and the years ahead is a key fundamental measurement of the department's performance. and there have been some special moments. seeing the pride of dtsc scientist when we showed the departments burkley lab. a desire to excel they have there at that lab. the sense of promise when director barbara lee introduced the department's first new deputy director public participation, general lopez mendoza. the almost 10 hour meeting we had in bakersfield that went late when families brought children to speak about environmental issues in the central valley. our meeting just weeks ago in january, where we met the dozen division heads of dtsc site cleanup program, brought together from throughout this state, in one room, to present on their important work. and chair, the vast majority of their cleanup sites go pretty well. the panel's grateful to director lee and the department for the considerable time and effort they've dedicated to the panel. hiring our two intrepid panel staff members including analyst larry rolfes and office tech mike singer who are here today for offices or phones helping pay our lawyer, the website. we couldn't do these tasks without the support of dtsc and its resources which we know are limited. this is awkward for the director, senators, having a review panel within her department. i know, and she's done her best. now your committees have asked us to report today on the panels observations and recommendations to date. 15 months into our work, particularly whats in this annual report. now it is true, our panels work is not complete, we do not know at the end of this year how things will turn out with the panels recommendations and performance metrics to dtsc. you can see a lot of work remains to be done. and there are timelines. but the department is working on most of it and it is only fair to allow time to measure that work. and report on it in our final december report, and we'll get that to you. we sympathize, and we acknowledge that dtsc is a big ship with a lot of priorities plus the huge job that is exide. and of course, we panelists are lay people, trying our best to understand a complex dtsc bureaucracy we have limitations. and i imagine there are many things we could have done differently, or understood better, or mistakes we've made. we created this panel from scratch. so there are things we don't know. it's too early to tell, maybe. that is true. however, there are things we do know. things are panel believes we do know enough about, to make observations and legislative recommendations to you and the annual report, even though our work may not be done. things after 15 months are panel reach consensus on, with confidence. after hearing and examining the facts, my understanding is that several of the panel's specific legislative recommendations are incorporated into assembly bills chair quirk introduced yesterday. they address topics that the panel supports, like adequate financial assurances for clean up, and fence line monitoring for permit sites. he will ensure that we never have another x side in our state again. with contaminated neighborhoods and the tax payers holding the bag to assure adequate assets. the legislative analyst's office made the same recommendation back in 2006. we all know and agree, don't we? that dtsc must function at its best, firing on all cylinders. specially in light up uncertainty at the federal level with the uscp in dc and region nine, and areas like grant funding and enforcement given the uncertainties of the federal situation, we californians may be depending on dtsc more than ever in the years ahead. and to ensure the department's long term strength, the panel unanimously agreed, senators, chair quirk in our annual report, on four big picture requirements for dtsc. one, longevity in executive leadership. two, organizational excellence. three, a stable budget. and four, transparency and accountability. most of our specific more gradual recommendations relate to these topics. but in our annual report, this four topics came first. mr. chair could i please spend the rest of my time explaining this topics? please. first, longevity in leadership. dtsc has had significant turnover in leadership, with five directors since 2010, any organization, or business, would suffer with that. this turnover in personnel has been damaging to institutional memory and continuity, it's essential for the current director, and her leadership team, to have longevity in office. of its 15 executive leadership team positions, eight were staff with hirers made just in 2016, more than half. a lot of brand new faces. we applaud the governor's office for appointing this positions and hope that the department now has a stable leadership team in place. senators, continuity and increased experience should give the director the authority to make the tough decisions and inspire confidence in those decisions, both internally within the administration and dtsc staff and externally to all stakeholders. so we know dtsc needs longevity in leadership. and also second, a focus on human resources. dtsc has 1,034 employees working in different locations on many different programs. and there's room for improvement when it comes to the department's human resources. for example, dtsc staff tells us the department may lack best management practices and appropriate supervision between sacramento and at the field offices. and dtsc leadership agrees improvement is needed. new chief deputy francesca negry, hired in 2016, will oversee what she's calling organizational excellence. she presented to the panel on those efforts in december and identified actions to strengthen dtsc's diversity policies, develop an all staff survey, create an organizational culture task group, and prepare a new, overall strategic plan for dtsc. with measurable performance objectives. the panel agrees, the chief deputy director should be given the authority and resources to improve staff morale. training, supervision, evaluation, accountability, cultural sensitivity from top to bottom, throughout dtsc in all its fields offices, it's the basics. so we know dtsc needs organizational excellence. three, a stable budget. dtsc's funding from 1991 when it was split from the department of health services and fiscal year 2013-14, the client in real dollars, 26% senators, even though legislative mandates increased a lot during that period. however, the legislature recently has made significant financial investments in this department. the legislature approved all the governor's dtsc funding requests in fiscal year 16-17. to department's budgets increase from 234 million to 280 million this fiscal year, an almost 20% increase. although this mostly is for exide. the panel applauds you, for these investments in dtsc. and we recognize the departments obligation to wisely administer the massive general fund expenditures the state has dedicated to exide. our report also notes the projected shortfall, quickly, in dtsc's site remediation account for orphan sites and maintenance of certain federal super fund sites. unless the sra account is increased, there's a strong chance that little or no funding could be available for certain orphan sites in future years. especially given grant funding uncertainty, senators, at the federal level now. so we know dtsc needs a stable budget. and then finally, transparency, accountability. in 2015, the legislature created an assistant director of environmental justice. and then in 2016 a new office of environmental justice and tribal affairs. the panel strongly supports these. in september director lee announced the governor had approved a new office of public participation, another great idea. it's tough for scientists to communicate dtsc's work and this could help. also, last year dtsc signed a landmark agreement to resolve civil rights complaints about kettleman hills that enhances the transparency and rigor of the department's compliance with civil rights laws. very positive, and yet a widespread perception exists that dtsc is insular and in need of increased accountability. just yesterday the california environmental justice alliance agency assessment rated dtsc poor or fair noting that approximately a year and a half since the irp's creation, the continued lack of progress and responsiveness to both agency wide and site-specific concerns is unacceptable. now that's their words. but frankly, this is a discouraging assessment about the effectiveness of our panel's advisory report-writing function and whether it really is making a difference on the ground at dtsc. we also heard last month in january from the regulated community concerns about their justification and transparency of dtsc's billing which cause the panel to make a specific recommendation on that topic. it's important for dtsc to set realistic timelines and be accountable for deadlines. for example, the department missed recent deadlines for work you approved and budget change proposals to finalize it's improving enforcement performance work plan, and to release and implement the uc davis collaboration center recommendations for dtscs public engagement records, as set forth in the pcps. and simply adding to dtsc's code more rules and laws may not be the answer. why? look at dtsc's authorizing statutes. this is two columns, double sided, eight font type. and this is just the statutes not even the regs. it is a beast. the statutes, in all fairness, are in need of significant updating and simplification, and that's for everybody's benefit. this is part of the problem. and i'm not sure i want to be the one responsible for that editing job. our panel was open the curtain to dtsc by taking comment in public, requesting information, prodding with our reports. however, the irp sunsets in 11 months. the panel therefore unanimously recommended, senators, that you consider creating a permit appeals board to decide hazardous waste facility permits that dtsc does not timely process. and an oversight board or other permanent structural change within dtsc to improve accountability and transparency. because we do know dtsc needs to be more transparent and timely. in closing, chair wieckowski, senators, chair quirk, the panel's been at it for 15 months, and there's things we do know. observations and recommendations we can make about dtsc after examining the facts. there are undoubted strengths at this department and there are needs and our reports talk about all of it. you have all of them here. if we address these fundamental issues i just discussed we can leave a strong, stable foundation at dtsc for years to come. what we all want, right, is quality, authoritative decision making that inspires confidence in dtsc. a proud legacy that will live on for this governor, for you legislators, and the current dtsc director. thank you so much for the opportunity to come present, chair wieckowski, senators. on behalf of the other panel members, doctor campbell, vice chair vizier, and our staff, we look forward to presenting you with the remainder of our reports throughout the rest of this year thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 37, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 50, 'end': 55, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 66, 'end': 73, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 83, 'end': 90, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 100, 'end': 104, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 112, 'end': 117, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 130, 'end': 149, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 614, 'end': 619, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1423, 'end': 1438, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1605, 'end': 1610, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1679, 'end': 1691, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4558, 'end': 4569, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4654, 'end': 4667, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5125, 'end': 5128, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5279, 'end': 5291, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5308, 'end': 5319, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 9765, 'end': 9780, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 11906, 'end': 11909, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 14489, 'end': 14499, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 14517, 'end': 14522, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 15200, 'end': 15210, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 15267, 'end': 15275, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ingrid Brostrom: hi, my name is ingrid gideon brostrom and i'm an attorney with the center on race poverty and the environment and i coordinate the people's senate which is a coalition of community, about 13 communities that are directly impacted by toxics and a dtsc has a regulatory rule. the people senate has been engaged in irp process, i, myself have also attended almost all of the 20 meetings. and in the outset of this, the communities impacted and developed it's own road map to develop the set of bench marks upon which it could gauged dtsc's and improvements over the years, really base on the gram approvements and community needs. so we recently did a ground truthing of where we believe dtsc at in terms of these improvement and the dtsc did not fair well. and so from our perspective, we've seen the different reform efforts, we've helped support passed and passed several bills on dtsc. but our land is always going to be are these changes at dtsc resulting in on the ground improvements and they are not. yesterday, we were part of the california environmental justice alliance. and we released our environmental justice agency assessment and dtsc is one of two agencies that we reviewed, looking through a lens of environmental justice principles. so, i did want to leave this with you and it's scored poor on virtually all of them and we did recognize a few improvements such as adding environmental justice staff, as well as working on some improvements in some of the program areas. in terms of the irp, we do appreciate all the work that the irp has done over the past year and a half. and, we do believe that they did the best with what they had. however, as mr crackoff said, we have, ourselves, noticed a lot of deficiencies on the tasks that they have before them is very daunting. they don't have an auditor. they themselves, they come with various experiences. but dtsc is a complex agency with a lot of different roles. and we did set the irp up to not be able to do the job that's really necessary. and i do say that with the utmost respect for mr. crackoff. because the staffing is so few, they have had to rely primarily on dtsc itself for information on dtsc's own programming. so, dtsc does paint a rosy picture often times at these meetings. and there's often not a lot of contrary information because, the public and myself included. we don't have access to the information that we believe the irp needs to consider. the three person structure has presented a lot of difficulties because of badly kin. and the issue of the site specific, the role of the irp and site specific issues has been difficult. because the residents that i work with, they're concerned about their communities. and the irp is the only place they have to go to voice their concerns. and there has been different appetites on that irp to listen to the communities and to consider what's going on in their lives. so it's very difficult to have residents continue to participate in the irp when their questions are not answered. and then finally, the structure of where we move forward, i do think this is the time right now,as irp is set to sunset to look at the bigger structural issues. we cannot continue to put bandaids on the agency into this piecemeal type of improvements. the preview is vast, there is no oversight, decisions are made behind closed doors, they review their own permit appeals and communities remain disillusioned. people are dying in these communities, they're very upset at dtsc and we continue to have the lack of community trust, that has not been improving. and so until there's some real oversight and accountability, i don't think that we'll be able to move forward from the community perspective, thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1669, 'end': 1677, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2063, 'end': 2071, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jean Urban: Good morning Mr. Chairman, I'm Jean Urban. I'll take just a few minutes. I represent a couple permitees, some controversial, Exside, Waste Management at Kettleman Hills facility. I also represent some permitees, who are in that class of permits that the chairperson of the IRP identified. The 80, 85% for which there is no controversy and they should be processed routinely. I have said for quite a while that it is the tail wagging the dog. Of the 100 permits there are 12 to 18 at any time that are controversial for any number of reasons, pure politics, science, communities changing around them. I have no principle position on why they become controversial, but you have to acknowledge that those 12 or 18 should be moved outside the system. Some elasticity and flexibility needs to be built into the system. You're never going to make mandated times. Do not impose systemic change on the other 100 permits for which there is really no difficulty or objection. It's always a process of accretion and addition, you never integrate. I'm aware of very few permits issued by DTSC that do not also have accompanying local permits, and in most instances regional permits from either air quality or water, or both. There are numerous sequel documents. The number of public hearings can be daunting, starting at the conditional use permit and moving all the way up to DTSC. So I implore you to try to integrate any changes into what is in fact a pretty comprehensive system. If you just look at the DTSC permit in isolation, you will not see a significant percentage of the reality that these operations confront. It's not easy, it is daunting, it's a mess. It's also thankless, but I think the Chairman has volunteered to single-handedly rewrite the codes. Lastly, with regard to my Waste Management client, Kettleman Hills, I have said this before I'm going to continue to repeat it Mr. Chairman until you upbraid me about this. 80 to 85% of the material deposited, Kettleman is only hazardous in the State of California. it is non-RCRA waste. When the Kettleman Facility was ensnared in a very long permit modification process, it had to curtail its operations. That material went elsewhere. Much of it went out of state. To my knowledge, no one in this state has ever asked what happened to it. It is my observation that the implicit public policy of the State of California is too frequently label something hazardous, but let's not greatly concern ourselves about the manner in which it's treated, stored, or deposited. So as long as we remain eager to label something hazardous, I think we also have the obligation, moral, legal, otherwise, to be prepared to permit these facilities in a realistic and not cost-prohibitive manner. Lastly, I think it may have been you, Senator Stern, who asked this question, I was with Director Lee once, she said she spent 90% of her time on Kettleman, Exide, and Santa Susana. She also told me in some cases there's no good answer. There are no good answers, these are tough, tough decisions. Which is why I think you need to just write a statue that acknowledges you're going to pull 6 to 8 to 12 permits out of the process. Don't try to change the whole law to address that one or two, but acknowledge some of these are uniquely challenging. They're going to take different standards, more flexibility, elasticity, call it what you will, and they may require some general fund money. If you fully want to involve the public, etc, hire experts, retained by the public, to do their own epidemiology or hydrology, etc. These are very challenging permits, but don't disrupt the entire mechanism for those. Lastly, on the Appeals Hearing Board, the Chairman of the IRPN, we've had these discussions. Some of it is perfectly acceptable, some of it scares the hell out of us. The volume of documents submitted on some of these permits is voluminous, shelves of documents. If an Appeals Hearing Board engages in that type of quasi-adjudicatory review, you'll never get a permit. You will have prolonged the process that you're supposed to be shortening. So we don't necessarily object to oversight, a statutory sort of oversight mechanism. But if it comes down to the quasi adjudicatory politicization of that permit, we would oppose that, thanks.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1806, 'end': 1821, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2781, 'end': 2786, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2833, 'end': 2836, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2903, 'end': 2915, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Randal Friedman: Thank you Senators and welcome Senator Stern, Randal Friedman, Navy Region South West. The military has almost 10% of the permitted facilities that we're talking about, and I'd like to think that we are part of the dog and not the tail. Our facilities essentially do not change, they do the same mission. It's a question about, again, the amount of work that has to go in every 10 years to re-permit something that essentially is the same purpose. I would also point out that if there is a change, there is a permit modification process that we go through, and that is a robust process in and of itself where some of these different circumstances surrounding the facility are taken into account. So even a slight change requires the permit modification process, which is its own process, and these factors are considered. So again, our facilities are very important to implementing our military mission in California. California has a number of very important military bases, and I would certainly assure you, ask you to take that into account. And finally, I just also want to applaud the work that IRP has done. We've been a participant in most of their meetings and they've done a fantastic job, and we look forward to continue working with you and the IRP, thank you.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 44, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 46, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jonathan Lightman: Thank you, Mr. Chair and members. Jonathan Lightman on behalf of the Faculty Association of California Community Colleges, in support. We have a very strong board and with that strong board, we welcome the addition of Ms. Haynes. She has elevated the discussions, she understands the twin pillars of access and success. She has reached out to us and to the other faculty groups as well as to the student groups, the classified groups. We have a whole diverse range of constituencies where we've discussed many of the topics that were mentioned here, including faculty, NCTE, and food insecurity and we appreciate the opportunity to provide input and we are just so pleased at the strength and support. We encourage you to support her confirmation, thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 222, 'end': 228, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Zeke Hernandez: Thank you. My name's Zeke Hernandez. I'm a newly elected trustee on the Ranch of Santiago Community College board of trustees, elected in November and I attended the community college lead conference and stayed behind on my own, on my own wallet if you say, to come to and talk to more of the office legislators and their staff. And I do support the nomination of Pamela Haynes, and as you look at the Board of Governors and you look at, I get involved in civil rights organization with Lulac and I came onto the board, I was lucky to win election, but on the point of doing more in the community college and its students and it's a driver in terms of the economy. I believe that if we have individuals like Ms. Haynes, that we could probably urge or initiate the actions that need to be made so that we can get our community more involved in realizing they can go to college, okay? I'm 70 years old, so I went through the phase of not wanting to go to college, etc. and I think that's where we need to give the urge, and I believe individuals like Ms. Haynes can assist in urging the larger group to do so also. Thank you. I stand in support.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 364, 'end': 377, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 712, 'end': 718, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1053, 'end': 1059, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Edgar Zazueta: welcome. mr. chair, members, edgar on behalf of the association of california school administrators. you have a very impressive set of nominees here. i have the pleasure of being here specifically to support dr. thelma melendez. you heard about her resume from her personally, from jack o'connell. he's been at the forefront of preparing students for the csu basically all of her career. we've seen she's been a leader in our school system whether it be a high ranking official in the obama administration. running very prominent school districts with some of the biggest challenges facing our states. and now with the whole work at los angeles unified school district. we all looked at dr. melendez. we think she provides a very important voice on the csu board of trustees. and are very privileged to support her nomination. thank you.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 212, 'end': 227, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 282, 'end': 296, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 485, 'end': 490, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 691, 'end': 699, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bob Giroux: senator de leon and members, i'm bob jonah giroux on behalf of the international union of painters and allied trades. the national union of healthcare workers. and other clients represented by our firm. i'm here specifically to speak on behalf of jane w carney who i've known since 1988 when speaker willie brown sent me to riverside on a nine month tour of duty. and then back again in '90, '92, and '94. i have to say that jane understands all three segments. i was heartened today that the committee talked about all three segments in the integration and transfer students and what they all should be doing. jane and i talked after her appointment about the success rate of community college transfers. and making sure that they're counted in the graduation rates of the students who move over to the csu system. i, myself, graduated from san francisco state after transferring from the community college system. i'll speak on behalf of the other appointees. we support them, as well, and i thank you for your time.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 15, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 33, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 247, 'end': 260, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 300, 'end': 312, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 425, 'end': 429, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 611, 'end': 615, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Zeke Hernandez: Yes, my name's Zeke Hernandez, trustee Rancho Santiago Community College District. And I also, I'm the past state director for LULAC, League of United Latin American Citizens. I'm going to just wear my other hat here. I'm very, very pleased and stand favorably in support of each one of the individuals that are before you asking for your approval. Particularly I want to just say something on Dr. Melendez. As you know I come from Santa Anna. I was born in Santa Anna, California in Orange County. And she was Superintendent of Santa Anna Unified School District, K-12 District. And through her work there, she recognized that college readiness is a big part of a K-12 system. And so she instilled in that not only in staff, faculty, state teachers, but amongst the students. So I'm very hopefully certain that they have discussed with you the issue of impaction. With LULAC, we've worked on the issue of impaction at the CSU level for the last couple of years. And have sat down with top administrators or top individuals from Cal State, in Long Beach. And I'm certain that you have talked to them about impaction and feel comfortable that the issue of impaction will be discussed at and taken care of at the CSU level. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 398, 'end': 406, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark Ghilarducci: good afternoon. okay, well, mr. chair, good afternoon and members of the committee, happy to with you today and i'm joined here with a number of my team members. tina curry, who is one of our deputy directors oversees. all of our planning, preparedness, prevention, and training directorate at oes, chief mark payson who oversees our division of law enforcement and homeland security and chief kim zeggarres who oversees our fire and rescue division and together we're going to talk a little bit about what oes is and how we do our work and talk a little about the process we follow in our efforts to not just keep the state safe but to respond effectively and proactively and recover following all different types of disasters and events. so let me start off by saying ghilarducci, director of the governor's office of emergency services and homeland security advisor to governor brown. i think everybody knows there's no shortage of crisis in the world and certainly california, the nation's state of california. there is a lot going on here with regards to our population, density, urban centers, our rural communities. we have an international port of entry and 11 very active commodity ports as well as very significant infrastructure and heavy academia and there's just a lot going on here, innovation hub of the country, roughly about 13% of the gdp of the united states, and so protecting california and being in a position to be proactive and try to continue to remain out, in front of, not just threats, but actually events that are unfolding, is a never ending, 24/7, 365 effort. as a part of that, oes is not just the agency responsible with prevention, preparedness, responsive recovery to natural disasters. things like earthquakes and fires and floods. notwithstanding that we have plenty of all of those, but we are also the homeland security agency for california and responsible working with our parties of the department of homeland security us government to ensure for the security of california through a series of threat assessment centers and intelligence gathering centers that we work very closely in partnerships with local law enforcement and our federal counterparts, the fbi and dhs, etc and as a part of that, we look at everything from critical infrastructure protection, waterways and lifelines and other kinds of critical infrastructure, power, water, etc. as well as things like port and rail security, transportation security, maritime security, special event large venue, kind of, security that happens throughout the state. as a part of that, we have a granting program where we move quite a bit of money through grant programs to local government, local entities to ensure that they are also working in a combined effort with us to meet a set of matrix that are outlined in a state home and security strategy. of course that homeland security strategy is a part of the overall state emergency part which i will let you in just a second, and tina will delve into a little bit more in detail for you, but beyond the homeland security and the natural disaster involvement we also oversee all the public safety communications for california, all the 911 centers and the state microwave and communication, which is not only critical for interoperable communications at all levels of government, but also is an integral part of continuity of government and continuity of operations throughout the state. so those physical assets and infrastructure of that capability as well as the technology piece is very, very critical that we work to maintain, and again we do that in partnership with our local government partners, and then of course we've got a very robust training arm through the california specialized training institute. california specialized training institute, or csti as we call it. it's physically located at a campus in san luis obispo, but is really an enterprise that reaches out throughout the state of california to provide training and exercises for local and state agencies, but also federal agency, federal counterparts and international organizations and we have been doing more and more private sector training, in recent years, to be able to provide a baseline capability for emergency management and security response recovery and mitigation efforts. several thousand students go through csti ever year, it's modeled after the national emergency management institute, in emmetsburg, maryland and is very very close relationship between fema and dhs, and other post, organizations where, we have joint effort stay fire marshal we are working together. at the center, it handles the base ball, and then, through the enterprise, throughout the state of california and then lastly is our victim services which really is an area where. we are working on projects. for example, integrating human trafficking task forces, overseeing the rape crisis centers in the state. we have a number of youth programs that we work with through our victim services. we also provide critical incident stress management resources that we go throughout the state. this effort is really a collaborative effort, and if i could just take a second and step back in history to provide context to this discussion that you know, we in california have continued to evolve our emergency management capabilities and i say emergency management as the overarching construct. all these things i talked about, whether it's communications or homeland security or victim's services, the various kinds of disasters and threats fall under this structure of emergency management in california and we have had a number of disasters and events, significant ones over the years that have continued to shape and form us. have given opportunity to introduction of legislations that help us build our capacity and capability and probably one of the most significant pieces of legislation was done in the 90s. it was the senator petris's bill that outlined and developed the standardized emergency management system and sems, as we call it, or the standardized emergency management system, is the standard system that we operate at every level of government in california. it is designed so that we can address and adjudicate events at the lowest possible level at the fastest possible way. it's built upon a backbone of relationships between cities and counties and regions, regions and the state and then at the state level we can turn to our federal counterparts or to counterparts at the international level and it's based upon, as a city or local community is dealt with a particular event that grows in complexity beyond the capabilities of that community. that fire chief, or police chief, or mayor has the ability through this system and through what we call the master mutual aid agreement to be able to turn to their neighboring cities or turn to their county and request assistance. counties throughout the state or what we call operational areas are really the first component of which we at oes have direct tie in relationships with from the form of a coordination standpoint and we have operation area coordinators in fire, law enforcement, emergency management, emergency medical, etc and we at that level, at that county level, a operational area level, that's the first key coordination point. those operational areas really are having the pulse of what's happening within their cities. they rapidly know whether or not an event is evolving beyond the capability of a particular community, and they, in turn, are sharing and moving information immediately through the system to provide situational awareness up the chain and across the chain. so it's really horizontal and vertical to be able to go to next door operational areas, and the system as designed allows an operational area to go to the next operational area, the next surrounding county, to pull in resources. they know pretty well if an event is again going to be evolving beyond that or if the event of such high profile nature that they're going to need assistance almost immediately. they then can turn to the next level, and that is the region and we have region coordination centers throughout the state of california, region and emergency operation centers. we have fire and law enforcement. we have agreements with, for example, on the law enforcement side, with sheriffs, which chief basil will talk about in a minute. which they handle the coordination for us for law enforcement mutually as chief regels will talk about the coordination for fire and rescue with fire departments and regions can then pull from all the resources within a particular set of counties as far as within the region and then in the event that that is even more complicated they then can turn to the state. over on the right, you see here, or my right, you see here a map that sort of explains how we break the state up into manageable what we call mutual aid regions. three administrative regions from the standpoint of administering programs, but six, what we call mutual aid regions, where we actually manage specific tactical resources within those six mutual aid zones and then we can move resources around the state. it's not uncommon for you to see, particularly during fire season where you see hundreds of fire engines and firefighters and law enforcement personnel being moved from one jurisdiction to another. sometimes you'll say, wow there's firefighters from san diego and eureka or vice versa. that is all done through this mutual aid system. we are the brokers of that. the system is built by the participation of all entities, but it is managed and housed within the office of emergency services and much of the work that these folks do. all of this is outlined in the state emergency plan which gets updated regularly, but i have to tell you that, look there's always new threats that, and new challenges that are evolving in the state that continues to grow, and evolve like california. we have moved from, maybe what it used to be just natural disasters, to natural disasters and the threat of terrorism and then under terrorism, there's certainly a whole list of different kinds of threats that could be chemical, nuclear, biological or radiological, explosive, a new one we're dealing with today is cyber. and so we are constantly having to pivot to think about what those risks and threats are to our state, to our economy, and to our citizens, and we need to be constantly working to build and stay out in front of those evolving threats. the state emergency plan is critical. it is the basis by which state agencies and local government build their plans, but it's important for me to note that it is not so much, in my view, the issue of the plan. it is the issue of the process, the planning process. we need to continually keep everybody in that evolving kind of steady state where we are constantly updating the plan, so it does not become a stagnant, static you know, door stop. so it's a very complex document with a lot of information and it's updated on a regular basis, but it really is that through a number of committees, working groups. and part of the standardized emergency management system is a maintenance program that is made up of local state and federal, in which we continue to maintain the status and capability of our system in california. we also are an accredited organization nationally. we are accredited by the emergency management performance accreditation program. this is a national program that state agencies throughout the united states participate in. emergency management organization and have to meet significant numbers of metrics and capabilities and we have been an accredited agency for some time and just recently went through a reaccreditation again in the last actually few weeks where they looked at all the different aspects. so i mentioned the coordination centers at the regional operation center, we also at sacramento here have the state operations center. it is the hub where all the state agencies come together with their federal counterparts and it's what we do 24/7, 365 situation awareness through the warning center. it is the place where hazmats get reported and other kinds of incidents reported and that warning center is augmented with six fusion centers. the fusion centers are multi agency intelligence threat assessment centers, they're located throughout california and they're specifically looking at threats to the state, particularly in the context of terrorism and terrorist activity. so we've a lot of feeds coming in, a lot of the analytics which we are working and we work constantly to be able to continue to evolve our process. so with that, i think i'll stop and turn it over to my colleagues and let them sort of brief on some more of the specifics. i maybe stole some of their thunder so i apologize for that, but that's what directors do and then i'd be happy to answer any of your questions. thank you.
[{'start': 162, 'end': 172, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 305, 'end': 316, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 394, 'end': 407, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 770, 'end': 781, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 881, 'end': 886, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2979, 'end': 2983, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5939, 'end': 5945, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8382, 'end': 8387, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tina Curry: Hi, good afternoon, Mr. Chair and Members of the Committee, chairs, thank you very much for the setup regarding the components of the state emergency plan. You did that very well, as did the director as far as what's contained in it, and what it does, and If I may. I'm sorry. Tina Curry, Deputy Director with CALOES, overseeing plans and preparedness, and if I may, I'll just touch on a few things a little bit more about what's stayed the same, what changed and kind of what we went through in the process of updating and I think as the subsequent speakers and panelists come up, you'll see how that Is illustrated in the actions that we take, the systems, the testing and exercises that we do, and hopefully this will set that up. So, it's described as far as how things work is really essentially what the state emergency plan contains, but its important to note that it is by law in effect in every political subdivision and what that means is that, yes we have cities and counties that have very extensive emergency plans and practices all the time, but it was important to the founders of this who created this requirement long ago Is that if there was ever any situation where there was a gap or for whatever reason, this plan needs to be something that can reflect itself in any level of government. So it needs to be written in a way that's not necessarily state agency or state government focused, but something that a city, or a county, or a community could actually see itself in and abide by what's in it. So we put a lot of thought into how we present this information and this plan. With that notion that it really needs to be something that resonates at every level of government and really as our emergency management family continues to grow to include individuals and private sector and the complex environment that we're in beyond government in that regard. So the plan itself contains an extensive description of our hazards and vulnerabilities. That's probably, or definitely an area that evolved quite a bit between the updates we have a much deeper understanding of drought of other extreme weather type events and how those present themselves, in today's day and age and into the future in California, a much deeper understanding of the terrors and threats, and we had been through 911 last time we updated a lot more has happened and we understand a lot more since then. And then of course numerous newer threats like cyber security. So those are described in our hazards and vulnerabilities. It describes the organization, the role of government, the role of individuals, the role of private sector. Our different phases of emergency, yes, the state emergency plan is largely about how we respond, how we do the things that save lives, protect property, protect the environment, but it's also about everything that happens around that. We need to be planning for disasters and emergencies. We need to do what we call mitigation which is the preventative work, making sure that the next emergency doesn't have the same effects that it did before and also how we recover. It's a very important component. Another thing that Cal OES oversees at the state level, but certainly a large part of the compendium of emergency management in communities all over, is how we build back, continuity planning, it was already mentioned, that's how we, plan for disruptions and how will we continue essential services to the public in the face of those disruptions. Emergency functions and state agency responsibilities, I'll get back to that a little bit later because that is a big component of the state plan, is what we expect our state government to do with OES in the coordination role. So for the update process that was largely I can put in kind of a few buckets of what the significant changes are. First is the inclusion as one of the Committee Members authored AB 918 and that is the better inclusion of access and functional needs issues in the State of emergency plan. We worked extensively on this issue. It is fortunate to have an office of access and functional needs and has done a lot of planning a lot of collaboration with communities since 2008 since it was established and in this published update of the state plan we're able to capture a lot of not only lessons Learned but a lot of the guidance and planning that has gone on at the State of California, largely as a result of establishment of that function. So access and functional needs includes persons with disabilities, older adults, infants, children, those with a multilingual people, all those things that exist in the fabric of our communities, that as we in government or anyone who is undertaking emergency planning and all the different functions that are spelled out in the plan have to take into consideration. So rather than have one spot in the plan where there's a description of actions and functional needs you'll actually find it integrated all throughout every element in the plan. Starting with the introduction and situation assumptions. Defining this, what's been done, what kind of guidance we put forward in the plan in order to be ready for these issues and to manage those issues in the time or emergency and disaster recovery. So some examples are use of interpreters. When we're communicating with the public and understanding that not everybody may have access or the ability to see and hear emergency information the same way. So the communities need to look at those, and we have a lot of techniques and ways to do that that have been developed in the interim. We have, just recently, launched guidance at partnership with our AFN office in law enforcement. Active shooter situations and considerations for people with access and functional needs in those types incidents, so those things we're able to capture in this plan update. We've also had quite a few events since the last update, those are always informative to us. Not only the drought that has continuing to persist in the state, but has been in place for several years now. The San Bernardino incident with terrorism. These state-wide fires that we have seemingly every year but certainly much more on extreme level in 2015 and also the Napa earthquake, we haven't had a significant earthquake in California since the 90s, and we learned a lot from that. So those types of events inform how we portray, the way we conduct emergency management in these updates and then finally, there was a pretty significant reorganization of state government in 2013. So this emergency plan update on one of the large components of change was the updating of the state agency functions. We consulted with about 80 state agencies, some probably come to mind, you know, that typically respond to emergencies or that you see working with us during those times, but really there's a role for just about every state agency if you think about their staff, their capabilities they have, inherently how they work on day-to-day issues to serve the public. There is a place for that in some way with most state agencies. So we spent a lot of time working with, as you can imagine, 80 state agencies, combing through the language, taking these events that have happened, making sure that we had the best and most current information about what our state agencies are capable to do. I can say from not just a planner, but from experience we have really leveraged state capability in a lot of ways that I haven't seen before in events to stretch that as best we can to serve the public. There's never a guarantee that we'll have federal aid or aid from other sources. So we've got to first and foremost be able to support our communities with all of our resources that our state government, which is very comprehensive, can bring to bear. The public comment period that was mentioned, the timing for that, we received about 400 comments. Comments came in from individuals, from state agencies, from local government. We received a lot of really good input that helped us reshape the language so that it was clear and understandable and again was something that our communities could see this emergency plan being in effect in their jurisdiction. It has to be compatible with what they do and likewise. The other thing that the director touched on this is the state emergency plan is a baseline document, it articulates at a really high level how things work, but it also has the, is intended to be annexed with very specific hazard plans or some of the things that my colleagues with law enforcement and fire will talk about, so the plan update has to make sure to be able to be bolted onto and vice versa with other types of plans that should be compatible with it. We have also published in partnership with the federal government, Federal Emergency Management Agency, several what we call catastrophic plans where we take a worse case scenario earthquake, and figure out, with our federal government partners, with the military, with local communities, what does that look like, and how would we respond to it? Those are kind of a newer thing that we've done in this last window since we updated the state plan last time. So the new plan had to reflect all that work that had had occurred in the meantime. So I think that really covers the types of comments that we got, again, language issues, how to present the information so it's more clear. We received a few things about reflecting the EMS capabilities, you mentioned that, Assembly Member Rodriguez, and how that looks state wide not just at the state level, based on some other things we learned to include San Bernardino. We also received some comments of things that people didn't like so much that we were not able to encompass, and I'll give an example. One of the changes that we made is to make our plan more compatible with national standards. So disasters and emergencies really become and a lot of time everybody's disaster and emergency. Something that happens in a California port has resonating effects worldwide, across the nation. We are often in California in a position to share resources, externally, because we have a robust system of resources, but there are some days, and there have been, as my colleagues will describe, where we are receiving, and definitely if we were to have the catastrophic earthquake we will be receiving. So it's important nationally that our planning is compatible with what other states are doing, what the federal government doing. We made some changes to reflect terminology and acronyms and things that were compatible with the national system. Yes, it's different maybe than what we called those things in California centric terms and that's just one of those things that not everybody necessarily agreed with. But we as an entity know that in the future and now we have to think about being part of Really a national system and really worldwide in terms of the impacts of what happens here and what happens elsewhere. A new annex for cybersecurity, we wanted to make sure to explore this new hazard as best we can. How does that connect and work with this system that we use to respond when cyber is going to present itself a lot differently than traditional bang type of disaster or flood, earthquake, etc.? So that's a new feature of the state plan, but really again to just reiterate the changes to an update and increase of the description of the state agency capabilities. And how we work together. Some of these new features like cyber security, incorporation of AFN, those are really the highlights of what was changed. The process was important, even if it's just to reinforce and reaffirm things that didn't change, is really critical because, again, as we've all, I think, echoed here so far, this is really the document that binds it all together and I hope that as I turn over to the next presenters, you'll see how that's illustrated in our day to day operations. So with that, it's subject to questions. I'll turn it over the next speaker.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 29, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 277, 'end': 287, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 9503, 'end': 9512, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark Pazin: okay, mark jonah pazin, chief of law enforcement, oes homeland security and it's good to see everybody. assembly, chair, there captain cooper and some of the other friends i've met over the years. i had the unique role of coming to this position compliments of director ghilarducci and governor brown. i've had the luxury of being on both sides of the fence, both at the local level as sheriff of merced county for 30 plus years, and now over the past three years working with the great men and women from cal oes. i'll give you some notes, mr. chair, regarding how we have this broken down. first off, we'll kind of run through the office of emergency services and what that encompasses and what that entails. again, i want everybody to bear in mind that i've had the luxury of being on both sides of the fence to recipient of cal oes assets through the system, a system that works, a system that has been tried in true through not only the years, but the decades, and now having the privilege of working from that top from the state level and assisting my local sheriffs and police chiefs now. so we'll start with the search and rescue, a very not only interesting but intricate component as we have all these issues that come up and down the the state of california. it's always interesting where someone will go for a hike with a light shirt and a bottle of water. next thing you know a storm comes in and that's where the system really prevails. we on a daily basis, especially with these storms, have had a number of issues wherein persons just take off for the day and get lost sometimes there are tragic events, but for the most part we bring them home safely, which then it dovetails into the civil air patrol. again, a very necessary component on how we work with that through the law enforcement branch to help manage that, the deputy chief matt sharper is in charge of all this. we have direction and control, so to assembly member rodriguez who evidently left temporarily, to his question about training. we have direction and control, and basically, we have four quarterly meetings throughout the state of california that brings in everybody. both federal, state and local assets to learn, to re-educate, use those tutorial moments that we've had over the past years to manage personnel and resources and then at the end of that learning period, we have a tabletop exercise to ensure that they have absorbed all those learning domains. and then with that we have our child abduction class that we have throughout the state that uses those same techniques to search for a person or family that's lost, but to also enhance in case there is a child abduction, and that is also post-accredited. the law enforcement mutual aid system, as the director had alluded to, starts at the local level, works through the sheriff, through those operational areas that you see on this board over here and again, i can only reiterate that the system works and will continue to work. we have the large venue initiative, the active shooter and also something that we've also had to realize is the active aggressor. a lot of the times you think it's a weapon, a gun. but now you see that we just had in incident down in hollywood, just yesterday, where someone was going around with a knife, and los angeles pd had to take affirmative action on that. the 1033, 1122 program, which repurposes equipment to our local law enforcement agencies in which it is free of charge. i can't tell you how many pieces of equipment are out there through this program that we manage through cal oes through a very robust group of men and women that we work with at the california national guard. just this past week, last week we had to audit over 100,000 pieces of law enforcement equipment throughout the state of california. everything was accounted for, everything. with that 1033 program is the 1122 program, where we can purchase items in bulk that also saves the local law enforcement agencies, das offices. those first responders financial resources that could be dedicated to other things within their area. we have our facility security that we also assist with the california highway patrol. we have the mass fatality program. we unfortunately responded to the ghost ship incident in oakland. we were prepared to work with sheriff greg ahern because of the number of unfortunate fatalities that occurred there, but that system is in place managed by cal oes under the law enforcement branch. let's move over to state homeland security. the director also mentioned the state for an assessment center along with the regional centers. we manage that to ensure that the public is safe. that we're able to obtain information in a lawful, and very, what i would say humble way, so we can ensure to protect the citizens of california. the rail and transit security force. that came to fruition during super bowl 50 of last year and the rose bowl. we had an assistant chief that was part of that committee to ensure the proper ingress and egress of persons that wanted to enjoy super bowl 50. it just wasn't for one day. it was for 10 days that we were there for that bay area, and i gotta tell you, thanks to the good work of everybody within the state, the cooperation that we had, there wasn't an incident. we can only hope that for super bowl 51 in houston. maritime security, very important component also. as i can't tell you how many billions of dollars of commerce come in through those 10 or 11 ports. the director has tasked me with being the chair and i work very closely with united states coast guard commandants, the real admiral, to ensure the safety and that free commerce throughout all those posts are maintained. critical infrastructure protection has also been brought under the law enforcement. it kind of speaks to itself that were constantly reviewing, overseeing, assisting to ensure that the critical infrastructure whether it be a power plant, whether it be a bridge, road. if you recall for the south bay, we had the metcalf incident in 2014. we don't know if it was vandalism, terrorism, but it occurred and we want to make sure it doesn't happen again. cyber security, i'll probably defer back to the director on that, but that is also comes under the law enforcement branch and with the executive order from governor brown. it's a very good system that i think we're way ahead of the curve thanks to director ghilarducci and having the vision to put that together with the governor and i'll let him discuss that a little bit more. but i gotta tell you the baseline on all this comes with being allowed to liason with all 58 county sheriffs, the cal chiefs, our fire counterparts and the california peace officer's association. we are constantly attending those meetings. we ensure that those relationships and whatever we can do now in advance of any type of natural or human-made disaster. it's those relationships that are built at the federal, state, and local levels, that really make this system work. again, i can only say, in closing, i've been on both sides of the fence as sheriff of merced county. i did that for over three decades, and now have the privilege of working here at cal oes. so again, i leave you with this thought. this system works. thank you.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 135, 'end': 141, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 270, 'end': 281, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 295, 'end': 300, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1852, 'end': 1864, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1944, 'end': 1953, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4320, 'end': 4330, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4439, 'end': 4446, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6328, 'end': 6333, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6420, 'end': 6431, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kim Zagaris: Okay, good afternoon. It's always a pleasure to be in the capital here for you. Kim Zagaris, State Fire and Rescue Chief for Cal OES Fire and Rescue. And I like this picture right off the bat because it shows you one of our OES engines lighted by a local guardant command vehicle protecting the structure, got a lot of fire in the background. We got large transmission lines out there and a federal contracting air tanker all dropping. Just to kind of give you an idea of the coordination of things that take place each and every day in our great state, at least during fire season. I'm either fortunate or unfortunate some days. I have a 19 member board that actually provides a direction and an input for myself, the director, ultimately for the Governor and the Legislature. Represent 12 local government agencies, some from very large to the very small rural fire departments in the state. Three state agencies are on it, three federal agencies, and two labor organizations provide us input on our state fire and rescue mutual aid system. The agencies actually have been since 1950, so a little over 67 years. But in reality our advisory boards have been meeting since 1943, so quite a number of years, when you look at it. Our real mission is coordination and systematic mobilization of organization, operation of the necessary fire and rescue resources throughout the state. As an example of probably the largest mobilization in the state's history was in 1993, Old Topanga Fire down in Malibu. We moved 900 engines in 24 hours, as an example of how good our system moves each and every day out there. Actually on this slide, starts on the left hand side, the Incident Commander there on the bottom makes a request. Goes to the Local Operational Area Dispatch Center, the 911 facility. Goes to an Operational Area Fire and Rescue Coordinator. There's one in each one of our counties who's elected by popular vote of the county fire chiefs. When they run out of resources, they go to the next level, the Regional Fire and Rescue Coordinator, we have six of those in the state. When that regional coordinator needs additional resources, they come to us at the state level. We then go out to the other 5 regions, down into the other 57 counties, down to those other local fire agencies to that individual overhead or resource and move it up and down the state each and every day, as Chief [UNKNOWN] has already indicated. There are over about 6,000 fire apparatus on the State of California. I would generally tell you and the Governor that we can move 500 of those in the first 12 hours, and generally another 500, 12 hours after that, maybe 24. There's about a thousand plus agencies at the local level. City, county, special district, volunteer. There's 55,000 firefighters who've paid volunteer combination. 10 years ago, it's about just short of 63,000. And of those about 32% of the state is volunteers. So not as many paid as you may think there are out there. We though we ask of 166 apparatus 195 overall total vehicles. Includes fire engines, com units, wolfwater units, Urban Search and Rescue. We respond to everything from fires, high rise, wildland fires, mudslides, earthquakes, tsunamis, floods, civil unrest, terrorism. We go to collapse incidents, urban rescue, high low angle rescue, pretty much name it, we do it. And in the background here is a shot of the Oakland Hills Fire of 1991 where we moved 440 engines in the first 16 hours of that incident. These are some of those incidents lined up out on the highway ready to go to work. We also rely upon our local government partners for a great deal of air support. These are some of the agencies that have fire based apparatus and some are co-located with our law enforcement partners. And which are made available in the spirit of cooperation throughout the state to assist locally, state and federally as necessary. Just as an example of how that works. As the Chief of Fire and Rescue, I also have the ability to task any other state agency to provide resources under the state's match and mutual aid agreement to assist and mitigate the threat to life and property and environment, if necessary. I often tell people the shot on the right there is me in my younger days, I only wish, not really. One of my strong partners at the state level is CAL FIRE. They provide us with a great deal of resources. I don't usually mission task them during a lot of incidences involving fire and rescue mutual aid. We have a one page letter that actually gives us guidelines, and so streamlines our process to move those resources pretty regularly. But they are not only a strong partner in the stateside, but they're also a strong user of our state mutual aid system as well. This is a California National Guard resources that we sometimes task. Everything from a fixed wing C1-30s that we use for moving personnel as well as dropping retardant to fix wing to aerial devices, hand crews for a number of issues. And they're again another very strong partner. And I'm sure Sheriff Martin will talk a little about that and his use of them two years ago. When we run out of resources in the State of California, which doesn't happen too often, but it does happen. We have the ability to go through our interstate compact. We regularly utilize an example as Nevada. In fact, in October of this year, we sent 125 OES and local government engines across the border to assist our friends in Nevada with a fire that they had at that time. It was actually the largest movement of resources across the border. We generally do maybe 40 or 50 engines, but nowhere to that degree. And I always tell people to better day to give mutual aid than it is to receive it in the state. So they were very thankful, and it's always a good day. So two years ago, we moved resources, us and CAL FIRE. Moved 10 engines each from our agencies up to Washington to assist them in a bad fire season. So it happens a lot more than people may think. There are times when we buy, use up our interstate compacts. We go to EMAC, the Emergency Management Assistance Compact. In 2007 we actually utilized, brought in 600 engines from around the country from as far as Florida and New York, as an example of why we need resources. Also, in 2008, the largest movement of National Guard helicopters on wild land fires occurred. We brought in over 50 National Guard helicopters from around the state as well. During 2008 under this agreement. We have various agreements. Our Fire and Rescue mutual aid plan is neighbor helping neighbor, this happens every day. Probably 1950, they assume neighbor helping neighbor was your county, your next door neighbor out of there. Today, that's, could be San Diego being in Sisca county, or Sisca County being down by the border. Just using them as another example of how good our system works. We also have an agreement in there with CAL FIRE and our federal partners on how we reimburse those local agencies. This year, we've processed, we'll be processing well over $200 million full of garments for their responses to assisting on state and federal fires within the State of California. Some notable numbers, when you look at history of resources that we moved up and down the state. I like to throw this one in, I like to makes sure I keep Chief Payson happy by showing we do cooperate with law enforcement each and every day on here. But there's some good numbers up there. Those aren't good days. Those were actually long days and very tough times for the state and for this house when we have to call for assistance, not only for us, but to assist our local government partners. [INAUDIBLE] A story that's unfolding here, is that not everyday can I meet the needs of the California Fire service. Since 2012 going to 2016, engines and water tenders, we fall everywhere from 2012 to 134 engines short, to 114 in 13, 403 in 2014, 958 in 15. And this year, we were unable to fill over 3,000 requests for engines and water tenders on going incidences in the state. Just an example of the drought and tree mortality issue that's been impacting us. Overhead, similar number, but then you look at the total numbers out there. And so we actually use an acronym called UTF. But it's just an example of what goes on each and every day in our state. The ideal process is not to have that number get larger, it's a continuum to have enough resources to meet our day to day needs. Especially during that initial attack phase, when we're trying to protect people's lives and properties. Under Senate Bill 27 chaptered in 1998 we formed firescope firefighting resources of California organized potential emergency. Actually puts again local, state, and federal agencies after the 1970 fires that this program was formed. It actually becomes the basis for the state's incident command system and Sims as the base document. And went on to become after the attack in 2001 on the nation our national incident management system. So what you should take out of part of this is that this state and the fire service and law enforcement and emergency management and EMS are leaders in what happens each and every day in this state and transitions across this country. So it's a great program. We continue to run it each and every day. We also manage a program called Fire Management Systems Grants. So it's a program that we have local government and state agencies call in when they have a major fire that such would constitute or warrant major emergency and they have to fill out a little bit of paperwork and it's very timely that it has to occur. We're able to get money for them through our federal partners and help offset local dollars as well as state dollars brings in 75% of the eligible cost back to us and local government in the state. So it's an important program that we manage each and every day. At OES we've got 114 Type I engines, 40 Type III which are our wildland engines, 12 water tenders, 12 HazMat units. Six communication support units. We have radio caches, portable repeaters, aluminum pipe. We also manage 8 of the 28 National Urban Search and Rescue teams in the country. We have 18 rescue trailer caches. One type III. We have 13 [INAUDIBLE] water caches. And four trailer mounted 1,500 GPM pumps that are used on different types of emergency. What some of those water tenders look like, and they can also not only be used for firefighting, but potable water in an emergency. And we actually had one of them that was rolled over on the way to one of the emergencies in Santa Barbara this year actually, we had a Ventura County staff, a water tender and they had a fatality on board. We're working through the replacement of that current water tender today. Some of our wildland rigs out there. We have a joint venture program that we contract with the CAL FIRE and us with a vendor that we purchased these back and forth each and every day. There local government folks also piggyback off that contract. Some of our communication assets that are available to use. This is some shots involve our special operations for the most notable, for you maybe be the bottom left there's actually truck into the capital during a special section dealing with car issues back in its day here out there as well. So Senate Bill 2064 created the Urban Search and Rescue Act that we manage each and every day. These are the primary sponsoring eight teams that we have in the state that are local, state, and federal asset as necessary. We move those up and down the state as necessary, or send them nationally if needed as well. In fact, LA county serves that and responds internationally on request as well with our federal partners. Some of our rescue trailers and some of the equipment on board. This is actually a use of the California National Guard helicopters, our swift water, and just as a side note, Urban Search and Rescue program not only in this state, but the nation was actually started by Director Galladucci in his younger days. It actually became the model for the rest of the nation, just as an example. So for our Swiftwater equipment that was upgraded in '07 and '08 utilizing federal dollars. One of our new hazmat rigs, it's going into service. Probably a good example of an incident, why we do fires and a lot of things very well, wild land and other issues probably our biggest fear in this state is by earthquake. And I often wonder myself, and you should wonder the same, is that if you look at San Bruno, and this is one explosion, I wonder what 50 of those would look like up and down the coast at any given time. It took this many resources to support it out there, and also started the line land fire, and a lot of resources working back and forth. But these are my resources I want you to notice at the top right there, that's actually law enforcement asset there. Went in and searched the buildings looking for folks that were lost or could not be identified. And they search, they locate a scent of a body. Then the firefighters come in and dig through the rubble to recover the remains. I'll leave you with an important thing. It's all about communication, coordination and collaboration at the local, state and federal level as well as the folks in this building. The most important things about a relationship. That logo actually comes from 1950 and is as valid today as it was in 1950 when they made that particular logo. I'll close with, Thanking you for the time today, as well as thanking you for your support and the different funding requests that come in and out of this Establishment and we couldn't do it without your support and without the support of locals each and every day.
[{'start': 80, 'end': 91, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 5043, 'end': 5049, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7311, 'end': 7317, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 11961, 'end': 11980, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Eric Lamoureux: Thank you, Chairman and Members, pleasure to be here today. My name is Eric Lamoureux. I'm CalOES's Inland Region Administrator. Happy to be here today to talk to you in a little greater detail, expound on some of the points the director made regarding our regional response operations. Here representing my colleagues who have responsibility for our coastal regional operations and our southern regional operations. Jody, Travis, Harold, and Mona, Bounty respectively. As you heard eloquently from Chief, we have very robust operations to support our fire and rescue disciplines and a huge volume of resources available there. What we have in any type of event is extraordinary consequence management outside of those fire and law disciplines that's required. Everything from helping support our counties and other entities with shelter operations, utility issues, a multitude of resource requests that are needed during an incident that we need to deploy from state or other entities. Huge donation management challenges, communication challenges that we face, and all our regional response teams during disaster operations are responsible for supporting and helping locals manage all of those requests. As was indicated earlier, we have three administrative regions, our Inland region and White, which I have responsibility for, our coastal region, which is from Monterey in the south to the California Oregon border, essentially all the counties that touch either the ocean or the San Fransisco Bay Area, with the exception of San Bonito County and Lake County. And Sheriff Martin is with us today and then our southern region, which is from San Luis Obispo, down into Southern California and then up the 395 corridor along the eastern Sierras. So huge territory to cover, but our regional response staff are really focused on engagement and relationships. You've heard a lot about relationships today and our ability to develop relationships with our local emergency managers represented with me today by Chief Skiles from Stanislaus and Sheriff Martin from Lake County. Our ability to develop relationships with these individuals and their teams is key to ensuring that we don't have anybody failing. That's our mission always in Blue Sky and in disaster responses to ensure that local government does not fail. Our regional response operations are really the tip of the spear. We've got regional emergency services coordinators who have assignments. Some, especially in our southern region, have one county that they are responsible for supporting. In some of our more rural parts of the state, we've got staff that have sometimes two, three. Usually, no more than four counties that they are responsible for supporting. The regional staff assigned to those counties have permanent responsibility to engage with their local counterparts on preparedness activities, being at the table for local disaster council meetings, helping local officials with their planning processes, with their hazard mitigation plan developments, engaging and getting to the table subject matter experts from in Cal OES, Deputy Director Curry's staff. Folks from our response and recovery directorates, is pulling in subject matter experts knowing who they are, knowing who needs to be at the table and helping facilitate. Having the right people there during preparedness. On the response side, our focus is to be very forward leaning. As the director, it makes very clear to us as we go into any event, especially these recent storms where we have the opportunity to see the event unfolding before us, and it wasn't a no notice event. We are leaning forward, we are forward deploying staff. We are not waiting to be requested by local governments, but at the job of our local emergency services coordinators is to understand the capabilities of each and every one of the counties. To understand, is this a county that's robust in capability? Has significant experience? Or are they going to require additional support? And it's not incumbent upon the county to understand that and ask for the right things. But it's incumbent upon us to understand what their strengths and weaknesses are and help them in some cases know what they don't know. In some cases we've got jurisdictions who have never been through a major incident and so they don't know what's next. They don't know what's coming to them next, when we talk about consequence management. Sometimes don't have an appreciation for the magnitude of support staff that they're going to need to support their emergency operation center. So it's our job ahead of the event to understand that, and then begin to be either prepared or forward deploying our staff to support those operations, and then as we go through the response, it's our regional response staff that have responsibility for beginning that recovery process. We have a robust disaster recovery team, but it's our regional response staff that begin that process, that begin to set expectations with local officials to begin to help folks understand what is going to be required from damage estimates, to how they might start to consider how they're going to handle debris operations following a major wild land fire or flood event. So engagement is key. Engagement of our OAs, our emergency services coordinators, as I said, to their OAs to assess capability, and to again ensure that nobody fails, we don't want to have that situation. Failure of our local government is a direct reflection upon us at the state level. So as I'm sure the members are familiar, generally speaking with how CalOES supports communities for earthquakes, fires and floods, I wanted to share an example of something we've been dealing with for several years in our response to the drought, which was something that we'd experienced in the state previously. We had plans and procedures to address it, but we, in some cases in some areas, the magnitude of the impact was something that we weren't prepared for in as much as anticipating the impact, but fortunately through our state emergency plan being an all hazards plan. We had the systems in place to begin to deal with these impacts we were faced with. At its peak in California, we had over 2,000 home sites where wells ran dry, we had a number of very large reservoirs that ran dry. In the northern part of the state, we had an entire community of Montague that was on the verge of running out of water because of the reservoir they relied on had gone dry and the mechanism to get water to that community was a gold rush era mechanism. We were losing a considerable amount of water. We needed to bring together state, local, federal, tribal partners to try to figure out how can we resolve this issue. How can we either drill new wells, how can we establish a new conveyance system. So that as this reservoir was going down through the drought, we could maximize the amount of water that was still available and getting it to that community. So a considerable effort was required In Montague, similar effort in the Ukiah area. In Tulare County, the community of East Porterville we are still to this day managing a multi-agency state local federal operation to get water to individuals who have been impacted severely by these drought conditions, and so, the drought was a very unique experience. We now know that what we experienced we anticipate is a new normal. The extreme drought is going to be something exponentially greater, we believe than what we have dealt with these last several years, but because of the plans and procedures that are in place to help us address the traditional consequences, the traditional incidents, earthquakes, fires, floods, we were able to successfully bring to bear the state and federal resources that communities needed. During those most extreme situations. We're fortunate that we've got about 40% of the state now that's out of drought, but we still, especially in Chairman Gray's district, and throughout the Central and San Joaquin Valley have considerable risk that we're still facing. We've received a lot of rainfall, but not to the magnitude we want. Our southern region is invested in a considerable effort to look at the water situation for the community of Santa Barbara where Lake Cucuta that they rely on is nearly dry, and much of the rain that they've received lately, the ground is like a sponge and everything has been saturated and they're not getting the benefit of storage that they would like. So our regional response operations are a critical part of our emergency plan, our process, and I'm happy to address any questions you may have. Thank you.
[{'start': 71, 'end': 85, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 417, 'end': 421, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 423, 'end': 429, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 431, 'end': 437, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 443, 'end': 447, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1578, 'end': 1584, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2051, 'end': 2057, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7957, 'end': 7961, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dale Skiles: Good afternoon, Chairman Gray, Members of the Assembly. It's a pleasure to be here. Dale Skiles with Stanislaus County and I get the honor and the privilege to serve as the Stanislaus County fire warden. Also, the Office of Emergency Services, and that has been a great pleasure. I've been in the fire service for over 30 years and for the last 15 years as well I also served as the fire chief for Salida Fire Protection. So my representation here and before you, I'll be speaking from a very local level, both the county level as well as representing special district, but as well within and throughout the county, one of my roles is to liaison with 18 fire agencies, not counting some of the state agencies that are also serving the state responsibility are here within Stanislaus County. And so, that becomes a huge task. I'm oftentimes asked by our border supervisors as well as our chief Executive Officer to say can you provide us with the State of the fire service? And I will tell you that the State of the fire service within Stanislaus County, one of the things that we watch and that we continue to be somewhat concerned about, is sustainability. Sustainability continues to be one of those things that seems in all of my conversations with those officials, that it rises to the top. I will also tell you that I have had the privilege for a number of years to serve as the operational area, or synonymous for county coordinator area, fire and rescue mutual aid coordinator, as well as the emergency services coordinator. And that has just been a great opportunity to kind of see from a broader spectrum within our county, some of the things that we face both good and challenging and then, recently and in 2017, I will serve as the region four coordinator for fire and rescue mutual aid. All that to say that as I see these, there's some very similar issues that we all face. Again, both positive and some challenging issues. One of the things that in the fire service throughout California that we've embarked on, I believe it was in the mid 2000s, is certification and qualification of training of our firefighters. That has been very important to train to a specific standard. Yet, any time that you train to a specific standard, then also there becomes a challenge about funding, about time, and about additional things that are added onto that. So it's great and I recall that there have been times when I have been on fire engines and responded to specific incidents, whether in county or throughout the State of California where we haven't necessarily been as incompatible. Maybe it's equipment, maybe it's training level and or our communications level. They're been huge successes and efforts underway, over the last, I'll say decade, in this area, and I would attribute a lot of that to as Chief Surgeris referred to as FIRESCOPE. That was the acronym that we used for FIrefighting Resources of California Organized for Potential Emergencies and in that, we have a standard. I have an opportunity to serve on that operations community for FIRESCOPE and something that we oftentimes discuss, is what is our mission? What is our core value? And it's very simple in FIRESCOPE, it's one voice, one direction. And I see that locally within Stanislaus County, as well as within California, specifically for the fire service, and I bring that to your attention to say how important that is, our local relationship with Cal OES, I appreciate Chief Surgeris and his staff, work with them quite often. I mentioned also and talked about the certification and the qualification process, that is led by Cal OES, but they take a lot of input from us as local individuals to find out what would work and what wouldn't. Obviously to put something in place that does not work is ineffective and so we appreciate that coordination and that collaboration that was discussed, but I will say that for coordination and collaboration what makes it successful is a commitment to partnership. A commitment to partnership is extremely important. We know, and it's been said from this dais this morning, or this afternoon, that all emergencies start local and, as well, they end local and so, there's a whole lot that goes in between in the hyphen between the start and the finish date. They start local and they end local. So it's very important, training, certification, qualification, and then, on the emergency management side, also planning and preparedness. Those are extremely important for us. I'd like to touch on just a couple of things that have already been referred to, but just a little bit more from a local perspective. That acronym that we call UTF, unable to fill. Locally, when we get two to three working, those who are active, engaging in firefighting on a structure fire, we often times have a number of agencies that are called in to assist in a mutual aid platform to suppress that fire, in doing so that is very important to us that we have that collaboration, but there are often times and we're seeing it more and more. Not only in our operational level, but also at the regional level when agencies are saying we are unable to fill, and oftentimes it's not from a basis, or it's not often times from an equipment standpoint. It's the personnel. The personnel it takes to fill those fire engines. And so, that enable to fill those orders that come down, every fire chief has a responsibility to maintain and support services within, at a particular level, within their own Agency in their own jurisdiction, and we asked them, we asked them to voluntarily to send their personnel and send their resources to assist their neighbor, and if they have them, I will say in county, very grateful to work in a very robust system where closest resource goes and it's just a great pattern, but that we had also applied that within our region four operations and then through Cal OES. That's encouraged throughout the state. So just a great platform out there. One of the things that has changed over the years and through my 30 plus years in the fire service is we used to train fire service only and then it advanced into EMS. Now we're all hazards, all hazards is a big term that is utilized out there, and I'll be honest, I don't know that we have our hands are completely around all of that, but we do every thing that is possible within our means to train our people for all hazards. I'm interested to hear more about our cyber terrorism and some of those efforts that are under way and being led by the state because we have a lot to learn and engage with at the local level. From the emergency management side, if I may jump off of fire and just with my partner here as Eric was talking about, Chairman you had asked a question, or somebody had asked a question about the sate plan, emergency plan, and how that is embedded within a local resource. For us, we just did, within the last 12 to 14 months, we did an adoption of an emergency operations plan and in us revising our emergency operations plan for Stanislaus County, we utilized the state plan as our template and so we want to marry a lot of what we do and so there is great value in the part that OES puts in making sure that those documents are all hazard. Making sure that they meet the needs of our people and we can maintain the motto that's found within the emergency plan. And it says the concept presented in this plan referring to the California emergency plan emphasizes mitigation programs to reduce the vulnerabilities to disaster and preparedness activities to ensure the capabilities and resources are available for an effective response. That absolutely starts in planning and preparedness, whether it's fire service, my partner in law enforcement or emergency management. We believe planning and preparedness is extremely important. Appreciate that statement within the plan because I think it talks, not only about a collaborative and a coordinated effort, but it refers right down to when you talk about, or when it says, the capabilities and resources that are available, thats at the local level, that's where I get an opportunity to play. A few things that we work within as the California State Fire and Rescue Mutual Aid plan. That is a very robust document. It has been in place, it's reviewed regularly. It has been in place for quite some time and we work throughout from San Diego all the way up to Modoc County, we work under the same plan and as I stated earlier, that is not always been the case, but since we work on standardization. As we talk about one voice, one direction. Those plans become very important for our operations and to be able to review those plans, and have input on those plans is extremely important at the local level because again, it's a partnership. The state doesn't provide all of it, nor does the local resources provide all of it. I'd like to, maybe just touch really quickly on reimbursement and there has been a lot of effort, yet there are continued challenges with reimbursement back at the local level, when they leave their jurisdiction, and go out. There is a term that we refer to as day to day mutual aid. That's what we do on a regular basis and that normally is, we send that mutual aid or that mutual aid is sent out and there is no reimbursement for it, but on the larger complex incidents, there often times is reimbursement. That is extremely important and that has been and continues to be a federal, a state, and a local government partnership in several of the agreements that are out there, we're grateful for that. I will tell you that today when I call a fire chief to say, do you have a fire engine to respond to a particular incident? No matter where it is in the state, it used to be, we'll get on that engine and we'll go and we'll talk reimbursement later. Today one of their first questions is, how are we being reimbursed. How are we being reimbursed? And that isn't to say that they won't go, their interest is to say, at what level will they go and can they even go. What are those minimum standards? Can they bring people back to maintain those levels locally? Furthermore, I want to talk about the interoperability of communications. We've gone a long ways in that. This is something that's extremely important. Not only for the services that we deliver to the public, but also for our firefighters. Communication and that interoperability, to have that and to be able to talk and discuss effectively is extremely important and we always encourage face to face. You are probably aware, and we talk quite regularly, about incident action plans, and the incident command system, and those are all avenues and means of communication. One in specific though, in regards to communication, is our infrastructure, our statewide infrastructure and also our local infrastructure. We locally in Stanislaus County, in fact I was part of a budget discussion yesterday about the infrastructure within Stanislaus County. There are some growing concerns at the law enforcement side as well as fire side about that. The technology is changing so fast, how do you keep up with that? How do you maintain that communication infrastructure out there for it to be effective? And then in closing I'd just like to say, but we are looking and we continue within Stanislaus County, as well as within the region to be huge supporters of technology. How do we track, how do we manage, better manage and better track those fire engines that are sent all up and down the state. You can only imagine 500 fire engines and fire resources being mobilized over a period of 24, 36, 48 hours and how we manage those and how we track those. So I think the utilization of technology would be the continued research on that, would just be phenomenal going forward. Again, the partnerships that we at the local level, appreciate with Cal OES is is just phenomenal at this time. I appreciate the leadership there very, very much and we'd be open for any questions that you might have.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 29, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 84, 'end': 95, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2817, 'end': 2825, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3433, 'end': 3440, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3461, 'end': 3469, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3611, 'end': 3618, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6688, 'end': 6692, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brian Martin: Good afternoon Chairman Gray, thank you for allowing us to come provide testimony. I also have to say hello to my own representative, Assembly Person Maggie Arcurry. It's a privilege to be here. My name is Brian Martin, I'm the Sheriff, Coroner and the Emergency Services Director for Lake County. I feel a little bit fortunate in going seventh in the lineup because a lot of what I was going to discuss has already been presented by the other people who have spoken before me and in deciding how to present my testimony I was trying to figure out what format would be best and I think it would be best to talk as essentially a customer of emergency services from the state having had a little bit of experience in my first year in office as sheriff. Lake County is very similar to many other counties throughout the state. We are a rural area. We have a lot of mountainous terrain, which provides geographical challenges as far as communications. Our county happens to be one of the most economically disadvantaged counties in the state and as Eric said, there are some counties out there that just don't even know what their capabilities are or what kind of help that they're going to need in the event of a disaster and I found myself in that category in 2015 when Lake County was besieged by some very serious fires. The most notorious fire was of course, the valley fire which started in September of 2015, but a lot of people forget that we were dealing with two other fires that were just very devastating before that. And I thought once those two fires were done, I was done for the year, but on September 12th of 2015, the valley fire started and that ended up being, at the time, the third most devastating wildfire in California's history. It burned over 70,000 acres, destroyed more than 2,000 homes. There were four lives that were confirmed lost and there is one person who still has not been accounted for to this day, and I fear that he never will be. To put 70,000 acres into perspective, it's about 110 square miles, which is about the geographic footprint size of the City of Sacramento. On a typical day in Lake County, we have anywhere from four to six deputy sheriffs patrolling that large area. Certainly if you had only four or six police officers in the city of Sacramento, it would be inadequate, but that is the reality of the situation in a lot of small rural counties in California. We are often times strapped for resources and when emergencies hit, we rely more than we know on the willingness and the ability of the state to respond. Having had the opportunity to go seventh, I've had the opportunity to listen to everybody speak before me and usually, I'll pick something out and I'll say, I don't necessarily agree with this. I wholeheartedly agree with everything, all the testimony that's been presented to this Committee up to this point. Most notably, the statement by Chief Pazen that the system works and I'll tell you a couple of antidotes from our response during the valley fire of how the situation worked. We had law enforcement come from across the state to help us provide security and patrols in our area. When this fire kicked off, there was a large group of people that were more than willing to go into evacuated areas and commit crimes and burglarize and loot areas where the fire hadn't actually damage the homes, but they knew everybody was out of there. Our small law enforcement response within the county was inadequate to handle that. We were able to reach out through the mutual aid system and request law enforcement assistance. We were able to reach out and request fire mutual aid assistance to come help us battle that fire. At the same time that the valley fire started, a lot of our state fire resources were allocated to the butte fire further south in the state. And I know it was very challenging and taxing on all the resources throughout the state, but I don't think anybody can say, none of our needs went unmet. We had the unique situation of becoming what I believe is the first dispatch mutual aid activation in the state. State dispatch centers throughout the state whether they're county, city run, privately run, I'll have a different records management systems, computerated dispatching systems, some of them use the same systems. We were able to reach out through Cal OES and find which agencies use the same records management system, computerated dispatching system that we did and request help, so that we had dispatchers that were able to arrive on scene. And immediately knew how to operate that system and start providing assistance to our overworked and tax dispatchers after they've been on duty for several days. We're able to reach out for cell connectivity issues with some of our private partners with AT&T and Verizon. This fire burned so quickly that it destroyed several cell towers. It burned down phone lines. We have a mass notification system that we use that use the existing phone lines to alert people that there was a fire coming. For some of those people, the alert didn't come until it was too late. We even had our records indicate that some of the phone lines were burned down. And once the phone lines went back in the calls that where in the queue started to go through and people that have been return to their homes found messages on their machines or actually answer the phone advising them the fire, but the fire burns so quickly that those messages were not able to be delivered in time. The situation in Lake County at that particular time are for various reasons, the Office of Emergency Services had been take away from the sheriff's department and placed under the county administrative office, and what we found that it's important to have somebody in that position as Emergency Service Director that has the authority and the ability to make quick decisions not to have to consult with board members necessarily. Obviously, we'll have to answer for decisions that we make, but there are times where decisions need to be made quickly and decisively and taken to consideration things that are happening right now instead of waiting to build a consensus. That ability was served us very well. As you all know, Lake County is a very agricultural community and the valley fire happened right around when the wine harvest was in process. Several of our wineries were in the evacuated area and to have the ability for a vineyard owner to be able to call up and say, hey, this is my problem. I need to get in there and explain that if we don't get in there and harvest our grapes, we're looking at losing millions and millions and millions of dollars to our local economy. And to be able to have a person in a position where they can make that call right away and say, yeah, we can open it up for those limited purposes in order to minimize the damage to our economy. That's a very important thing. I'd like to close in saying that again, I feel fortunate to go seventh, because the testimony that you've received here as a customer of the system, I like to consider myself, I wholeheartedly agree with everything that I've heard here. The statement that the system works, it did work. It worked for us, it continues to work. We continue to receive assistance and support from our state and local, our state and federal partners both in Cal OES and in the legislature as we continue to recover from the valley fire, as we continue our way through the current existing flood emergency that's plaguing us now. Thank you for the opportunity.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 28, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 150, 'end': 164, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 206, 'end': 218, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1045, 'end': 1049, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2913, 'end': 2918, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Denise Everhart: Thank you. Mr. Chair and Members of the Committee, my name is Denise Everhart and I'm the Division Disaster Executive for the Pacific division of the Red Cross. I want to start out by just quickly going over our mission statement, I always like to start out there. The American Red Cross, prevents and alleviates human suffering in the face of emergencies through the power of volunteers, and the generosity of our donors. Through our strong network of volunteers, donors, and partners we are always there in time of need. We want to make sure that people have care, shelter, and hope, and that they are ready and prepared for disasters. So whether it's a blanket for somebody who's effected by a fire, coffee for a first responder, or bringing by food for people who are digging out their homes burned by a wildland fire, the American Red Cross is there. So, I'm in charge of disaster cycle services. Disaster cycle services means prepare, respond, recover, much in line with the previous testimony. We're an active partner in preparedness. We work on all levels, from individuals to families, to our local emergency managers, to the state. We work as technical experts for some of these bigger plans that they've talked about previously, like the Bay Area catastrophic plan. We serve as the technical experts that can look at maybe some different ways to shelter. If we do have a big earthquake, and the shelters aren't usable, we have some advise for some other ways that we can respond to these disasters. So, we're an intricate part of that planning process. We're also a convener. We work with other voluntary agencies and make sure that their perspectives are brought to the table, as well as local communities and private businesses. And we work on all levels of exercises with our partners, to prepare and to see if our plans are executable before a disaster. We have a long standing MOU that is unfunded with the California Department of Social Services and as part of that MOU we do do that planning and that joint response. We also have an MOU with the Cal OES, partnering with DSS as the operational arm and co-lead for emergency support function six, which is the mass care. We're the subject matter expert, we provide and facilitate sheltering, feeding, reunification services, emergency supplies, disaster and mental health, and health services for all Californians affected by disasters and we also work very closely to make sure that all of those services are accessible to all. We respond with CDSS and Cal OES to staff the state emergency operation center, as well as the local emergency operation centers. We're also an active partner in recovery. We work with those voluntary organizations active in disasters, to come up with innovative recovery solutions. We assist families with paving the way forward to build personal resiliency, and we maintain networks that can help all of the organizations come together to find those unmet needs and fill those to help people with their recovery. We have been part of the state emergency plan, we did comment on the state emergency plan and, like I said, we are co-leads for ESF6, so we are an important part of this plan. Thank you.
[{'start': 62, 'end': 77, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Costa: Thank you, good morning Mr. Chair and members. Thank you for having me here today. My name is Amy Costa. I serve as the Chief Deputy Director for Budget for the Department of Finance. I have provided the Committee Members with several slides that I thought could guide my presentation. And for your reference I'll go through those briefly. Highlighting a couple things of significance within the governor's proposed budget, and then of course be open and available for questions. As you can see on the second slide, the tide of revenues is beginning to turn. In the best of years our budget is often precariously balanced. I'd note that we consider this a rather modest adjustment compared to the 2016 budget act. It's 1.6% lower over three years. However revenues across our major revenue sources personal income tax, sales, and use tax, and corporate tax are lower than our projections. This slower revenue growth is totally $5.8 billion across three years. And we also are experiencing a current year shortfall in the medical program of $1.8 billion. Both of these factors are contributing to a $1.6 billion deficit. I would like to take a moment to just talk a little bit in more detail about the current year deficit in the medical program. The two components of this increased cost include a payment of a federal drug rebate, which we had actually previously budgeted for in 2015-16, but the payment actually went out in the current year. And so that accounts for add that number, which is at 487.3 million. And that is one time in nature. Less satisfying in our current year figure is a calculation error of $ 1.5 billion within the Coordinated Care initiative. This error is unfortunate, and we have taken steps in concert with the Department of Health Care Services to ensure similar errors do not occur in the future. Moving on to the third side, you'll see a side that we've used numerous times, and it reflects capital gains revenues over time. We've shown this graph in the past to just illustrate the high volatility of this particular revenue source. Through 2017 we are still forecasting at historic levels on capital gains, but it is extremely volatile. Our budget was helped by the recent passage of several ballot initiatives. Prop 52, the hospital fee provided $211 million. Prop 56, the tobacco initiative, provided 1.2 billion, and Prop 57 provided 22 $1 million in savings. We've also mitigated our projected deficit by a statute requires determining that the coordinated care initiative is not providing savings. The elimination of CCI provides the State a net benefit of $626 million. We do propose continuing the Cal MediConnect pilot program, which is authorized by a federal government pilot, and which we project has a savings of $20 million. Moving on to the fourth slide that you'll see that even in light on some of these lower than projected revenues, we have proposed maintaining some of our core achievements. One of which is the Earned Income Tax Credit was, Mr. Chair you raised in your opening comments. As well as the maximum family grant, the continued expansion of the Affordable Care Act, the SSI/SSP COLA and continued increased funding for higher education, and K-12 education. We also continue our work on infrastructure and combating climate change. Additionally, we grow the Budget Stabilization Act by $1.2 billion for a cumulative total of $7.9 billion, which is 63% of our constitutional target. I'm going to take a minute to go through the $3.2 billion in solutions that the proposed budget offers. In light of the projected deficit, and seeking to maintain and preserve some of our core achievements, we offer $3.2 billion in solutions to bring the budget back into balance. And to continue to build our Reserve. As we sought solutions to address the projected deficit, we sought to push back on a variety of one time spending previously proposed and temper some future anticipated spending increases. If you look at slide five, you can see that we propose adjusting the Proposition 98 minimum guarantee based upon our new revenue numbers for a savings of 1.7 billion for 2015-16 and 2016-17. We also propose recapturing some 2016 allocations for a total of 900 million. Some of the bigger items within that include reverting the $400 million we had set aside for affordable housing, canceling the $300 million transfer scheduled for state buildings. These also include the community infrastructure grants at 67 million, children's mental health crisis service grants at 17 million, residency slots for primary physicians at 33.4 million. And disability applications for 45 million. Another component of our solutions are to constrain spending growth. The administrations budget proposes pausing planned childcare rate increases. We would maintain the increased reimbursement rates for childcare providers at the 2016-17 level. But we would pause the 2017-18 scheduled increase. And we would forego the 17-18 childcare provider COLA. We'd also pause the addition of 2,959 state preschool slots that were planned for April 1st of 2018. We propose also, not providing any new middle class scholarships. We would only renew the 37,000 current middle class scholarships. And we would continue the funding for those students that are already within the program. We also are not submitting a variety of justified department spending proposals, and converting some of our capital outlay projects to lease revenue. On slide six, there's a little bit more detail offered on the adjustments within the Prop 98 guarantee. You can see that we're proposing a $434 million reduction in the 15-16 guarantee. A $506 million reduction in 16-17. And I'd note that even with these adjustments within the guarantee, Prop 98 growth is still $2.1 billion above the revised 2016 guarantee to the projected 17-18 guarantee. Per pupil spending will be at $15,216 total funds. And our Proposition 98 proposal includes $287 million for one-time discretionary funding as well as $200 million for the final installment of the CTE Incentive Grant funding. We do propose a shift of $859.1 million in local controlled funding formula expenditures from June 2017 to July 2017. To maintain our 2016-17 expenditures within our new proposed 16-17 Prop 98 guarantee. We will create a deferral but we'll pay off the deferral almost immediately. Within the community colleges, we have several significant adjustments. Apportionments are relatively flat year over year based on several different calculations. We do provide a proposal of $150 million in one time funding for guided pathways at the community colleges. Which we view as building upon some of our previous work on student success. And allowing grants to go out to local community colleges to ensure students are able to complete their certificates and their degrees in a timely manner. We also propose an increase of $43.7 million in one time Prop 98 for deferred maintenance and instructional materials at the community colleges. Within higher ed, we do propose some increases since 2012 and 2013, the California State University system have received $ 1.1 billion in new funding. We proposed a total increase of $161.2 million for the California State University system. And of that, $131.2 million is part of the 4% increase that we're offering. $26 million is for the final installment of funds realized through savings in the middle class scholarship fund that were effectuated last year. And there's $5 million at the final installment of the cap outlay shift for the CSU. UC likewise has received $818 million in new funding since 2012- 13. The significant adjustments that we propose in the Governor's Budget include an increase of $131.2 million as part of their 4%. As well as $169 million in Prop 2 funds as part of the final installment of payment towards the UC Retirement Plan unfunded liability. We also have continued our work on combating climate change. You have before you in the Governor's Budget proposal, $2.2 billion proposal for cap and trade based upon a two-thirds vote urgency measure passing. We also put forward another drought program for $179 million. We also offer transportation package. It is similar to previous transportation packages that we have presented beginning in 2015. I would note that there are several changes in this proposal versus past transportation proposals. And that does include stabilizing the gasoline excise tax up to $0.215, the historic average versus previously reared around $0.18. And additionally, we are proposing a different expenditure in active transportation that was not included in previous transportation packages. Lastly the Governor's Budget continues many of the important strides we have made in counteracting poverty. The Affordable Care Act, our budget proposes $18.9 billion, of which 1.6 billion is general fund. To continue the optional Medi-Cal expansion, which provides health coverage to 400.1 million low income Californians. The budget also provides full year funding for the full scope Medi-Cal coverage for undocumented children for a cost of $179.5 million general fund. I'll close with our last slide, which we have also presented frequently in the past. And it shows historically that balanced budgets have been quickly followed by huge deficits. This fact added with a high degree of uncertainty in our budget time frame requires a prudent approach and a robust reserve. Unlike past budget deficits, the rainy day fund does allow us to mitigate what we considered the next inevitable recession. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 94, 'end': 103, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Adam Dorsey: adam jonah dorsey, department of finance. first, i should just sort of caveat my remarks with the fact that in the mid-2000s as a budget solution, the state put the medi-cal program on a cash budget which is unusual for state budgets. it was a one time solution at that time to help close a budget gap, but what that's done is that it's made medi-cal expenditures very volatile. in terms of predicting where we are going to land at the end of the year in terms of the appropriation level in hiding that year by the end of the fiscal year. and so that is sort of an inherent challenge in estimating expenditure, particularly for such a large program and the program has been growing very, very quickly. having said that with the respect to the error. there were actually two errors that made up the coordinated care initiative problem. those were really the result of an extraordinarily complex model that was used to develop the estimate for this very large piece of the medi-cal program. we were finishing the transition of these beneficiaries into this program and that added complexities to the model. and i think that one of the big lessons learned from this going forward is that. the complexity that you add to some of these models for an incremental benefit in accuracy of that model may not always be worth it. because sometimes that complexity introduces an opportunity to make mistakes. and unfortunately that was what happened in this case and we take full responsibility for that and it was unfortunate. and so going forward, i think one of the lessons learned is that simplicity in some of the estimates, to the extent that it's possible to get an accurate estimate. and that's one of the primary lessons. and we're also trying to extend the time of review for local assistance issues as well.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jacob Abhorr: Jacob Abhorr with the Department of Finance. With the change to the program and the budget, is not a change to the way the program operates. It does shift back to counties, their original share of costs that they had for quite some time before the maintenance of effort was put into place. The counties do have a dedicated revenue source to fund several entitlement programs including IHHS. That's not to say that this isn't a pretty significant shift to the counties. And the administration is prepared to work with them to see where we might be able to find some way to mitigate some of this. But historically, they have had a share of the cost. And what this budget does is beginning in 17-18 and shift that share back to the counties.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Tollefson: Mark Tollefson with the Department of Finance. So the budget did include an additional $2 million for outreach. We are still evaluating the results of that as most of the filings would come in during this period of time. I will note that last year we did see about 75,000 first time filers, which is great, come into the program. We're hoping to increase that number, but we are still evaluating the efforts that are underway.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lisa Marzinsky: Lisa Marzinsky with the Department of Finance. So yes, you'll be lowering the guarantee in 16, 17 by about 800 million and that would go forward. But we're bringing it back down to the minimum required per Prop 98.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carla Castaneda: carla adam castaneda department of finance, are you asking about the deposit for 16-17?
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Halterman: mary carla halterman, department of finance. so i believe the amount that you're citing would be the direct state subsidy provided to build a housing unit. the amount that we included in our budget writeup, the 332,000, is the total cost of developement including all funding sources.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Clint Kellum: Clint Kellum, Department of Finance. One thing to point out is that the initial shift, is just a shift in oversight. The staff at the facilities will be the same staff that are there now. We don't envision impacting the folks that are working with these patients, so it's really a shift in oversight and the Department of Corrections currently operates, or oversees 500 in patient mental health treatment beds. So they're already versed in kind of doing this type of program and this actual level of care. They're operating about 85 of these beds in the system now. So this wouldn't be completely unique, they have some experience doing it. And there still would be a relationship with the Department of State Hospitals, for their lower custody inmates. So for the actual people providing the care, we don't imagine a lot changing initially. It's sort of having the efficiency and structure of this one department overseeing it and hopefully reviewing moving patients more quickly because of that.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jim Nielsen: mr. president, ladies and gentlemen of the senate, i have two today, if i may. one is for the father of one of our sterling gold members of the nielsen staff family, mccornning. claude crowe, a very unusual life circumstance for this man. he spent a lot of his young years on the family farm in iowa. but most interesting, his father was a civil engineer. he spent a lot of his career on the guantanamo bay base in cuba. and claude was pretty much raised there. in 1962, during the missile crisis, his brother and sister and mother and he had to leave. while his father remained there working on the base. those surely must have been trying times. he had the distinction of being the first eagle scout on that base at guantanamo bay. and also, he was given the latter-day saints duty to god award, the first so awarded from that base. he was active in the church throughout his life, as an elder and a mentor. he served five years in the marines after he completed his high school education. and then he went on to work with the schools and in the woodworking industry through his life. he met and married his wife sandra, of some 62 years. and they raised three sons. one is my jerry, who has worked for me now for about six years. jeff and sam, he was a scout master, and i believe every one of his children followed his pathway as eagle scouts. he was a mentor in the young men's portion of the lds church. he leaves a sister and a brother, virgil, and five loving grandchildren. a man roundly respected in his community. and he was always proud that he had had that experience at guantanamo bay. he didn't talk about it an awful lot, but i think often about what it must have been like for him in those years. and when he and his brothers, sisters, and his mother got on a boat and departed in 1962. i ask that we honor claude crowe as we adjourn. also, a great inspiration in my life, don barry. don was my high school geometry teacher. he probably wasn't as successful as a geometry teacher with me, that was my fault. but he was very successful as a mentor throughout my life, was my track coach and friend. don came from tulare high school in the central valley. the high school that gave us two great olympians, bob mathias and sim iness. the decathlon champion, mathias, and iness, a champion discus thrower. one of my other nielsen staff family, doctor john peterson went to school with him. and they were both in championship band at tulare high school. don's first teaching experience was at sanger high school, and he became the head track coach. and i enjoyed competing on, i think, three championship track teams coached by don berry. he was an inspiring coach and we had good teams. we had a very unique stadium that he'd helped craft. it was not a football stadium with the track around it, it was a football stadium with an adjacent track to it. and he began what was called the sanger invitational track meet, which became an olympic caliber meet, not just a high school championship meet, an invitational. but we had olympic champions compete on that track and olympic records. and one of my greatest memories in the 1960s, there was a olympic games here, winter games, at squaw valley. and through don's connections with matthias and simunus, he made contact with walt disney. and was allowed access to the olympic flame. and the olympic flame was run from los angeles all the way up to squaw valley. and our little track team got to participate in several legs of that. and the torch was lit and it has remained led ever since at the sanger stadium. that became kind of one of the little mini legends along the pathway to the olympics at squaw valley. after a few years there at sanger, with championship teams and mentoring good geometry students. he was recruited to go down to half moon bay and become a cross country and track coach there, again, very successful. but then his pathway took a turn, from teaching to administrating and he became very good at administrating. he'd served in variously over the years of his career as principal, a vice principal. director of vocational education, supervisor of counseling of special education, of student activities. and as an athletic administrator. in 1969, he was the half moon bay rotary citizen of the year. quite kind of an unassuming man, he was a great athlete himself. recruited by the famous track coach at san jose state, bud winter. went on to many successful steps in his life path, but one who made a great difference in my life. and we remained in touch throughout our lives and i hosted he and dr. peterson one day here in the late 1980s. and it was delightful for they felt compelled, here in the capital, in the hallways, singing the tulare fight song. and i have in my office if you come there, my college shot put and discuss. and some pictures and plaques. but it's not for the trophies. there's a sign in front of it says heavy lifting. and that's the role that don berry played in my life. he taught me about heavy lifting. heavy lifting in that realm was the exercise and the weight lifting and conditioning to be a good athlete. but the lesson was not learned and the blessing was not for plaques and trophies. it was for what it gave me as a human being and as a man. learning how to deal with people. how to be competitive, how to be disciplined and how when times got tough, to push just a little bit harder. that was a gift of don berry to me. but i know that that gift went far beyond jim jonah nielsen. hundreds and hundreds of other people, this life's, he touched their lives, as well as he touched mine. i asked the senate to adjourn in his memory as well. god speed, god love, don berry. may we adjourn in his honor.
[{'start': 144, 'end': 151, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 166, 'end': 176, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 178, 'end': 190, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 425, 'end': 431, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1115, 'end': 1121, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1179, 'end': 1184, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1233, 'end': 1237, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1242, 'end': 1245, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1444, 'end': 1450, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1824, 'end': 1836, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1890, 'end': 1899, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1901, 'end': 1904, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2115, 'end': 2118, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2221, 'end': 2232, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2237, 'end': 2246, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2272, 'end': 2279, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2285, 'end': 2290, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2364, 'end': 2377, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2467, 'end': 2470, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2641, 'end': 2650, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3221, 'end': 3224, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3244, 'end': 3252, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3257, 'end': 3264, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3287, 'end': 3298, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4407, 'end': 4417, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4588, 'end': 4596, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4958, 'end': 4967, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5430, 'end': 5439, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5489, 'end': 5506, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 5686, 'end': 5695, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Danny Brown: sure. brown, calhr and, yeah, the administration just views sb 48 as companion to sb 28. and just it would bring new employees hired under seiu under the governor's health care provisions that i discussed earlier that would require a longer vesting schedule and reduce the employer contributions at retirement. and with that, i'd ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 13, 'end': 18, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Danny Brown: thank you dr. pan. good afternoon, chair and committee members. brown on behalf of calhr. without necessarily repeating dr pan's comments, i just want to emphasize that with the agreements that we reached last year, and with these agreements, we now have 100% of our rank and file employees agreeing to pre-fund opev. so that was a big win for the administration, the governor and what he was looking for when negotiations started. also, we have about 96% of all of our new employees will start having to work longer to vest for retiree and dental benefits. and also, once they do vest, they will also get about the same amount of money that they would get as an active employee. so the amount of employer contribution has reduced, so i just want to point those out.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 17, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 64, 'end': 69, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 123, 'end': 126, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Margarita Maldonado: yes thank you, thank you, appreciate that. i'm margarita jonah maldonado, vice president for bargaining within seiu 1000. and thank you dr. pan and the committee. and on behalf of the service employees international union local 1,000 and 97,000 of our members, we are proud to cosponsor the senate bill 28. which includes a tentative agreement through local 1,000 and the state, and it encompasses nine bargaining units. which, that covers about 40% of the state employees for the state of california. and we really provide a broad range of jobs and work for californians and also communities. we're it analysts, we're librarians, we're teachers, cooks, custodians, nurses, scientific technicians, and social services specialists. and those are just a few of the thousands of classifications that we actually represent. and with the people that we represent, we protect the environment, ensure our roads and bridges are safe. we provide quality medical care, and help ensure schools are funded. we oversee 108 community colleges that are educating our next generation of leaders. and after veterans have served our country, we are there to serve our veterans in the different veterans' homes. and so like all californians, we believe that all people who work hard for a living should be able to provide for their families. and so some of the things that you've heard all ready from the tentative agreement were not always easy, as we were having the conversations with our members. but i think we were able to see what the investment would look like. and therefore obviously we reached a tentative agreement. and i wanted to also say that this tentative agreement also reflects the voices of our members, and what kind of struggles they have. and i want to read a quote that we received from one of our members. this contract means i have food at the end of the month, and i can buy healthier food. i'm able to take the kids to the doctor, it restores my dignity in my profession, and makes me proud of what i do everyday. it means not having to say no to my family for the basic necessities, such as shoes and winter clothes. i think that is a very powerful representation of what it means to be able to have a contract that reflects the values of who we are. this contract also has a reduction of mandatory overtime, which we know has been a model the state has been using in order to staff the medical, certain medical positions. and so this will reduce it by one day a month, and eventually by 2019 will reduce all mandatory overtime. and that create through that there is a task force in place. to ensure that we can have these conversations. and then also the large liability around employee time banks. there is also a provision in there to help reduce that. we know that through workloads and through different staffing models. some employees hadn't been able to use their time, so now there is a provision that will now enable them to have that benefit. and along with the contribution to the post retirement health benefits. and as you consider and vote on sb 28, i want to make sure that you know it wasn't easy to get to this point, but we were able to get there. it was a long struggle. and we have this mutual agreement and we really believe that this is going to have a positive impact on the 90,000 plus members that we represent. our communities and our families, so thank you and we appreciate your support for sb 28.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 72, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 140, 'end': 143, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Coby Pizzotti: Good afternoon, Senators, Coby Pizzotti with California Association of Psychiatric Technicians, we're also co-sponsor of this bill. And we are also in this vehicle, so we do support.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Aaron Read: mr. chairman and members, aaron margarita read, representing cal fire local 2881 and we're co-sponsors as well. it was a difficult round of negotiation taking over a year to get there. our firefighters receive one-third less pay than local firefighters and work a one-third longer workweek. 72 hour workweek versus local's 56 hour workweek. so we made some progress, not nearly as much as we hoped for, but we support the bill.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Cremins: Mr. Chairman and members, Tim Cremins of National Union in full support. That your bargaining units 12 and 13 and that represents your blue collar in the state work force. It's Caltrans and maintenance workers at your stationary engineers that your blue collar here at action in the capital. Thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joshua Golka: Joshua Golka with the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, Bargaining Unit 19 here in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christy Bouma: mr. chair, members, bouma on behalf of the california professional firefighters, local 2881 is one of our large affiliates and we're pleased to be in support.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Young: Michael Young, On behalf of the California Labor Federation, also here in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gregory Tall: Hi Senator Mitchell, my name is Gregory Tall and I'm with the Department of Finance.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 19, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 32, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eric Stern: Eric Stern with the Department of Finance.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Margarita Maldonado: Good morning and I'm Margarita Maldonado. I'm the Vice President of Bargaining for SEIU 1,000, and on behalf of the Service Employees International Union, Local 1,000 and the 96,000 members that we represent, we are proud to cosponsor SB 28 and we would appreciate on your support in passing this and moving forward. The tentative agreement encompasses nine bargaining units. And together we represent 40% of the represented state employees for the State of California. And we have a broad range of valuable services to California and our communities. And we're IT analysts. We're nurses, we're scientific aides, we're social services specialists, and these are just a few of the near thousand classifications that we represent. And there are some special salary adjustments that are put in place largely to address the recruitment and retention problems that we've had. Getting in certain groups of classifications. One specifically is with the CPUC, the California Public Utilities Commission and that salary adjustment will help us in retention of some of those staff and even what we have in this agreement doesn't totally fix the problem but it is definitely I'm going to create a road map to address it. And then also as Dr. Pan had stated, that we have also agreed to a contribution propose retirement healthcare, and this agreement really reflects a long struggle to get to this point in reaching an agreement. And once again, I would appreciate your support in passing SB 28. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1231, 'end': 1234, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Coby Pizzotti: Madame Chair and Senators Coby Pizzotti with the California Associate of Psychiatric Technicians. This was a result of nine months of pretty rigorous conversations, 28 bargaining sessions. I think it was a fair and equitable deal that we reached with the state. With that I would ask for your support.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Aaron Read: madame chair and members, aaron jonah read, representing cal fire firefighters, we're pleased to be a cosponsor. i can tell you, your state firefighters work a very long work week, 72 hour work week. the locals work 56 hour work week. and they are paid about 30% less but we did make progress here we are not thrilled but there is more work to be done but we did make progress so we'll support the bill thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christy Bouma: Madame Chairman and member of the Committee Christy Bouma on behalf of California Professional Firefighters in support.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Allison: Madame Chair and Members of the Committee, Brian Allison on behalf of the American Federation of State County and Municipal Employees. Pleased to be a cosponsor in strong support.
[{'start': 43, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Tong: So good morning, Madame Chair, and Vice Chair, and Members of the Committee. And my name is Amy Tong, the Director of the Department of Technology. And speaking to Senator Moorlach, I'm probably it's your reference of the CEO of IT for the administration. I came to this position July 1st of 2016, so it's a little bit over six months ago. And speaking of a significant change in the reform that's in place, I'll be happy to address that specifically to answer question to Senator Skinner as well as Senator Mcguire about the IT procurement vendor management. Excuse me, apology, I have a cold coming now, as well as the project oversight. Department of Technology is the technology oversight entity for the administration. And later on after my colleague here talk about specific to the FI$Cal project, I will be happy to come back and address from an oversight entity what are the measures that are in place in making sure the success and timely correction of the necessary project. And then be happy to answer any question from that point forward. Thank you.
[{'start': 92, 'end': 100, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 172, 'end': 180, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 481, 'end': 488, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 508, 'end': 515, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nick Louizos: Good morning, Members of the Committee. My name is Nick Louizos. I'm with the State Auditor's Office. I'm the project manager of our monitoring efforts.
[{'start': 51, 'end': 63, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Elaine Howle: Thank you Mr. Chairman. For the record, my name is Elaine Howle, California State Auditor. And what I thought I would do, members, we did hand out some graphics. We'll step you through those in a few moments. But what I thought I would do is step you through our most recent letter report. We are responsible under the government code for monitoring the FISCal project. We've been monitoring it since 2007. Mister Louizos has been working on this project since 2009 so he's been following the project with other staff from my office. And our primary responsibilities are monitoring the contracts, both the IV and V contract for this particular project, monitoring the IPO responsibilities, project oversight. And then looking to determine whether or not the project is being responsive to questions that are being raised by both the project oversight group, which in this case is the Department of Technology, and the IV&V Group, which is the technical side of the house, and then looking at whether or not FisCAL is really progressing within schedule and within budget. And I'll talk to you about one of the graphics I think Senator Nielsen you were referring to earlier in some of your questions. But clearly there have been scheduling challenges and budget challenges. So let me step you through some key issues that we identified in this report. What we issued in this past January. It starts with the SPR 5. And that had certain goals, and things that the project wanted to accomplish. That was approved in July 2014. By July of 2015, there were significant deviations from that particular plan, that were presented in that fifth SPR. To the point where the Department of Technology said, we need to stop and do a reset. We need to consider an additional SPR, special project report, which really kind of makes the project step back and reassess. Are we on schedule? Are we on budget? What do we need to do to modify our approach? Do we need to push some departments out into further waves, now called releases? Will there be an additional cost to the project, etc? So the Department of Technology required FI$Cal to put this SPR together. This SPR was created and approved by technology in February of 16. It required the department to develop three different detailed plans. How are they going to deploy FI$Cal to the remaining state agencies? Knowledge transfer. How are they going to transfer technical knowledge from Accenture to state staff? A really key issue that has been outstanding for a long time and remains outstanding. And then the transfer of operational control and maintenance of this project from Accenture to the State of California. So technology required the project to submit a variety of these plans, and there were three different deadlines. What we talk about in the report is at least one plan related to knowledge transfer, when the IPO looked at that plan, they weren't convinced that that was an upgrade from previous plans. So there are still significant concerns with respect to knowledge transfer. But talking about scheduling, so again, this SPR was approved in February of 2016. What this SPR, one major change from previous, the fifth SPR, was to move the state controller as the FI$cal Director indicated make the State Controller's Office, State Treasurer's Office. We're going to rollout in July of 2016 last year. The SPR said, we're not ready. We need to move it out for additional testing. So let's move the Controller and the Treasurer out to July of 2017. What I would like to mention is they were supposed to be rolling out in July of 2015. So previous SPRs moved the Controller to 2016. Now the sixth SPR is moving the Controller and Treasurer out to 2017. In October of last year, in an IPO report that we reviewed, that's part of our responsibility. The IPO is suggesting, the project is behind schedule in implementation for these two agencies for Controller and Treasurer. In addition, the IPO suggested that the roll, the plans to roll out other departments by July of 2017, were at least five weeks behind. So we're running behind schedule, we're not meeting milestones, or the project isn't. Again, the IPO is reporting using some metrics of the scheduled milestones that were supposed to be achieved between May and October, less than 50% of those milestones were achieved. So the IPO is really raising some concerns about progress. And are we truly on schedule with this new SPR that came out in February of 16? We're looking at a report that's just eight months later in October suggesting that things are falling behind schedule. Then in November of 2016, the Department of Technology reported that the schedule of this project has become a significant risk. And they are unsure and in their words, the ability to meet the release for July of 2017 is low. The likelihood of achieving that is low. They did build into the SPR, the sixth SPR, as I mentioned, that was approved in February. That if we had to move this project out, if the State of California has to move this project out, in likelihood will be an additional $100 million. So we would go from the 900 million, we'd hit the $1 billion mark. So those are some of the concerns we identified in looking at some of these IPO reports. Well, why is this happening? The causes that we identified is, there were previous rollouts as the Director indicated. In wave one, which was back in 2014, much of the accounting functions from any departments was rolled out. The reason, there were struggles in being able to meet future deadlines like the July of 17 or July of 18, is that there has been a lot of effort to help these departments that had implemented FI$ cal in 2014 and in 2015. To be able to close their books, get their accounting records in shape, to transfer that information to the controller, to do our annual financial audit. So there were unanticipated needs by these departments. There's continued support of these wave one departments, which again, are relatively small departments, who were rolling out Fiscal in 2014. So being the professional skeptics in the room, I mean that is our responsibility, that we really have raised some concerns in this letter that we issued back in January. And then many of the wave one, again, wave one and wave two, which is 2015, had difficulty closing their financial statements on time. Many of these departments are very small, medium-sized departments. So that is related to schedule. So we really are concerned about whether or not, and in fact, the Department of Technology, as I indicated in November of last year. Nine months after the approval of the SPR, is suggesting that the ability to roll out and to accomplish what Fiscal wants to accomplish by July of 17, is the likelihood of that occurring is very low. And then the Controller and the Treasurer being moved out to 2017, as the Director indicate. That was to allow more testing, which is a good decision. It was to allow 12 months worth of testing, but because of some other concerns that has now been compressed to 10 months, and it may end up being compressed more. And you need testing, particularly for two major control agencies like, say Controller's Office and State Treasurer's Office. So the other aspect and it's kind of woven in with the schedule extensions, is looking at outstanding issues raised by this IPO and IVNV. The IPO, as of October of last year, they had 12 concerns that were still outstanding, that were relatively, seven of these were significant. And significant means they are big enough, problematic enough, that it could affect the schedule of this particular project, could affect the cost of the project. There's critical, there's worst case, that's an immediate, you need to address it right away, significant is the next level down. So out of these 12 concerns, seven of them were significant from the IPO's perspective. Examples of that are accessibility issues as far as meeting Ada requirements, but certainly, delays, and testing, and support activities. Support activities for departments to come in, work with the system and learn, because I want to acknowledge I think the Director's absolutely correct. There are a lot of challenges with state agencies unwilling to change, learn new processes, having to modify their processes. But that really has had an impact and that's something at the IPO, the project oversight group, has been raising for several years. I mean knowledge transfer, in particular, has been an issue, first time we say it was back in 2012, that the IPO raised that as a concern. Of the IVNV similarly, raised has 25 recommendations that were outstanding, some of those are dating back to 2012. So the project is making progress, but again, we're tracking all of these outstanding issues. And I think it's very important for the Department of Technology, and certainly, the Fiscal Project, to focus on some of these issues that the IPO has raised. I was looking at the table, we have in our report, and there's at least three outstanding issues that the IPO raise, specifically related to knowledge transfer. There are a couple of issues related to the situation, Senator Skinner, referred to as state employees being able to understand, and see the documentation that Accenture's putting together related to software updates, how this system is being designed and developed. So there are concerns outstanding with respect to both the IPO oversight and the IVNV oversight. So the knowledge transfer, one more thing I would like to say about that. I think there has been improvement and we acknowledge that in our letter. As I said, there were outstanding issues in 2012, 2014. And a more recent year where the IPO continues to raise that as an issue. One of the the parts of the 6-SPR, the reason it's being pushed out for two years from 17 to 19, is the intent is to have all the departments rolled out by July of 18. But that last year, from July of 18 to 19, is all knowledge transfer. So a lot of it appears to be occurring at the back end of this project. Which again, I think the director acknowledged it is much better to have a lot of that knowledge transfer up front. And that's an issue, as I said, that's been raised by the IPO as long ago, as four years ago in December of 2012. So it's something that the State of California FI$Cal Project really needs to focus on. So, we also have concerns about, and I'm going to turn it over to Mr. Kleto so he can step you through some of the graphics. As the Committee acknowledged, and I think the department acknowledged as well is we've gone through a few waves. A lot of the agencies that have rolled out FI$Cal thus far are very small agencies with very few funds. Now we're looking at attempting to roll out, by 20 of 17, July of 17. Which again, is in jeopardy, in my words. And to complete full roll out by July of 2018. These are very significant large departments. Employment Development Department, Veterans Affairs, and Nick will go through some of these others, but these are big departments. High number of users, high number of funds that need to be addressed as part of the accounting part and some of the asset management, etc. So, we really do have concerns about, is it reasonable and feasible for the State of California to think this is going to get done by July of 18. So, Mr. Kleto will step you through our graphics, which demonstrate to you, what has been successfully accomplished in the last few years. And what the project is intending to accomplish in the next two years and why we really have concerns. We had significant enough concerns that in our letter, we did suggest to the Department of Technology to take the step back and ask the project. Because again they've completed the SPR in February and IPO in October. And in November is saying it's unlikely we're going to meet July of '17. So we may need to take a step back and reassess and be realistic as Senator Mcguire suggested. The other thing I'd like to mention before I hand it over to Mr. Kleto is back in 2012, these answers are response to a few questions. Senator Pan, you asked a question about benefits. Back in 2012, the project actually had a bench marking study done related to what would the benefits be and I think it came out to about $400 million for a variety of reasons. And that could have been a good foundation for tracking benefits. We did make a recommendation to the Legislature. We thought the project should track these types of benefits as well. I think that's a very valuable suggestion that you made, obviously we made the suggestion in the report back in 2012. But they did have a benchmarking study. To our knowledge, there hasn't really been anything done with that since. So, hopefully either that can be resurrected or it can serve as a model for moving forward. And then, I lost my train of thought on the other but the knowledge transfer, I'll hand it over to Mr. Kleto and let him step you through the graphics that we shared with the Committee.
[{'start': 51, 'end': 63, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 414, 'end': 421, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1134, 'end': 1141, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 9172, 'end': 9179, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 10449, 'end': 10454, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 11351, 'end': 11356, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 11951, 'end': 11958, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 12035, 'end': 12040, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 12113, 'end': 12116, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 12942, 'end': 12947, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lourdes Morales: Good afternoon, Madam Chair and Senators. I'm Lourdes Morales with the Legislative Analyst's Office. Thank you for the opportunity to speak regarding the FISCal project this afternoon. We have prepared a handout for this purpose. I believe it's before you in your briefing documents. The handout does walk you through quite a bit of background regarding the purpose of the project, it's anticipated benefits, how it has evolved since it was first proposed in 2005, as well as highlights key details of the current project plan, SPR 6, which was approved in February of 2016. That section of the handout is really for your informational purposes. And while I'm happy to address questions, I'd really like to focus on our observations regarding the current project status and comments on the overall health of the project. So if you wouldn't mind turning to page 6 of our handout. This section regarding project status begins with a table that outlines the number of departments and the functions that have gone live previously as well as those that are anticipated to go live in years to come. Two really key takeaways from this table is that most of the system functionality is anticipated to go live once in July of 2016 per the current SPR. So assuming that SPR 6 does hold going forward, most of the system functionality will be built at that time. But the work that really does remain, which the Auditor spoke to, is the concern regarding the number of departments and the size of those departments. Only 58 departments have gone live so far under SPR 6. An additional 50 are anticipated to go live in 2017 and 65 in 2018. That's quite a large bulk of work that remains in that space. As for the upcoming July 2017 release, we are also tracking some of those activities are behind schedule. There's two major aspects of the July 2017 release. The first aspect is a departmental deployment which is bringing on the additional departments to begin using FI$Cal. We understand that it's quite an intensive workload to prepare departments to begin using the system. It involves helping them convert their data from their legacy systems into FI$Cal and training their staff, as well as other pretty labor intensive and complicated activities. We understand that there has been challenges with those work streams. And because of those challenges, a number of departments have been pushed out towards later waves. Department of Justice and the Department of Veterans' Affairs are just two examples of work streams that has been pushed to 2018, and again, further increases the size of the workload that remains in that final release. As for the accounting and cash management functions related to the state treasury and state controllers office we are also tracking that there are delays. We ave observed that there is already an extension of 1 year under SPR 6 for those functionalities to allow additional time to design and test. Despite the additional year, there are still some delays that Department of Technology is tracking and that is of concern to us as well. Two additional comments regarding the project's status that we haven't spoken about, one is the vacancy rate. The project is tracking an 18% vacancy rate, given the amount of work load that does remain, the high vacancy rate does put additional pressure on the department to fulfill its activities in a timely basis. And then the final observation regarding the status is departments are having challenges closing their month and year-end financial statements. I understand that the department has allocated additional resources for this purpose. But it is our concern that it has taken existing department quiet a bit of time to go through those financial statements. So with those observations in mind if you turn to page nine and of the hand out, we do have some overall comments regarding that projects. The first is just to highlight the inherent risk, that it is very clear from the discussion today that the Senators understand that large IT projects present quite a bit of risk. And the state has had a challenging track record in meeting its technology objectives. Given the size and complexity of FI$Cal, those concerns are even more acute in the case of this project. We would say that it's prudent for the project to continue to prioritize quality over staying on schedule necessarily. We know that the project has decided to push things out. And given, again, what's at stake should these systems go out prematurely or without a department being ready, it's better to be prudent and focus on quality rather than these predetermined milestones but we acknowledge it's important to be realistic there. Once again, the remain concern given the size and number of departments that remain, we issued an analysis back in February of 2016 when the SPR6 was developed and noted that there was a significant risk given though the large of amount of work that remained in relatively a constrained period of time. And we think that that recommendation and that concern remains true today. And again, highlighting the vacancy rate that the project has experienced a higher vacancy rate than 18% in the past. So we do note that it is taking downward but to the extent that it stagnates at 18 or continues to tick back up, it could create additional project to fully support the large number of departments that will be on boarded in the years to come, as anticipated by SPR 6. The comments that this Auditor's office made given the complexity of the department, number of funds, we think on page 10 of your handout, that departments may continue to have challenges closing their month and year-end statements. And that could create a risk for the state's financial health going forward. And finally, given the amount of work that remains, the fact that activities continue to track behind schedule, we also agree that a SPR 7th is likely in the future that would further extend project schedule and increase costs. Happy to take any of your questions. Thank you.
[{'start': 46, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carrie Tamara: Thank you, good afternoon, my name is Carrie Tamara, I'm the Government Affairs Director for the Sierra Business Council. We're a non-profit organization headquartered in Truckee where we work with businesses, local governments, and community partners to foster vibrant, livable communities throughout the Sierra Nevada region. We appreciate the opportunity to share our support of AB 18 with the Committee this afternoon. I won't repeat what others have already covered, but I do just want to say, me too, to the many important aspects of the bill mentioned already by the chair and other witnesses, especially those that affect disadvantaged communities and rural regions, those that address the huge maintenance backlog in our existing parks and recreation areas and especially those that distribute funds so widely throughout the state. That's a critical piece of this bill that I haven't seen, necessarily, in others before. And we really do support that quite a bit. I do, though, want to focus on why we think it's important to pass this bill, even though it would mean incurring additional debt for the state. We believe the state needs to make good on its past investments by funding necessary upkeep and expansion of parks and recreation opportunities for our growing and changing population. And here's why. First of all, 82% of Californians in various surveys have said they consider outdoor recreation as important or very important to their daily lives. And most of those said they preferred activities that don't cost very much or that don't require specialized skills, like walking, driving for pleasure, picnicking and other general activities. And these are all things that neighborhood and Community parks provide. Second and frankly closer to home for me, coming from the Sierra, in many rural forested areas, like the Sierra and the Cascade, the recreation and tourism industry is more important to local economies, than even commodity production. As has been mentioned, studies of the economic value of Sierra tourism in this case, are in the billions a year. And travel related employment in some rural areas is actually twice the national average. So, one way to help economically disadvantage rural communities is to invest in protection and expansion of these critical parks and outdoor recreation opportunities. And then finally, the forested areas of the state contain features like water. Our recreation species habitat timber and more whose value extends well beyond the surrounding local communities. Services like these and the ability to use our forests to store carbon and to address other climate goals state wide are opportunities that entire state relies on. So investing in recreational facilities, improving our forest and watershed health, reducing the risk of damaging wild fire and offering alternatives even for energy production through bio mass as an example. These are all critical, not just to our rural communities but to the entire state as a whole. So I do want to thank you for your leadership on these critical issues and let you know that Sierra Business Council and our partners look forward to working with you to continue advancing this important measure. And we ask for your aye vote today, thank you.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Margo Parks: thank you, parks, on behalf of the california state parks foundation. in support of the bill, i want to thank the author for continuing to work on this very important measure and specifically, i want to thank you for the consideration of funding for the enterprise fund and for deferred maintenance in our state parks which as we know is over $1 billion back log so that it is extraordinarily important to maintaining what we have, and thank you very much. i encourage your aye vote.
[]
Alfredo Arredondo: Alfredo Arredondo on behalf of the Sonoma County Ag Preservation and Open Space District, as well as the Pacific Forrest Trust in support. And thank you to the author for carrying this important measure.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joshua Hanthorn: joshua jonah hanthorn, i'm with defenders of wildlife. we support this bill, particularly the salton sea investments and the wildlife investments under article 9. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Fenstermaker: fenstermaker, on behalf of environmental defense fund, in support. thank you.
[]
Jamie Go: Jamie Go, on behalf of the Big Sur Land Trust and the Balsa Chica Land Trust, in support. Liz Forsburg with the Nature Conservancy, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 90, 'end': 102, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Danielle Lynch: good afternoon, lynch, on behalf of community nature center tree people and the los angeles neighborhood land trust, in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jay Kalkenio: Hi, Jay Kalkenio, on behalf of California Association of Local Conservation Corps and Land Trust of Santa Cruz County, in support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Miguel Luna: good afternoon. miguel joshua luna, executive director of [unknown]. i came from la, so i'm going to take my 30 seconds. and i'm here for several reasons. one is to congratulate you on your chairmanship. well deserved and we look forward to your leadership and the leadership of the new members and those that have been serving. small parks play a huge role in our communities. they serve as outdoor classrooms, and importantly they also serve as the portals to the state parks, that serve as the place where our bodies can catch up with our souls. this comprehensive approach to funding our parks is long overdue. and we are here in support, and we're ready to roll up our sleeves and work with you, assembly member, as we move forward and make this a successful bill. thank you so much.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Helyne Meshar: Mr. Chairman, members, Helyne Meshar on behalf of the City of West Hollywood. The City of West Hollywood is 1.9 square miles with a population of almost 40,000 people. And park space in our city is very important and an integral part. And we look forward to working with the Chairman and the author on this bond. And we support it. Thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Smith: Mr. Chairman and members, Mark Smith on behalf of the Carbon Cycle Institute, the Grassland Water District in support, thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Leslie Martinez: good afternoon i'm martinez with environment california and we support this bill.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alex Gibbs: hi, gibbs on behalf of the desert recreation district and the cities of walnut creek, oakland, fullerton, imperial, and the city of carson in support we would like to thank the author and his staff who have been fantastic to work with throughout this process. thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Wendy Ritter-Bush: good afternoon, members. wendy with the association of california water agencies or acwa. we have a support and amend position. we're hoping for consideration of perhaps maybe some type of mirroring language between this bill and sb 5. sb 5 contains 1.5 billion in water resource projects that we feel would be very complementary to the park items that are in this bond. thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Arnold: michael miguel arnold on behalf of the cities of redondo beach and oxnard.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jared Sanchez: hello, i'm jared on behalf of the california bicycle coalition and we are in support,especially with the focus on low income communities and park poor areas, as well. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Wolfe: Good afternoon, Mr Chairman, it's good to be back. Members, David Wolfe of the Howard Jarvis Taxpayers Association. We are in opposition to the bill here today, AB 18. Members, before approving another bond to fund parks, I think it's prudent to ask, and we all should ask, is what was done with the money from prior bonds that was used to fund parks? There was an Associated Press article from last year, and I'm just going to highlight some of the points of that really briefly. The last major bond that was used to fund parks was Prop 84 in 2006 and that initiative allocated about $400 million out of that $5 billion, roughly, bond, to fund those parks. Of that money, the state parks department chose 126 park sites on which to build parks and allocated the money out accordingly. However, of those 126 parks, only 59 park projects have been built since 2006. And the unbuilt parks account for about $230 million, or over half of the allocation of the bonds given out from that 2006 initiative, Prop 84. It begs the question, members, 10 years to build a park? 10 years? The money's been allocated, but the parks aren't being built, 10 years. Why should we be giving, and granted, they're for low income communities, and that's valuable, and I think something to get behind, but, 10 years? Why are there not any regulatory reforms in how we're conducting this process to ensure that this money is being spent faster and why isn't that a condition in this bond? Further members, given California's wall of debt, I think it's prudent to ask and just prioritize the amount of money that we spend on bonds. What's a priority here? Is funding for parks more important than funding for affordable housing? Is it more important than Prop 51 in providing money for education facilities? Those bonds have not been sold yet. We do need to prioritize, I think, our bond debt and I think that's especially true with a debt service ratio that's about 6%. 6% of the general fund goes to nothing more or less than paying off bonds. So I really do think, especially given some of the governor's comments, we do need to prioritize how we spend this money. And finally, I think we do need to ask, is this a prudent use of bond funds? These bonds, if approved by voters, are going to be sold and paid off over a period of 20 to 30 years with a cost to taxpayers of roughly $6 billion every 30 years to pay off that debt. And I do think it's worth asking, especially since we're spending money on projects that aren't going to last the 30 to 40 year length of the bond, is it not more appropriate to spend money from out of the general fund as opposed to using general obligation bond dollars for capital projects? So for all those reasons, I ask for a no vote.
[{'start': 60, 'end': 71, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Keith Dunn: Thank you, Madame Chair and Committee Members. Keith Dunn on behalf of the Self-Help County.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Keith Dunn: Thank you. Thank you Madam Chair and Members of the Committee. Keith Dunn here behalf of Self-Help Counties Coalition. This AB 28 is a critical measure that allows critical agencies and Caltrains to process federal environmental regulations, and doing it in a timely, and cost saving approach. It's been critically succesful saving up to 14 months in untold dollars. In allowing us to meet our environmental needs and policies, while complying with all the regulations for the federal government in the State of California. I would like to ask for your yes vote. It's a really important measure that we get this done quickly, that's why we're moving so fast. We have to have it to the Governor by March 31. It enjoys bipartisan support, and I'd be happy to answer any questions that you may have. Thank you.
[{'start': 63, 'end': 73, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joshua Shaw: Madame Chair, members, Joshua Shaw for the Solano Transportation Authority, the Fresno County Transportation Authority, and the City County Association of Governments of San Mateo County. All in support for the reasons that Mr.Dunn mentioned. Thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 227, 'end': 231, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark Watts: chair and members, mark jonah watts, today representing the contra costa transportation authority, riverside county transportation commission, and transportation california. all in support and urge your aye vote. thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Moira Topp: moira, i want to talk on behalf of the orange county transportation authority, orange county business council and the city of san diego all in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erica Arriaga: Erica Arriaga with the County of Monterey and the Transportation Agency of Monterey County, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Van Dyke: David Van Dyke with the California Transportation Commission and we support AB28.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kirk Blackburn: blackburn on behalf of the san diego association of government, sandag, in support.
[]
Jonathan Clay: Jonathan Clayback for the County of San Diego, also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Melanie Perron: melanie mark perron representing caltrans, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jacqueline Wong-Hernandez: jacqueline with the department of finance. we're neutral on this bill and it extends current practice, so we don't see this as having any new costs. and as your committee analysis noted, those costs were assumed to continue the program in the 2016 budget act.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Donna Sites: Okay. Good morning. My name is Donna Sites and I am representing the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors today and I will be reading Angelo Bellomo's testimony from our Department of Public Health that he would have provided had he been here today. The magnitude of this disaster is often described as the largest natural gas release in US history, that description fails to capture the full impact this disasters had on the health and well being of residents in the surrounding community. Please recall that thousands of families were temporary relocated from the area, many reporting that at least one member. The family was experiencing symptoms, which included, eye, nose, and throat irritation, headache, shortness of breath, chest tightness, wheezing, worsening of asthma or chronic obstruction pulmonary disease, stress, dizziness, and light-headedness. In the month after the gas leak was sealed 62% of sampled households reported having at least one family member experiencing one or more of these symptoms. Excuse me. We understand the role of state regulators in overseeing oil and gas operations, and assuring the sufficiency of the State's energy supply. First, the root cause analysis must be completed before the field resumes operations. We can't prevent a reoccurrence of this disaster without full knowledge of the cause. Second, irrespective of whether Aliso resumes operations, continuous monitoring of all wells, equipment, and components is essential to ensure rapid detection and third, a comprehensive health study is necessary to determine whether and how recurrent persistent symptoms correlate with remissions from the field. Thank you, Senator Stern, and Members of the Committee for your consideration. We urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 137, 'end': 153, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1676, 'end': 1681, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Eric Mattos: good morning my name is eric jonah mattos, legislative affairs deputy for supervisor cathen barter of los angeles county. who was unable to attend today. supervisor barter sent me here to convey her strong support for sb 57. it's a common sense measure which is overwhelmingly supported by the community that is still recovering from the worst methane gas leak in united states history. to address the communities concerned, this bill merely asks the root cause analysis to be completed before the reinjection is considered. on behalf of los angeles county board of supervisors, unanimously approve supervisor barter's motion in support of sb 57. i thank you for your time and consideration. shortly you will hear from the los angeles county department of health, whose flight was delayed, and we also had the los angeles county fire department come as well to voice strong support for sb57.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 85, 'end': 98, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 165, 'end': 171, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 610, 'end': 616, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark Fenstermaker: Good morning Mr. Chair. Mark Fenstermaker here filling in on behalf of Environmental Defense Fund. EDF's a non-profit organization and one of the first organizations to respond to the incident at Aliso Canyon. Over the last year we've hired expert consultants to provide technical comments and input into stopping the gas release, inspecting the facility, and establishing a protocol for reopening the facility. Our comments and our support for SB 57 is not a shall be viewed as a challenge to the technical analysis, but rather that we should complete the root cause analysis to provide assurance to the public that this facility is ready to be reopened. My colleague from EDF, who is also on the delayed flight, should be here shortly, can answer some more of the technical questions if you have any. But thank you very much, we are in strong support of SB 57, thank you. Thank you.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Shaw: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Members of the Committee, Michael Shaw, California Manufacturers & Technology Association. We apologize for the tardiness of our letter, obviously, the urgency of the bill- It's fine, it was the last minute, don't worry about it. Yeah, but to the point, our primary concern representing manufacturers throughout the State of California and a significant number in Southern California. Region, we're trying to express our concerns regarding energy reliability. The need for Lesso Canyon as a integral resource of our energy picture in Southern California both for natural gas supply. For manufactures that use that in their processes, as well as electric generation. We are increasing obviously our use of renewables in their production. However, having that natural gas backup is important, critical. Disruptions in supplies of either natural gas or electricity at certain points in various manufacturing processes can cause the loss of a line of production.
[{'start': 51, 'end': 63, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Mmagu: mmagu, behalf of the california chamber of commerce, also concerned. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Moira Topp: Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members. I'm Moira Topp on behalf of Orange County Business Council also with grave concerns. Thank you.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Marshall: Mr. Chair, Jason Marshall. I'm the Chief Deputy Director at the Department of Conservation. To my right is Al Walker. He's a senior engineer with our Division of Oil and Gas. We're happy to be here to answer any of your questions, the members questions, Mr. Chairman. With regard to this question about the off gassing from around the SS25 well, it was our expectation, after the well had been leaking for three plus months, and blowing a rather significant volume of gas into the atmosphere from a depth of about 500 feet, if memory serves, that that surrounding soil around the well where the hole was in the outside of the well is saturated with natural gas. ` That all of the gas didn't go into the atmosphere. That some of it was entrained into the soil and it was our expectation that, that would continue to leak. It was something that we tried to build in to our expectations of how much methane would still be at seen, by monitors, after the well was plugged back in early February of last year, mid February of last year. So we could have a clear understanding of whether or not when the well was plugged Whether it So, we could have a clear understanding of whether or not when the well was plugged whether it would be expected if there would still be some methane coming out of the ground. It was and our expectation right now, our understanding right now, is that the recent rains saturating the soil are pushing the methane out.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 107, 'end': 116, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ken Bruno: bruno, program manager, safety enforcement division, leading the root cause analysis, facilitating that, and also leading the cpc's investigation. reliability is best addressed by ed randolph, who's also from the commission, and he, ed, do you want to come up and address it?
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 180, 'end': 191, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 233, 'end': 235, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Edward Randolph: Good morning, I'm Edward Randolph. I'm the Director of the Energy Division of the Public Utilities Commission. Is there, I don't want to launch into a long reliability spiel, so are there some specific questions you'd like me to address?
[{'start': 18, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ken Bruno: Yes, hi Senator. Again, Ken Bruno of Safety Enforcement Division of California Public Utilities Commission. Could you repeat the question that you?
[{'start': 24, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Edward Randolph: I wan't to answer that quickly. Again Edward Randolph for the Public Utilities Commission to the first question, does Aliso have an impact on gas reliability statewide? Answer is probably not it's very specific to Southern California. PG&E has stored fields in Northern California that if they're operating properly provide plenty of supply for Northern California. It can have impact on electricity supply throughout the Southern California region if you have to start redispatching power plants outside of the LA region to supply power within LA. Yes.>>That puts stress on the greater system and could strain the other system. And as an example, the California Independent System operator, a mitigation measure they're doing to help reduce the risk of blackouts in the LA region is to run power plants in San Diego more often and ship the power into LA. So you do have some interregional issues in there, but the gas itself isn't particularly interchangeable. To talk about the primary purpose of Aliso and the report we just issued a few weeks ago it's accept the maximum and minimum amount of gas that are needed in the field for liability purposes. That is limited to what's needed for liability purposes the statue required that if you also look at. What would be needed to provide just and reasonable rates, which would be an economic analysis? You can on behalf of the utility, on behalf of ratepayers, will buy gas in the cheaper parts of the year. Store it and withdraw it And what is that number Mr. Randolph for reliability? The range is, the low is 15 billion cubic feet which are actually a little below the minimum range right now. And the high is right around 29 billion cubic feet. And the field hold is about 82. Yeah, the field holds 83 billion cubic feet. 83 billion.>>Yeah, so we're setting the range that's allowed on the field dramatically lower than if the field were full, which if it were full, it would be used.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1511, 'end': 1519, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Todd: thank you. good morning. sorry for the delay. plane didn't work this morning, so we had to get another one. my name's john eric todd, i'm a deputy chief of los angeles county fire department. i'm over at prevention bureau. i don't know all that's been said this morning, so i'm kind of catching up here. but i know that, i just wanted to explain the jurisdiction of aliso canyon. aliso canyon's adjacent to porter ranch which is in the city of los angeles. but the aliso canyon gas storage fill is actually in la county's fire jurisdiction. so the initial response up there if there something happen would be la fire department. but when it came to unified command and overseeing the sight and getting involved with all the followups, it was la county fire department involved. and primarily, our health hazardous materials division, they were the ones that were, that the charges were first leveled against socalgas for failure to report the leak, which is required. so our health hazmat division primarily has continued to review things like the risk management plan, attending public meetings, and working with the larger county family on this issue. and some of the, some of the concerns the department has, and these have been expressed in our letter to doggr, so no surprises here. we're just kind of like what's the rush to reinject this gas, okay? as you just heard, the root cause analysis is going to take seven months to a year to complete. and that is with just ss25. that's what they're focusing on. and they've got to extract that well casing and evaluate it. so in seven months to a year, i'm going to bet it's closer to a year, okay, that's just how it goes. a root cause analysis helps operators and regulators design and implement safety features so this won't happen again. so i think this is critical that this be done before we start reinjecting gas. be completed, and those safety measures be shared and be implemented prior to reinjecting. also, we have concerns that were mentioned, seismic concerns. as you know, this gas field sits on top of the santa susana fault. we've had major earthquakes in the area, the northridge quake in '94 and let's not forget the san fernando quake in 1971. during the northridge quake, there was landslides on the property and there was one well that collapsed. so, going forward with wells, not all the wells, and maybe a third of the wells have been evaluated. but the other wells, if they're not evaluated, they seem like they could be exits for stored gas. so it seems like we would like to get all the seismic studies done and evaluated and incorporate those, too, before going forward with reinjecting gas at aliso canyon. and lastly, we looked at the risk management plan and we have concerns about the risk management plan. again, we review risk management plans. our health hazmat division has a [unknown] program which is the california accidental release program that is for high risk facilities like refineries and gas fields and so forth. and we've looked at the risk management plan. we've sent our comments to dogger. we feel there's a number of inadequacies as is right now. we've got a reply back from doggr, that said they'll expand the risk management plan requirements in their final regulations. but again, why are we in a rush to re-inject gas when we don't have a root cause analysis, we know we've got seismic issues, and the risk management plan has got some deficiencies. that's our input.
[{'start': 118, 'end': 132, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 3082, 'end': 3088, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3176, 'end': 3181, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Issam Najm: Thank you, my name is Issam Najm, I'm the President of Porter Ranch Neighborhood Council. I very much appreciate the time to be here. Southwest Airlines had different ideas for us today. I'm here speaking on behalf of the Neighborhood Council and the 30,000 residents who live in Porter Ranch. I can speak to you volumes about the supply and demand, but we're not going to do that. I just want to tell you that a year ago no one knew where we are. No one knew Porter Ranch and we didn't know what DOGGR was, what PUC was. But, unfortunately, October 23, 2015, will always be our day in infamy. You are being presented with a lot of calculations but this is about the people who live around this facility. That is the day that we Learned that the careless operation of the Aliso Canyon gas storage facility by Southern California Gas Company resulted in the largest storage field well failure in the country. This has disrupted thousands of lives. It spewed methane and chemicals over our schools, our homes, our parks, and our lives. And as we watch the gas company to try to figure out what to do and how to plug it, people had to grab their children and leave. Have to live their lives in hotel rooms, move their kids to a new school, try to get their kids working in cramped hotel rooms. People were standing in line to get approval to go to hotel rooms. It was a disaster. I can not begin to describe to you. How stressful this has been on the community. And we are dismayed that everybody is proceeding with mathematical calculations on numbers, and no one is asking the question, what is the health risk of this facility?
[{'start': 22, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Angelo Bellomo: yes, senator hertzberg, my statement was read into the record by our representative, donna sites. yes.>>the only thing i wanted to say is that senator stern a few minutes ago. why don't you state your title? i'm sorry, angelo, deputy director for health protection, la county public health. senator stern had made reference to the uncertainties associated with operating this field. you don't really hear that on the analyses that have been prepared much by the regulatory agencies. but those uncertainties are most important when we're talking about a facility like this, that is in close proximity to people. if this wasn't the issue here, if we didn't have that close interface between an industrial operation and the public, this would be an entirely different subject. what's often missing when we describe this facility, is the impact it's had on the population. we can't afford to take chances with the uncertainties, we have to fill those data gaps, and this measure will help fill one important one. thank you.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 22, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 85, 'end': 96, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 151, 'end': 156, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 219, 'end': 225, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 299, 'end': 304, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Timothy O'Connor: Yes, good morning, Timothy O'Connor for the Environmental Defense Fund, my colleague Mark Fenstermaker delivered- He did.>>The majority of my comments. Two quick points I'd like to raise. Briefly.>>One is that the gas utilities own filings with the Public Utilities Commission and said that this field has been experiencing, a quote, negative well integrity trend over the last several years. The purpose of a root cause analysis to to find directly, what is the source of that negative well integrity, and I would urge you to require that to be completed before we allow them to reopen this facility. However, there's also been one other issue related to reliability which has been brought up, but which hasn't really been raised. Because the Public Utilities Commission recently did an evaluation of the efforts in Southern California to reduce gas demand from this facility, finding that over the last year, they've been able to reduce gas demand by about 4.5 billion standard cubic feet of what's needed from this field. Of that though, only 2% has resulted from actual efficiency, fuel switching, and other gas burn demand reductions. Which means that 98% of the positive effort that's gone into reducing the need for this facility has been because of gas balancing. Some new rules by the CISO and by the PUC. And so one question in terms of public policy is, we look to the public policy of whether we should open up a facility right next to people's houses before we have a sufficient root cause analysis. The question is whether the gas companies should be allowed to reopen this facility when they themselves have only caused just 2% of the reductions of the gas demand. And whether there should be more reliance on gas demand reductions for reliability before we actually open up the facility.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 85, 'end': 102, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Angie Young: great. i'm young, i work for the immigrant legal resource center. we have been providing support to criminal defense counsel for over 25 years, both in the state of california and nationally. and just to give you some background on the law, the us supreme court decided in 2010 in a case called padilla vesus kentucky, that the 6th amendment requires defense counsel to not only affirmatively, but competently advise non-citizen defendants of the immigration consequences. and they basically said that deportation can be often the most integral part of criminal cases, because those penalties of deportation can far outweigh on the penalties of the criminal case. and california courts have been consistently holding the same thing. the california legislator enacted ab1343, that basically caught up the pd vs kentucky decision, another court decisions. and then last year assembly member lorena gonzalez, pass ab813 to provide some recourse for people that weren't adequately advised of the immigration consequences. this is the final piece to give meaning to these laws. unfortunately what's happening across the state of california, raja will say. is that, there are some offices that have some resources to do this, but there are many offices that have no resources. an immigration law is a second most complicated law to tax law. we spend, we have 16 lawyers on our staff. we have half of those lawyers everyday, looking at these laws and interpret them. it's a very hard to keep up with it and so. we feel that there's a great need across the state to be able to resource public defenders, who have high volume caseloads to be able to understand the law and effectively advise their clients. and there are a lot of cases where it makes a difference. we're not only talking about undocumented people, but long time lawful permanent residents, who can be deported permanently for a misdemeanor. and those realities are even more real today, given the administration and the enforcement priorities that they're looking at. so, we asked for your aye vote for this bill.
[{'start': 889, 'end': 904, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1136, 'end': 1140, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Raha Jorjani: My name is Raha Jorjani. I direct the Immigration Representation Unit of the Office of the Alameda Public Defender. I've been practicing immigration law with a focus on the intersection between criminal and immigration law, and on detention and deportation defense for about 11 years and about 9 of those years, I've advised criminal defense attorneys, mostly public defenders, in various counties primarily because. At the last job I was at, I was able to receive calls from various public defenders and often provide free advice to them. And what I can report is that so many counties did not have the resources. So many counties were thrilled to just find a live immigration attorney that could answer even one or two questions, and would repeatedly and constantly tell me, I'm not sure what I'm going to do next week. I'm not sure, can I call you next week? No, you can't call me on every single question. Unfortunately we can't be that resource to you. So I've witnessed first hand how great the need is and how great the need is for funding. As a lawyer who has advised both criminal defense counsel regarding immigration consequences of criminal convictions, and the importance of trying to mitigate and avoid these consequences. And being the lawyer on the deportation and defense side, I've seen first hand and I've witnessed first hand how much is that stake for individuals, who are facing detention and deportation from the United States. And I know that for criminal defence counsel representing a non-citizen, to have access to immigration advice is absolutely critical, because I don't think that the decisions of whether or not a lawyer can take something to trial. The decision of whether to go on a trial on a particular case, or the decision of whether or not to enter a plea on a particular case. I can genuinely say, it's not knowing voluntary or intelligent, if that non-citizen, if that immigrant doesn't have access to the immigration advice. And in order for an attorney to be able to competently advice you, you have to stay up on the lies. Angie said immigration laws are known. As only second to tax laws in their complexity. I'll add to that that complexity is really in the Immigration and Nationality Act. That doesn't even cover the fact that the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals, the US Supreme Court, the Board of Immigration Appeals are daily issuing decisions that change. The list of crimes, the category of crimes that can subject a person to removability. So it is impossible for line public defenders, with their caseloads as they are, to not only stay on top of criminal law and represent individuals in criminal proceedings competently, but also stay on top of immigration laws and to be able to deliver this advice. And we've done surveys of chief defenders, I'll just wrap this up. We've done surveys of chief defenders and asked them, why they don't have the same type of immigration resources in their office, and the answer's always the same, and it comes down to funding.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2067, 'end': 2072, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Caliph Assagai: mr. chair, members, caliph jonah assagai on behalf of the california public defenders association, we're the sponsor of this bill and clearly in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maya Ingram: Maya Ingram, ACLU of California co-sponsor in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Scott Smithline: thank you very much. mr. chairman and members, thank you for the opportunity to come here today. my name is scott. i am the director of the department of resources, recycling and recovery, also know as calrecycle. appreciate the opportunity today to provide an overview of the bottle bill, or the beverage container program, and discuss some of the challenges that the program's currently facing and some of the efforts that the administration is currently working on with respect to reform. this is an old program, it's from 1986. it's initial focus as was just mentioned was on litter reduction and to really introduce the concept of returning of containers really the beginning of idea of recycling, returning beverage containers. the main component that distinguishes these type of program is that it is deposit program in california. we call that the crv, which is the california redemption value. it has successfully achieved it's mandated statutory goal of 80%. there are 10 other bottle bill programs in the united states. california's is the largest. we sell, the beverage manufacturers and grocery dealers sell over 23 billion single use beverage containers in the state every year. the 80% recycling rate puts us over 18 billion containers recycled in this program. on an order of scale, that's in the range of 50 million beverage containers per day are moving through this program. and it's a very complex program, there's a lot of moving parts. i have a pretty ambitious set of notes that i'm going to try and get through, but i think i can do it in a timely fashion. in it's simplest form, this program consists of the consumer paying a deposit on the beverage container, the consumer returning that container, and the program ensuring that there is infrastructure in place for that consumer to go. i mean in its simplest form that is what this program is really trying to achieve. i'm going to walk through some of the main components of the program right now. the program is on single use beverage containers. the program not only is dictated by the beverage but by the container that it's in. so the packaging materials matter. in this case, the program covers aluminum bi-metal plastic in glass containers, exclusively. it also is specific with respect to which the beverages are in the program. so the beverages that are in are water, soft drinks, beer, small juices, and wine coolers. examples of beverages that are not included are milk, medical food, infant formula, wine, large containers of juices. as we mentioned it is a deposit based system. under 24 ounces is nickel, 24 or over is a dime. the consumer has two main responsibilities in this program. they pay the initial crv upon purchase, and then they bring that container back for redemption. they have to have somewhere to go to redeem it. that is the collection infrastructure that we speak of. that's where the beverage container comes back into the stream of commerce essentially, that's where we regain access to that container. there's two main recycling mechanisms in this program. the first and the largest is what we call recycling centers and the second is the curbside program that is available to consumers in the state of california, and i'll discuss those in more detail in a moment. that infrastructure is supported by the program with two main payments. i'm going to describe those payments briefly to you. the first one is called the processing payment, this is a corner stone of this program. the processing payment is designed to cover the fact that when these containers are returned, sometimes the cost of collecting them is exceeds the value of that container. and when that happens, when the scrap value of the material is less than the cost of collecting the processing payment, there's a formula for us to determine what that difference is, so we can assure that those recycling centers are still viable in taking these containers that are already in the program. so that's what the processing payment is designed to do. the second main payment in the program is called the handling fee. the handling fee is made to a subset of recyclers. the processing payment goes to all recyclers. the handling fee goes to a subset of recyclers who are in special zones called convenient zones. a convenient zone is a zone that's within a half mile of a grocery store. recycling centers in the convenient zones get a handling payment, which is designed to ensure that there are recycling centers in an area that are convenient for consumers to take their beverage containers back. so they get not only the processing payment but they get the handling fee payment as well. there is one further mechanism in the convenience zone program to ensure that there are sufficient opportunities to redeem for the consumer. in the instance where there's no recycling center in the convenient zone, there is an obligation on the grosser in that instance. there are two options that the grosser can comply with the statue in that instance. the first is, they can choose to take the containers back in the store themselves. so sort of what we've colloquially been calling the recycler of last resort in that instance. about 2500 stores have chosen to do that in california. the other option is for them to pay an in lieu fee of a $100 a day to the state, through the department which we use then to support program payments including other payments to recyclers. about 140 stores are availing themselves at that option at this time. so i've talked a lot about payments. i want to talk now, just to shift briefly to how the program is funded. by far and away the largest primary source of funding in this program is the crv. we call it the unredeemed crv. and what that means is, every time a beverage is purchased a nickel or dime is paid on that beverage, that comes to the state. but not 100% of those beverages are redeemed. we're at about 80%. so that difference is what we call the unredeemed crv. and that unredeemed crv, which is approximately 180 to $200 million, depending on the year, is how we fund the program. there's a secondary source, a couple other secondary sources of funding which are smaller. i'll mention just one more that i haven't mentioned which is the processing fee. a processing fee is paid to the department by the manufacturer. and the idea of the processing fee is that it's designed to cover a portion of the cost of recycling the container that they sell into the state. so that processing fee is then turned around and used to cover part of that processing payment that's used to cover the cost of recycling. with respect to expenditures, by far an away the biggest expense is the returning of the crv. so that's $1.1 billion going right back out to consumers in terms of crv redeemed. the processing payments that i've been referring to now is about $100 million a year. the handling fees annually are about $50 million per year. we, of course, administer this program, there's a cost associated to that, it's under 4% of the overall program. and it runs between, i think around mid-40s, depending on the year, $40 million, mid-40s. and then there's a number of other smaller payments i'm not going to go through, that are important. but just for purposes of time, that round out to about $50 million. the last major component of the program that i just want to discuss, is that in the last 10 or 15 years, there have been a couple of efforts to include market development mechanisms in the program. so move from just to focus on collection, to what happens after we have the materials. there's one that's for plastic, and that's called the plastic market development payment. and that's designed to incentivize the in-state re-manufacturing, with the plastic that we have in california. that's a $10 million program. it's been a very important program, but i want to note that it is slated to sunset at the end of this year. the other is a program on glass, it's called the quality incentive payment, and that program is designed to support the cleaning of glass, so it can be kiln ready for manufacturing in the state, and that's also a $10 million program. i'm going to shift now and talk about, sort of some of the trends and changes we've seen over the last few decades, and how that has maybe created some challenges that we're working with in the program right now. maybe first and foremost beverage packaging has changed very significantly, since the inception of this program. in 1988, 95% of beverages sold were in glass or aluminum containers. today, that's less than half. so there's been obviously a huge influx of plastic into the container market. we're very familiar with this type of plastic. this is pet water bottles and soda bottles. but there is a number of other container types that have come into the market. flexible foil pouches, which are like juice pouches. shelf-stable aseptic cartoning for shelf-stable milks and juice boxes, that type of thing. those latter products, container types i just mentioned are not covered by this program. so there's an expanding number of container types that are not covered by the program at all, due to these changes. another significant change in the program in the last few decades has been the curbside collection. well, a number of changes in collection mechanisms but in particular curbside collection. just a couple of years after this program was adopted, the state adopted ab 939 which was the local mandate for cities to divert 50% of the waste that they generate. that really was the advent of curbside in the state of california. so that came just after this bottle bill. 99% of cities offer some form of curbside collection to their residents. so there's vast coverage of curbside in the state of california. and there's a number of benefits to curbside recycling for the state of california. curbside captures all material that's recyclable. it doesn't just capture beverage containers. so it's serving a very significant purpose for the state's environmental goals. and it's obviously very convenient from the respect that, you can just put something at your front door. we are experiencing some challenges with curbside recycling with respect to this program, however, one important point to note is that, it does not provide a direct opportunity to redeem. so if the consumer takes their water bottle or beer bottle and sticks it in the curbside bin, they're choosing to donate that refund value to their curbside operator, in that case. so it's convenient, but it's not convenient opportunity to redeem for the consumer. in like ways, we are experiencing some challenges with the consequence of co-mingling all the materials in the curbside bin. particularly, this is true with glass. when a glass container goes to a buy-back center, it's much easier to keep that clean and make it kiln ready. when glass is put into the curbside program by virtue of how it is all processed, it's a more expensive and complicated process to get the glass back out that, in some instances, has been adding to the cost of recycling, or affecting the amount of contamination in the glass product. and so those are some challenges that we will need to address with the curbside community. there have been significant fluctuations in the global marketplace, obviously that's a constant, these are all global commodities that we're talking about here. most significantly virgin prices of plastic, i mean i don't want to just focus on plastic, aluminum and other commodities have had significant drops in price, but in particular plastic has been very bad. with plastic, prices tend to follow the trend of oil. so when we've seen the precipitous drop-off of the price of oil, plastic has gone with it. that directly impacts the value of recycled plastic, which competes with virgin plastic. from 2011 to now, we've seen some of the prices of recycled plastics drop off by half. so these are not insignificant drops. when that happens, we have to try and make up for that difference if we want these recycling centers to still be viable and be able take these materials. the statute, the way it's written now, does not provide the flexibility to the department to be nimble, to respond to those changes in the marketplace. so that's a significant challenge that we're facing. and i imagine you've already heard or will hear more about that from stakeholders. the results are that there has been a significant decrease in the amount of recycling centers in the state of california. we have 800 fewer recycling centers than we did in 2011. in the year 2015, we lost approximately 500 of recycling centers and again the same number in 2016. now, some of those have re-opened, those aren't net losses. but that level of turn illustrates how these centers have lost viability to a certain extent. and it's not only a challenge to the recyclers but to the department to keep up with that pace of recycling, opening and closing of recycling centers, so. and finally, i want to talk about sort of the trend in the fund condition over the last couple decades. there's been wild fluctuations. there have been periods where the beverage container recycling fund has been experiencing surpluses, in the hundreds of millions of dollars. but in the last, more than five years, we've seen ourselves in a sustained condition of structural deficit. the major dynamic that drives that fiscal solvency, that structural deficit really is, crv-in versus crv-out. when the recycling rate increases, the amount as i mentioned, the amount of unredeemed crv shrinks. the payments that the department makes are mandatory payments. so we don't have the flexibility to cut back on some of those payments, we're required to make those payments. and that drives us into position of insolvency we've been there for a number of years. we've had sufficient cash on hand to continue operating, but there's a point at which that will no longer be the case. the only other significant source of funding that would help alleviate that is the processing fee that i discussed, sorry, the processing yeah, fee paid by the manufacturers as i discussed earlier. originally when this in the original bill the manufacturers were tasked with paying a larger portion of that cost of recycling of the container in 2002 that was curtailed with something called offsets. so what happened was, the amount that the beverage manufacturer had to pay was reduced, and that additional payment present of that payment was made by the unredeemed crv so that put additional pressure on the unredeemed crv. however, this is important to understand our most recent projections suggest the significant decrease and the condition of the size of the structural deficit. from fiscal year 15-16, we were projecting a 49 million. we are projecting a $6.2 million deficit in fiscal year 18-19. so why is the deficit shrinking? the projected deficit, i should say. there is number of reasons that are important to understand. the first is, in the last couple of years, the department has had some new tools to address fraud in particular we have a new program that is instituted at the california border with the cdfa. it is now a requirement if you are importing beverage containers into the state of california that you fill out a form, we called it imported materials report form. you sign under penalty of perjury that you will not redeem those containers in the state of california. it is a crime to bring containers in around a border station in california. so this program has had a significant impact on the viability on those criminal organizations bringing containers into the state. the second sort of anti-fraud or leakage program we've instituted in the last couple years is that we have a new level of oversight at all processors in the state of california. the processors are where the financial transactional occurs with the state. so in the last two years, we have had over $6.8 million in court order restitution, 37 individuals have been arrested. we've seized over 400,000 pounds of material and seize over almost $400,000 in cash. now, these numbers in and of themselves don't change the structural deficit that much. what's impossible to know is what is the deterrent effect that this new level of enforcement is having on, yes, exactly. another very specific item that's affecting the structural deficit is, i mentioned the plastic market development payment. that's an annual payment of $10 million to support in-state remanufacturing with the plastic from the program. that is, as i mentioned, set to sunset at the end of this year, so that takes $10 million off the books right there on the expenditure side. now, i'm not suggesting that's a good thing. i think that's an important program but with respect to the structural deficit, that's $10 million. but to round it back, i think the primary reason that we're seeing a decline in the structural deficit is that the recycling grade is trending down. the 15-16 recycling rate was at 84.5%. we're projecting a recycling rate for fiscal year 18-19 of 80.6%. that's a drop in 4% in the recycling rate. so while we may have a shrinking deficit, these current challenges that i've addressed, including the recycling center closures, increased responsibility on grocers, loss of redemption opportunities for consumers, very significantly declining recycling rate, one that puts us almost right back to the precipice of the statutory goal. and the loss of these market development programs that contribute to the shrinking deficit, these conditions continue to persist and need to be addressed. so while program has had significant success, we're concerned about some of the trends we see in overall performance. as we address these challenges, we very much agree that we need to look at this in comprehensive sense. the administration would like to see a folding in of more modern environmental principles into this program. this program was well before we were talking seriously about green house gas emission reduction and other environmental principles. also an additional focus on the economic benefits of this program with respect to jobs and in state manufacturing. we outlined a number of those ideas and the policy framework that was published on january 10th. historically, as mr. chairman you already mentioned, a lot of reform efforts have been on one or two components of the program, are focused explicitly on fiscal solvency. we think that there could be unintended consequences of following that particular approach. in the interest of time i'm not going to go through the policy framework in any detailed fashion. if i may just take a minute just to conclude and highlight the three policy goals that were outlined in there. the first is improving recycling and remanufacturing. we've stressed the importance of supporting the recycling infrastructure, so individuals have the opportunity to redeem their container, but we believe that that infrastructure may not need to look like it does today. there might be other efficiencies that we can gain. a lot has changed in 30 years, so we're very open sort of reassessing what convenience looks like? how we create an opportunity to redeem that doesn't necessarily focus around the grocers, so that's something that we've been talking about. and again, this shift towards looking at post-collection. so the policy paper looks at additional mechanisms to support in-state manufacturing. we are not gaining manufacturing capacity in the state of california, we're losing manufacturing capacity. we're losing glass manufacturing capacity. we're losing, as we speak, we're losing plastic manufacturing capacity. we just recently lost glass manufacturing capacity. we want to stop those trends and make sure that we support the infrastructure that we have for manufacturing in the state of california. and then thirdly on that bullet is a reevaluation of the containers and the beverage types that are in the program. as i mentioned there's some beverages that are already packaged in container types that are in the program. we think maybe those beverages should come in. there's also a new packaging types that probably make sense to bring in to the program. there's not actually a reason to keep them out. the second main policy goal of the framework document was shared responsibility and that really just recognizes that a flourishing program will continue to require investment in both the recycling infrastructure and the manufacturing infrastructure. we are proposing to restore the beverage manufacturer's share of responsibility to previous to what it is today. either through an increased cost share of the cost of recycling or through other mechanisms that were outlined in the document. and then finally and very briefly just enhancing adaptability, and sustainability is a bit of a catch-all, but there's some very important components to that. some are somewhat less interesting, like cleaning up antiquated provisions and things like that in a program, but others are very significant, like providing us the flexibility to respond to market conditions or changes in the infrastructure in a timely fashion, so we don't see a loss of that infrastructure. so in conclusion, the administration is committed to a comprehensive reform and a collaborative process. we look forward to working with stakeholders, certainly, this committee and the legislature. thank you very much.
[{'start': 108, 'end': 113, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Murray: Chairman, members, can you hear me, okay? Mark Murray with the environmental group Californians against waste. Really appreciate this hearing there's. Well this is been a successful program historically as Mr Smithline describe their lots of different bells and whistles and there is a need for some of those bells and whistles to be updated. But I do think that there is an urgency issue that is, that should be taken up by the Legislature. That is that the crocks of the problem with the Beverage Container Recycling Program right now. And back in 1986 when this legislation was adopted, while the world may have been a lot different back in 1986. There was an element in terms of the purpose of this program that I think that Legislature got exactly right. And when they described the purpose of this program, they said, the purpose is to create and maintain a marketplace where it is profitable to establish sufficient recycling centers and locations to provide consumers with convenient recycling opportunities. So that the establishment of minimum refund values and processing fees and through proper application. Blah, blah, blah. This was the main purpose of this beverage container recycling program, and this is what it's failing right now. With hundreds of closed recycling centers in the state, with recycling centers not being compensated as the statue intended. With the full cost of recycling. And with recyclers literally reporting on paper that they are losing money. That the entire recycling sector is losing money. That is a demonstration that this basic purpose of the program is failing to be met. Now it's not a failure of the department. It's not a failure of the statute. It's a failure of an application within the law. And this is the part that I think needs to be. It is this root problem that is the cause of recycling centers closing and stores having to do fake recycling. And pretend that they're taking containers back inside the store, or pay $100 a day fine. And that failure is the calculation of the cost recycling. For the last two years, the calculation of the cost of recycling has not covered the actual cost recycling. It is not provided. The reasonable financial return that's called for in the statute. Now the reason for that is a regulatory methodology that is admittedly flawed. No one proposes that the department look back, to see how did the recycling sector do to determine what should be the payment in the future. Nobody anticipated at the time, that the entire recycling sector would be losing money, so to look back would produce a negative number. So recyclers right now 2016, 2017 are not getting compensated the full cost of recycling, they're not getting a reasonable financial return. That's the part that needs to be fixed on an emergency basis. Can't wait 'till January, can't wait 'till July, that needs to be fixed now. We've asked the administration to try and deal with this administratively. At the moment they're responding that they don't have that administrative authority. But that's something that the Legislator can do on an urgency basis, it will help to solve the grocery sector problem, the recycling sector problem. And we can continue the conversation about what has to happen to this program comprehensively in the long term. It doesn't take away from that discussion. Arguably,it focuses that discussion on the bits and pieces the program that really do need to be updated as opposed to kind of the elephant in the room, which is the $1.25 million a month that recycling centers in California are losing. I appreciate your attention.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 209, 'end': 218, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Paula Treat: yeah, i see some wood involved. paula i represent the reclaimer recyclers. so we're the ones that take the plastic items and bottles, make it into flake or pellet, turn it back into a product, so it can become something else. so it really closes the loop. so i have six. one filed bankruptcy, so we're down to five now. but the problem that they're having beyond the virgin resin, which is a big problem. the virgin plastic is a big problem because it's so much cheaper right now and it has been for many years. we have issues like glasses with quality but that's not what i want to talk about today. i want to thank the chairman for having this hearing. i want to thank cal recycle for working with us. we can work on quality issues later. right now we need that minimum content. we need to have skin in the game for everybody who has bottles in the state of california, to keep them out of your landfills, keep them out of the oceans and streams and put them back to work in another plastic form. and we need the pmd right now. the pmd payments are really key. they aren't fully funded, because the fund is not very big, but we would love to see that fund bigger. so that it can help these manufacturers keep these thousand plus green jobs in california until we can get through that minimum content phase that actually lets us be whole. and then we may not need the pmd again. but the key is it just help us stay alive. i don't want to see any more bankruptcies. i don't think you do. it closes the loop and thank you so much for having this hearing.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Pitto: Good morning. Mary Pitto with Rural County Representatives of California and I to wish to thank you for holding this hearing. And I wish to thank Cal Recycle for all of their efforts of bringing all the stakeholders together. This is a real critical issue for our rural counties. We've been hit hard by the certified Senator's closures. We have several counties now with no redemption opportunities, and many more that are down to either one or two. This means that people would have to travel up to 50 miles to be able to redeem their bottles and cans, so it's very important. One of the things that is important to us are the handling fees. Oftentimes these single dealers that are left in our counties don't only deal with the bottles and cans, but they do the other commodities as well. And the handling fees are what have kept them open. And so we are very much in agreement with doing a tiered system so that the small volume handlers can continue to operate. I'd also like to stress that we are partners with our haulers. And so we are at the table with the haulers and with Cal Recycle they figure all in this together. And we want it to work for all of us, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Leonard Lang: my name is lang, i'm president of upper room consulting. i consult with recyclers, processors, haulers all over the state. i have been in this program since the beginning and i sincerely thank you for this opportunity. i believe this is the first oversight meeting that has been held since byron sher left the assembly sometime ago. just to give you a little background, in 1987 my employer assigned me the job of the bottle bill. and within about six years we were the largest beverage container in the west. number two in the united states, certainly the biggest in the state. i trained and assisted, not only our own businesses but other recyclers. i have run recycling centers, processors, mrfs, operated curbside operations, i'm familiar with all aspects of this operation. in 2007, i recognized the industry wasn't staying up on regulatory problems that they were facing and especially immigrants. so i went into business to assist them. i have defended more recyclers in this state than anyone else. i probably read over 20,000 pages of department accusations. i am intimate with the statue and regulations. i have successfully petitioned oal to rule underground regulation on some of the actions of the department. now, in 1986's program started in it was basically an experiment and we all got involved and it was blind leading the blind. it started in 1987 and by around 1991, charles calderon had introduced a bill that would have imposed standards on the operations of the program. what we saw was that the legislature gave the responsibility to the division to audit and to investigate. but we didn't insure that there was competence, and that's been the problem with fraud. in 2002, we saw first loan come out of the program which affected it solvency. 2003 ab 3056, i called it the christmas tree, it gave away lots of money. and started to drain on the fund. 2008, 2009, we saw the financial disaster, we saw the fund approach in solvency, proportional reductions were imposed. 2010 important year, the legislature requested an audit. the first audit report by the state bureau of audits showed ineffective management and statistical incompetence. also that same year, lao said, budget bills were not a place for beverage container legislation. 2011, the department issued the notice about out of state containers. i argued with him for about two years. finally, the former head of the office of administrative law wrote a petition. and the department was forced to admit that they had imposed underground regulation on the recycling industry. in 2012, we got a new deputy director, and he came out of the medical section of the government. he came with the term called pay and chase, and that led to an increase in underground abuse. convenience zone pricing abuse started around 2012. i have that on a you tube video, it's available for anybody to see. that abuse was a magnet for out of state material. in 2013, oal overturned that notice. also in 2013, we saw sb 96 a budget bill. it extended the certification time for recycles making more difficult, more expensive, it established load limits. it eliminated co-mingle that was detrimental to the glass industry and the hospitality industry. because that gave them good quality furnish, then they imposed training classes on the industry. and they forced us to use a computer system called doris. both added additional cost, doris is now being used to profile applicants into the system. 2014, we saw another budget built sb 861, it increased the statute of limitation to 250%. both sb 96 and sb 861, language came from the department, industry was not consulted. 2014, we all had the second audit which came out poorly for the department. in 2016, we had another budget bill proposed and we identified fraud going to the curbside systems. dor had major staff increases during 2016 and their legal costs are rising because i and another attorney are successful in challenging their accusations. 2017, we're looking at insolvency and modernization. right now, i say we have a house built on sand. my recommendation, request another audit, audit enforcement, certification, endorse. the two audits already expose quite a bit, but this hasn't been dealt with. you will find the answers that you need to shore up this system and if it wasn't for the insolvency, we wouldn't have started these meetings to begin with. now, my recommendations, you need standards of competency for audits and investigations. the calderon bill would've established audit standards and also would've put department of justice in charge of all investigations. you can't just hire a college graduate and stick them in investigations, they don't know what they're doing. right now any auditor with a laptop can go in and make changes to the payments to recyclers, which completely circumvents due process and the right to appeal. i also think that there has been a problem. there is the dymally-alatorre act which requires state agencies to create information in languages, and the majority of the recyclers in this program are latino. they have never published the act or the regulations in spanish, which i think is what the dymally-alatorre act requires. the statute has fraud indicators built into it. my recommendation is you take those fraud indicators out and put them into regulation because the department misinterprets them. right now, the original statute has an exemption to adopt permanent regulations. the department can adopt emergency regulations and they last forever. there was never a sunset put on that provision. it needs a sunset. we've adopted emergency regulations with sb 96 and i petitioned that they adopt them on a permanent basis, they have not. we're still running on emergency regulations. that denies the industry their right to participate in rule making. i recommend that you eliminate the informal hearing. it's cheap injustice. it's not due process. and you need to adopt standards and formal standards for the formal hearing when the department is going to re-write a decision. i recommend you repeal sb 96, 861. recyclers were guaranteed that they could make money in this program and if proportional reductions are imposed, more are going to die. if you take proportional reductions out of section 14581 and put it some place else, it wont be hurt. recyclers will not be hurt. now there's a question of whether or not redemption is $0.05 and $0.10 or $0.04 and $0.08. i recommend that the committee look in, what was the legislative intent and what should the redemption be at this time. two years ago, the department entered into a memorandum of understanding with the us department of labor. there is no authority for a state agency to go into contract with a federal agency. the result has been that the federal agency is coming in and interrogating recyclers on issues which had nothing to do with department of labor. they're asking questions on calrecycle's behalf. now i go to phoenix frequently. the current street price over there is $1 for cans, $0.50 for plastic. this is a good indicator, good benchmark to see how well your system is working. now, the department has conflicting goals. in one sense, we're trying to increase recycling, especially with the 75% goal, and on the other hand, the calrecycle is trying to reduce recycling. i have clients who have applied for certification at convenience zones and have been denied. probably the most egregious place was in visalia. less than half the town is covered. i had a recycler apply for two locations. he's been in business eight years. he was denied. you need to bring fraud under control. i don't think it's that hard. recycling is a physical, tangible, logistical business and you can follow this stuff. i've identified three locations in phoenix plus a yard which converts the material and ships it to los angeles. i've taken a picture of a 53 footer backed in to that location. i've provided address, gps coordinates to the department and to doj. i'm here to protect recyclers and the public.  and get fraud under control and we won't have to have these discussion. thank
[{'start': 11, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 290, 'end': 300, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1387, 'end': 1403, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2185, 'end': 2188, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ralph Simoni: mr chair and members, ralph representing the american beverage association. mr. chair, i think you really keyed in on this program at the outset when you said that it is complex with a lot of moving parts. right now, we only have the broad framework which was the subject of discussion with the department. the 10 hours that were mentioned earlier, when you get involved deeply in this program, you realise that the devil is in the details. we look forward to seeing a modernization approach, one that doesn't pick winners and losers, one that is visionary and updates the program after 30 years. during one of the hearings or workshops, i should say down in the governor's conference room, it was mentioned that this program quote grew up with curbside. in 30 years, we've seen a totally different landscape. so at some point, everything needs to be re-balanced and reconfigured. senator wieckowski, you mentioned something that i think is important. you inferred that perhaps we should have some study or something. but one thing that is peculiarly absent from the department's modernization proposal is the lack of empirical or analytical data. i think it's important that we have some foundation and know what's going on out there before we make critical changes. about a year ago, the department had discussed a study with uc on convenient zones when we asked during the workshop phase a week or two ago, we were told they were still quote negotiating the scope and the timing of that report would not be available for this comprehensive reform. i kind of look at it a little differently. i think it would be fundamental to structuring a reform to know the balance of how many people are using buyback centers in supermarket parking lots versus curbside. a couple of other things from a beverage manufacture perspective. there's been a lot of discussion and proposals going back to 2014 about removing processing fee offsets. just so you understand that would shift about $100 million annually from the unredeemed account back on to manufacturers. when the 2014 bcp was going through, that was one of the core proposals. it's part of the modernization concept. but going back and looking over my notes in 2014, we were told that the program would become insolvent in march of 2015 almost two years ago, now we're still out there. all i want to express to you is that there is an inner relationship between when we might become insolvent and the cost to manufacturers. certainly if this $100 million annual cost is shifted to beverage manufacturers, it's going to be extremely difficult to absorb. and i think simple economic principles would tell us that ultimately that's going to be passed on to the consumer in the form of a higher cost of goods. so thinking about the 2014 proposal, if we had figured that we would have collected about $200 million from ultimately consumers that wouldn't be needed to run those programs. so again, we have to be very careful in balancing solvency. senator stone, you mentioned issues dealing with the plastics. certainly the portfolio of our beverages from sparkling drinks to juice, to sports drinks and whatever are predominantly packaged in plastics. many of it we designed for recyclability. the entire package, such as on the desk there are recyclable from not only the pet body of the container, but also the lids and the labels, etc. we have the industry establish, the plastic recycling corporation of california, way back in 1987 at the inception of the program, that has ensured that no pet containers have gone to the landfill. they have all gone into productive secondary uses. and there's a multitude of secondary uses. they range from bottle to bottle to a lot of thermal forms. so that when you pick up baked goods or items in the produce department that are in the clamshells, those are thermal form containers, they are predominantly recycled content. yes, there has been a global imbalance in terms of the cost of our pet and whatever. but we don't believe that recycled content, that is bottle to bottle content is necessarily the way out. there are again, a multitude of markets and the minute you start favoring one secondary market over another, it starts cascading and creating a distortion in the normal marketplace for those other uses. so we have to be very careful as we go about this, and perhaps some analytical data would assist. so we are pleased to work with the department through this process. but again, we'd prefer that the solution not pick winners and losers but be more visionary and scope. and take into account how far we've moved 30 years ago to where we are now, thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 889, 'end': 899, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2999, 'end': 3004, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Latimer: mr. chairman and members, john jonah latimer on behalf of the california retailers association. we have some shared membership with the grocers association. i certainly would support everything that louis said. we too are in support of the bill. i would just add we were part of the discussions deal in the legislature on the budget process last year. we were part of the discussions along with the grocers took the tail end of the legislative session. and we were given the signal from the administration of a desire to do something, and frankly the senate, to do something in a more holistic fashion. the administration has put out a large potential revision to the program and they've hosted a number of meeting that we continue to participate in. the complexity attached to this program does take an awful lot of time to work through to find the perfect solution or even frankly, a good one. the problem that we have, as grocers, is that we're the carnage along the way. so if we continue to have this problem of not being able to get to a global solution fast enough, our members suffer. in addition to, we won't be at the table in the conversation as a stakeholder along the way. it's important for the committee and the members to know we participate in this program not only as a dealer, we're also manufacturers. we have many private label brands that we offer and sell through our stores that we act as a manufacturer. and therefore have the manufacturer component requirements of this program that will continue and we're fine with that. we accept that responsibility. so what we appreciate about this bill, is it is an attempt not to force to all the larger discussion. it's an attempt to try to be sure that as that larger discussion is going on. we don't again, what we would argue is unfairly damage, retailers and grocers trying to be good partners. so we urge you to aye vote today.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 199, 'end': 204, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nannette Miranda: Good morning Senators. Nannette Miranda, Public Affairs Manager for the Save Mart companies, a family owned regional grocer with 207 stores throughout California and northern Nevada. We do business as Food Max, Save Mart, and Lucky, we are in support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sam Rodriguez: good morning, mr. chairman, members of committee. sam john rodriguez on behalf of united food and commercial workers. about 160,000 members throughout the state of california primarily in the grocery and pharmacy industry. we're very much in support of this industry because i want to echo senator skinner's comments earlier this morning. that the grocery stores in the middle, in the middle of the grocery store is our workforce. and we do not necessarily want to be in the business of handling items that may in danger health and safety issues with our members. we're primarily in the food business and we don't necessarily want to be in getting our hands cut or by glass or by tin. this is something that we find extremely vital to be resolved. and we are very much in support of what senator mcguire and senator glazer are doing. in trying to get the administration to come to the table and resolve this issue.
[{'start': 50, 'end': 68, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 298, 'end': 305, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 796, 'end': 803, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 816, 'end': 822, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark Murray: Mr. Chairman, members, Mark Murray with the environmental group Californians Against Waste. It seems to me that, as I stated earlier, there's a need for some urgent fixes in this program. I think urgent fixes that would require legislation. And we have no objection to the provisions that are in this bill. We've proposed to the Committee and we've proposed to the author that the bill be amended to include the very specific recycling fix that Mr. Smithline described earlier, has resulted in the unintended consequence of recyclers not being reimbursed the cost of recycling or being provided the reasonable financial return which is in the statute. So they need a legislative fix to solve that. We can wait a year for them to do it trough a regulatory change but recyclers are losing $1.25 million every month. Obviously recycling centers have closed, so we think it is, I would hope that the Legislature would see the need for an urgent legislative fix. This vehicle presents a potential opportunity. We've prepared amendments to this bill, provide them to your Committee to make that change on an urgency basis. I am absolutely confident that the grocers and recyclers will continue to be at the table for a comprehensive fix regardless of the outcome. It would just be better, if focusing on those issues, if this recycler fixed the root of the recycling center closures, the root of grocery stores having to take containers back inside the store If that was addressed immediately.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 449, 'end': 458, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Joshua Shaw: Mr. Chair, Members, Joshua Shaw, Executive Director of the California Transit Association. I'm really just here to introduce our chair and be a technical resource recognizing there have been a lot of questions about transit funding. Mike Wiley, long-time General Manager and CEO of the Sacramento Regional Transit District. The state Capital's Transit System is here, and I'll be a resource.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 233, 'end': 243, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mike Wiley: chair cannell and members of the committee, i'm mike jonah wiley, as josh indicated, and i'm chair of the california transit association. and we at the association are very pleased to support sb-1, and we thank chair beall for working so hard to reflect a true multimodal funding package. two weeks ago, during your informational hearing, josh shaw testified. as the state widen funding needs faced in our transport system through out the states of california. as indicated by senator beall, we estimate about $7 billion a year, over the next 10 years, of the 71 billion that he indicated, is needed, with about 5 billion an year, roughly two-thirds to 70% of that. is needed for critical capital spending and then another 2 billion a year alone simply to reverse the current deterioration of our capital facilities. too many of our rail cars, tracks, buses, stations and related facilities, about 40% of our capital investments statewide has met or exceeded its useful life. and what that means is as we continue to operate those facilities vehicles, the operations costs to keep them operational and in a safe operating order continues to increase, sb-1 would invest about 600 million annually for these purposes. yes, we could use more. we could use every cent that you could provide us to rehabilitate, provide true state of good repair and the growing expand or services. but we're very thankful for the proposal before you that reflected in sb-1 and we certainly wish your support. we know full well that making transit more frequent makes it more attractive to those riders with options. and those operations dollars and new capital serve those riders with no options as well. during my 39 years with the sacramento regional transit district, and especially my last 9 years as general manager, and i did retire august 1st, but i'm still working for transit. and not only did we want to expand our offer range, but perhaps more importantly, we face the constant challenge to bring our system up to that state of good repair. we needed to repair and rehabilitate and modernize or [unknown] improve our bus stops and rail stations. make safety enhancements and upgrade our communications and control equipment. sb-1 would provide new funds to do just that. we hope you will vote to invest these funds in enhancing public transit service for all of california. thank you.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 13, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 48, 'end': 64, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 69, 'end': 73, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 217, 'end': 222, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 339, 'end': 348, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 485, 'end': 490, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark Watts: Good afternoon, Chair and Members. My name is Mark Watts. I'm here today on behalf of Transportation of California. Our coalition is comprised mainly of major contracting companies, material suppliers from many of the districts around the state that you represent. And Ali of labor. However, companies are businesses, they are operating the state, they're very involved in local regional business organizations and we are in support here today of SB-1. We've all been beneficious of a major transportation system that have been recognized as among the best in the country at one time. Mostly developed nearly 50 years ago, the state's transportation infrastructure supported decades of economic and population growth that helped prepare our state for. [UNKNOWN] the past two decades, we've seen the transportation system decay to a point of being unreliable at times. But frankly, sometimes unsafe. Our business community worries have without a solution, such as SB-1, California will be headed to the bottom of the nationwide list when it comes to the condition of our roads. In fact, it's a pretty well just acknowledge the attentive California Service Centers have paid the conditions and rank among the most deteriorating state. The author did discuss the well-documented $59 billion backlog and differed maintenance in our state transportation system and the $73 billion short fall for cities and counties. Logic would tells us [UNKNOWN] expect to make progress over the next 10 years anything less than 5 to $6 billion would be, would not let us make real progress from reduce in the backlog. California businesses, large and small alike, have been waiting in desperation for California to repair our aging infrastructure. Simply stated, our employees and managers alike often find themselves stuck in traffic to and from work every day, whether it's in Northern California, Southern California, or in the Great Central Valley. Our system is inadequate. And if our citizens are stuck in traffic, then so are the goods that are in transit from production to customer. Freight is critical to California's economic well-being, and having an efficient system is important and SB-1 does provide the wherewithal to start to address that. It's estimated that the amount of freight moved on California highways will more than double from about 1,000 million tons in 2002 to more than 2 billion tons in 2035. Not sure where I came up with 1,000 million, but that's a billion. While it's good for California's and the nations economy this increasing truck traffic will also accelerate the deterioration of the transportation infrastructure. You've heard the witness on transit. Our organization stands in support of the transit component in the measure, and reforms. The author did lay out several reforms. We think these are very important and vital to transparency and improving efficiency and we also expect to see the movement of a parallel path of legislation that would provide sort of a lockbox approach as CA2 comes to mind. And we're taking a deep look at that. One last observation I'll make, and then I'll close, is that there are statewide job benefits that would accrue. Economic modeling that our organization did a decade ago, which has held up, shows that projects funded in infrastructure generate about 18,000 jobs per billion spent a new activity that includes the jobs that directly occur in our and organizations as well as the ensuing additional economic activity that's activated throughout the state. So for these reasons, we encourage your support and ask for an aye vote.
[{'start': 46, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sean Ashan: Good afternoon. Good afternoon. Sean Ashan, I'm Mayor Pro-Tem for the City at Downey, and I'm here to support the bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Lee: chris on behalf of the california state association of counties, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Hank Trimble: Good afternoon, Chairman Bill and Senators. My name's Hank Trimble. I'm from the City of Hawaiian Gardens. I'm the mayor. We currently maintain our city's...I'm in support. Thank you, very much.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 29, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 54, 'end': 66, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vivian Romero: Hello, happy valentines day. Mayor Vivian Romero, for the City of Montebello. I am also the independent city's Association President. I support that bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ed Berens: Ed Berens, on behalf of the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors, in support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Pittmentell: pittmentell here on behalf of the city of santa monica and the santa cruz metropolitan transit district, in support.
[]
Filipe Fuentes: filipe mike fuentes, on behalf of the associate general contractors of california, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Quigley: michael filipe quigley, with the california alliance for jobs, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kirk Blackburn: Kirk Blackburn on behalf of the City of Temecula in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eddie Bernacci: bernacci, on behalf of united contractors and their 500 union contractors and vendors, in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Steve Baker: Steve Baker, with Associates for the professional engineers in California government, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Cremence: cremence, international union of operating engineers representing both the heavy equipment operators on the new construction, also the caltrans and maintenance workers, in full support.
[]
Jeremy Smith: thank you, mr. chair, members of the committee. smith, here on behalf of the state building and construction trades council, also in support.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Long: Rebecca Long, with Metropolitan Transportation Commission for the nine county San Francisco Bay Area, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roxanne Miller: Roxanne Miller, on behalf of Mayor Sam Ricardo and the entire council City of San Jose, in strong support. Lets fix it.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 35, 'end': 46, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Karen Lang: Good afternoon, Mr Chair. Karen Lang, on behalf of the counties of Humboldt, Napa, Yuba, Solano, Sonoma and the city and County of San Francisco. I want to thank their Senator for his work and also Jolena Voorhis asked me to communicate the support of the Urban Counties Caucus today. In support, thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 198, 'end': 212, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Shane Gusman: Shane Gusman, on behalf of the Teamsters and the International Longshoremen Warehouse Union, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Arriaga: john, on behalf of the league of california cities latino caucus, the transportation agency of monterey country, monterey county, the city of salinas, and the fort ord reuse authority in support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Keith Dunn: Thank you, Keith Dunne, Self-Help Counties in support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 22, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Andrew Anthony: thank you, mr. chairman and members. andrew michael anthony here on behalf of los angeles mayor eric garcetti in support and the los angeles county metropolitan transportation authority and for the southern california regional rail authority, otherwise known as metrolink, i would like to associate myself with the remarks from david katorsky and capital quarter. we appreciate the revisions in sb1 that provide money for commuter rail and industry rail. thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 96, 'end': 109, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 328, 'end': 342, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Todd Bloomstine: Todd Bloomstine for the Southern California Contractors Association in support. Thank you, Mr. Chair and members.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gus Khouri: Gus Khouri on behalf of the Santa Barbara County Association of Governments, San Mateo County Transportation Authority in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Skip Daum: Skip Daum, on behalf of the American Subcontractors Association, which are open shop and unions, we ask that you move the vehicle down this entry ramp to an improved California infrastructure.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rosanna Carvacho: Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and Senators. Rosanna Carvacho here on behalf of the Alameda County Board of Supervisors, also in support.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Lambdon: good afternoon, sarah andrew lambdon, mayor pro-term in the city of hayward in support. good afternoon, lucinda wilcox on behalf of the city of sacramento in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 104, 'end': 118, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Josh Hubert: josh sarah hubert for the east bay leadership council in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Viviana Becerra: good afternoon mr. chair and members of the committee, viviana, on behalf of the santa clara valley transportation authority and the county of san mateo in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 55, 'end': 62, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eric Johnson: Good afternoon, Eric Johnson of the California Transportation Commission, in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alex Gibbs: Hello, Alex Gibbs, Towns and Public affairs, in support and on behalf of a number of entities, including the cities of Oakland, Emeryville, San Leandro, Hayward, Pismo Beach, Tilary, Carson, Walnut Creek. The counties of Imperial and Mariposa. The North Country Transit District and the Merced County Association of Governments, in strong support.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eloy Garcia: Mr. Chairman and members, Eloy Garcia for the Western States Petroleum Association, and we're not in opposition. So I'm not sure how you want to handle it. We are not in opposition today. We have some strong concerns that we think it's appropriate and timely to share with you. So if you want to count my time towards the opposition, but I could use one minute or two minutes of your time. Thank you very much. Again, on behalf of the Western States Petroleum Association representing the state's major refiners. Producers of 92% of the transportation fuels on the roads today and the fuels that are being proposed to be taxed here today, gasoline, diesel, jet fuel, and others as well. We have historically supported investments in infrastructure. We understand that need to maintain our roads, improve our capacity, understand that our customer's needed, your constituency needs it as well. The concern we have here today is that we are now taking on the issue of transportation infrastructure after we have added fuels under the cap and trade program. Which has resulted in an increase of costs to your constituents and our consumers that tracks very much with the price of carbon. We're circulating to you, up there, a chart, which is a conversion chart, this is from the Air Resources Board. There's an absolute cost to adding fuel under the cap and trade program and we ask you to consider that as you're proposing and considering adding additional cost to your constituents and attracts with carbon. So, Senator Atkins, I hate to throw off the mat in terms of what it means to your constituents but you cannot forget about the price of carbon. You have decided to add that to the price of fuel and it's an unspecific uncertain. It tracks with the price of carbon. For every $10 of allowance cost, it's $0.09 a gallon on gasoline, $0.10 on diesel. So as you think through extending the cap and trade program this year and you think about-Right, well, I would disagree with you just a little bit, Senator, in that you're counting on cap and trade revenue for this program. 300 million, we would just encourage you to consider the price of carbon in addition to the price of a tax because you're counting on a carbon trade for the revenue. You need to include the price as well from the cap and trade program to the bill specifically, a couple of points that we would ask you to consider. We would actually consider and minimize the impact to the consumer, then in terms of how much over what period of time. We actually appreciate the approach in this bill which is to face it in whole sense over a couple of years. We think that's the right approach. We need to face it in, again, be thoughtful about the additional prices as well. We do not agree with indexing the price of gasoline over the taxes on gasoline. Again, it's a declining source of revenue that's why we have a concern. We expect that our other policies will increase alternate fuel vehicles and we think that's place to index because that is where the future is going by California's design of its programs. For that reason we ask for equitable treatment of all highway users. There was a comment here about the increase on zed vehicles. We disagree with Senator Allen's comments. If these vehicles aren't being driven substantially then there is negligible or no environmental benefit from investing in those vehicles. It makes sense because you're actually driving them and you're replacing.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1519, 'end': 1525, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3234, 'end': 3239, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jared Sanchez: Hello, thank you to all the Committee Members for working on this bill. And thank you in particular, Senator Beall for leading at long process to secure our transportation funding for all of our systems. My name is Jared Sanchez with the California Bicycle Coalition who represent dozens of local affiliates across the state. Some are here, but also 75 other groups that signed on to and oppose an amended letter which I think was referenced by Senator Atkins. Also that some will speak regarding these messages. We appreciate the importance of maintaining our existing road infrastructure that many depend on. And your urgency defined in funding solution as maintenance costs continue to climb. We support the fix it first concept that is priority throughout legislation. We also support the meaningful inclusion for up to 150 million out of the state highway account for active transportation. However, with that recognition in mind, we have focused our collect position on five priority recommendations that are not incorporated in SB1. And therefore we oppose any bill without significant compromises. We strongly believe that funding our roads must be balanced with investments in a future transportation system that protects our environment. Promotes social justice, and economic justice, and improves our communities. The five priority areas, I'll list throughout here if you haven't read the letter, to just kind of reinforce what those letter states. The first one is we believe that any new transportation funding should advance social and economic justice by ensuring that significant advancements from this package provide meaningful benefits for low-income communities and people of color. These communities are disproportionately in need of greater mobility. Who will pay more than their fair share of regressive taxes proposed and already bear the brunt of the health and safety impacts of our transportation system. Number two, we believe that new funding should dramatically increase sustainable funding for the operation of public transit and reducing fares. We should include building new transit capital projects but also put greater resources toward improving existing surface. Public transit should provide high quality efficient transit service, especially for low income individuals and families. Number three, we believe new transportation investments should support our air quality and climate standards. Transportation is a single largest of air and climate pollutants in California to obtain federal and health based clean air in our 2030 and 2050 climate standards. We must prioritize investments that reduce vehicle miles traveled, especially for the freight sector, which is responsible for the vast majority of wear and tear on our roads and for emitting harmful air pollutants. While also improving air quality, physical health, and those with access without a car. Any funding that should potentially expand freeways or add new road capacity as through the trade corridor fund or the STIP must be tracked and mitigated which project contribute to attainment of our air quality and climate standards. Number four.
[{'start': 109, 'end': 114, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 215, 'end': 228, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 453, 'end': 459, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bill Sadler: good afternoon. i'm bill josh sadler, i represent the safe routes to school national partnership. and we're also one of the groups that signed onto the letter that jared already referenced. first, i wanted to express support for the investment act of transportation program up to 150 million would almost double. the amount of money available, and this program remains heavily over-subscribed every year. so we strongly support the money that would go in there because that would definitely help a lot of communities with their projects to help increase walking and biking, and make it safer. but as jared said, some of the broader themes of this proposal we are opposed to without some changes. first, the advancing social and economic justice. a lot of the people walking and biking and taking public transit are low income and people of color. and they're disproportionately burdened by the health and safety impacts of our transportation system and any increases in tax. the taxes tend to be regressive. and then, also, with aligning our climate goals. we have ambitious climate goals in the states and transportation is one of the largest emitters of greenhouse gas emissions. and we don't see a strong alignment of this plan with the goals that are set by other agencies as a whole, and this is concerning to us. so we would recommend any funding that could potentially expand freeways or add new road capacity must be tracked and mitigated with projects that contribute to our climate goals. and finally, as jared mentioned, to be increasing expertise and accountability at the ctc, moving it into an independent agency. we see a need for oversighting approval specially since they will be ultimately approving most of these transportation projects. and we are also supporting assembly bill 179 which would change some of the composition of that to add members that have expertise in things like transportation and public transportation. so with that, thank you for allowing us to provide comments.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 164, 'end': 169, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 600, 'end': 605, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1515, 'end': 1520, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
David Wolfe: Yes, Mr. Chairman, members, good afternoon. David Wolfe at the Howard Jarvis Taxpayers Association oppose SB1. Members, allow me to paint for you a picture. Two parties, two wearing factions, if you will, are gathered. One is the party of quantity the other is the party of quality. In the middle are Californians stuck in traffic in their cars. Both sides understand this problem if there's a road maintenance transportation back clogged if $58 billion of the next 10 years that needs to be addressed. Well, that's the commonality ends. The party of quantity wants to raise your gas and car taxes to the tune of another 4 to $5 billion a year. They may not remember that we already lead the nation in regressive gas and car taxes that every single California have to pay punishing those who can least afford it. And members on the other side, you have the party of quality. The party of quality realizes that you don't need new revenues to get workers home to their families faster. The party of quality realizes that there are billions of dollars of reforms that can be adopted today to address the backlog that I mentioned. $1 billion of existing fees on truckers can be diverted today to road repair and maintenance. But the party of quantity said no. Existing cap and trade funds that all drivers pay can be diverted to road repair instead of being used to fund high speed rail. And that includes, of course, the Prop 1A high speed rail bots. And many bills have been offered up in the past to deal with these issues and yet the party of quantity said no. Sequoia environmental exemptions, can be created for some existing road maintenance projects. Accelerating necessary construction. But again, the party of quantity, said no. And only 20% of California's transportation budget along like currently goes to road repair maintenance. The party of quality proposed some common sense solutions to reform Caltrans and increase the share of general fund revenue that goes to transportation, but the party of quantity, again said no. Members, it's all to common the warring factions here forget about the people stuck in the middle, the Californian taxpayers. According to recent polling done by the California Chamber of Commerce only 20% of voters believe that additional funds are needed to address road maintenance issues. While 80% believe that the current funds need to be managed better. Members, a communications degree is not needed to understand that messaging. No new taxes without serious reforms. It's a common interest of both parties to adopt reforms today and get taxpayers home to their families tomorrow. Let's stop leaving billions of dollars of quality solutions on the table just because government wants more and more taxes. I'd ask for a no vote.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Phoebe Seaton: thanks so much, phoebe bill seaton with leadership council for justice and accountability, we are based in the san joaquin valley and coachella valley. and we represent lower income californians, i'm in work with community based organizations throughout the state to improve environmental social economic justice for all californians. we align our comments today with calbike and safe routes to school along with the 80 something organizations that signed on to the letter, senator atkins referenced. and we're presented with an opportunity now, with this transportation package, to further the goals outlined in that letter. social justice, environmental justice, economic justice. i think that, without repeating what my colleagues have already articulately stated. i just want to know, from our perspective in the san joaquin valley and the coachella valley, the regions that we work in are often lifted up as reasons and justifications for why we need to focus on road expansion and highway expansion. yet month after month as we meet with the residents we work with the number one priority is improve transit, improve walkability, improved air quality and improved environmental quality. and improved consistency across the board with our climate goals, so on behalf of those organizations and those residents that couldn't be here today, i ask that you strongly consider the recommendations included in our letter in discuss today, thanks so much.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 482, 'end': 488, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dave Campbell: My name is Dave Campbell, I'm the Advocacy Director at Bike East Bay, Alameda in Contra Costa counties East Bay of the Bay Area and we're a signature to ladder cowboy and the other 80 organizations. Wanted to give you a little local perspective of why the active transportation program is so important and we appreciate the money in it. We need more, hot of the press from Contra Costa County in Alameda County, we're doing coordinated call for projects there. For all funding, federal, state, regional, local to program over the next two or three years and in Contra Costa County, the applications for bike and walking projects are oversubscribed by 400%. In Alameda County, they are oversubscribed by 1200%, and that over subscription is higher than for any other mode of travel and that's not good news that it's oversubscribed. It is good news because cities are trying to build these walk and bike projects in their cities. They get it, they want to do it, but so much more money is needed. And when we advocate for this money, we often hear from decision makers, well, the local streets and roads money, that's where you can build your walkable, bikeable neighborhoods. And we'll just put a complete streets policy on that money and we're off for that. And we want to strengthen that but honestly we're probably five or 10 years away from getting public works departments, training, and experienced, retrained and up to speed on how to do that. And the challenge has been getting the transportation planners to talk to the engineers who repave streets. And we still have so much more work to do, and that's why the act of transportation program at least I'm estimating here the next five or 10 years is so important to get these projects built on the social equity component, which is super important. Great to hear that Oakland is in support of this money as well. Oakland, I believe is the first city to my knowledge that has passed a strategic transportation plan where equity is the number one driving factor. Every dollar spent will be spent in a way to look at what have been the impacts of our past transportation decisions, and what are the better decisions to make going forward? And programs like the shop, very important. This tip, very important. Local streets and roads, very important. But those are the programs that have historically created a lot of these challenges. And that's why each of these programs need to address equity, it's that important.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Chang: mr. chairman and members of the committee, i'm tim phoebe chang for the auto club of southern california. unfortunately, we do have an oppose unless amended a position on this bill. we submitted our letter, and very briefly, we are where we were a year and a half ago. we feel that california should keep faith with the voters who passed proposition 1b. those were supposed to be general obligation bonds, and we feel that the weight fees should be returned to their maintenance purposes and that the general fund should once again assume its role to pay for those transportation debt bond needs. and secondly, we object to the annual vehicle registration fee. we feel that a flat fee on vehicles is not the way we've funded our transportation system. it is not user based, it is not usage based, and so we feel that that fee would be regressive and unfairly impact california voters.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 63, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Jacob: hi, good afternoon, mike tim jacob with pacific merchant shipping association representing ocean cares marine terminal operators on the west coast. we have a minor concern with section 27, working with senator, working on trade quarter infrastructure fund, thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: Good afternoon, Kyle Jones with Sierra Club California, also on that coalition letter with an opposed unless amended.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Pariset: hello, michelle mike pariset, i'm with public advocates. we would love to see more transit operations funding. oppose unless amended, thank you.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Madam Speaker: We will now to move to announcement and adjournments in memory. The following members were granted prior permission to speak on an adjourn in memory. Members, please take your seats for the adjournment in memory. Assembly Member Chavez, you are recognized at your desk. Madam Speaker, thank you.
[{'start': 229, 'end': 235, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brian Kelly: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My name is Joe Farrow. Mr. Chairman, Members, Mr. Vice Chairman. I am very happy to be here today. My name is Brian Kelly and I am the Secretary for the California State Transportation Agency. Just by way of background, our agency was created in July of 2013. Prior to that we were known as the Business Transportation and Housing Agency, and then during the 2012 legislative up cycle. The Governor proposed the Governor's reorganization plan. And that plan, created a stand alone as State transportation Agency that now has within seven different departments. They're all working area of transportation. In a few shorts minutes, you'll meet each of the department directors from the seven transportation related departments within our agency. And just by way of I guess disclosure backgrounds, those seven departments are the Department of Transportation Cartrans, Department Motor Vehicles, California Highway Patrol California High-Speed Rail Authority, California Transportation Commission, the Office of Traffic Safety, and the Board of Pilot Commissioners. So those are the seven different transportation related entities, some of which were within the business transportation housing agency prior to July of 2013, some where not. So when we created the the new agency, all transportation-related departments came under the agency. The seven departments make the state transportation agency one of the largest in state government with total employee base of nearly 40,000 and the commutative budget of 16.9 billion. These departments collectively help maintain state assets valued at more than a $1 trillion. Ensure the movement of more people and goods than any other state, and it provides safety and security to California's workers, residents, and Japan visitors alike. State Transportation Agency works to coordinate and execute policy and programs with our transportation related departments. We worked with the Legislature and stakeholders in recent years. Toward establishing a transportation system that meets California safety, mobility, economic and sustainability goals. Just a couple of examples in recent years, we've worked together Mr. Chairman on some important policy measures include the passage and and enactment of AB194. Your legislation to streamline in the approval process for projects that include tolling or pricing elements in California. A couple years ago, we passed SB862 together, which dedicated 40% of cap and trades funds to transportation improvements throughout the state and led to the creation of the Transit and Intercity Rail Capital program, which has now invested nearly $625 million in 28 high priority public transit projects throughout California, and is poised to add many more in 2018. Just last year we enacted I think one of our more important safety measures that we've seen in some time in California and that was SB 1046 by Senator Hill, which expands the use of ignition interlock devices as a strategy to reduce the recidivism rate of drunk driving in California. So we always sort of had a focus on investment, safety, and innovation. Of course there remain many challenges ahead for us to work on collectively. You'll hear more detail on some of these from the department directors shortly. I'd simply note some policy issues we'll be engaged in this year under the headings again of investment, innovation and protection that I know. Mr Chairman and Members, you are highly engage in now and you certainly will be as the year progresses. First, under the category of investment. Funding transportation with a stable, equitable and dedicated funding source to fix neighborhood streets and roads, to improve bridges, reduce congestion, invest in trade corridors and expand traveling options by expanding transit, bicycle, and pedestrian options remains a high priority for this administration. We started this conversation two years ago, and for us, it remains unfinished business so we want to continue to work with all of you on viable options to create and sustain a world-class transportation system in California. Another area of investment that is at the front and center this year Is work the CTC is currently doing, you probably hear from Susan Branson on this shortly. They're in the process of adapting a guideline for programming of some $580 million on federal funds to improve California's freight network after conducting public workshops and the Commission will adapt this guidelines later this spring. The area of innovation, I just note that in a few short weeks the DMV will be releasing its regulations for the second phase of testing and deployment of autonomous vehicle technology, or driverless vehicles in this state. In 2014, the DMV promulgated regulations for phase one testing in which a driver Is required to sit behind the steering wheel capable of taking control of the vehicle during the testing period. To date, 21 manufacturers are participating in this program. And they're testing some 139 vehicles on California roadways right now. This year, the DMV will complete the rule making for phrase two, which will detail the requirements for testing and deploying truly driverless vehicles technology in California. The department is working hard to commence the formal rule making process in the beginning of March, so it's just around the corner. And finally in the area of protection, California has amongst the lowest fatality rates in the nation when it comes to travel on our highways. All of our departments in some level have as a part of their core mission the protection and safety of the traveling public. And this Legislature has passed legislation in key areas to enhance safety. We'll have more to do in this area today and into the future. And certainly in light of the passage of Proposition 64. The CHP and the officers of traffic safety are working to create the right regulatory structures to ensure safety of the driving public against what's known that casually as drug driving. This is an emerging and complex policy area that props 64 itself made some funding available for law enforcement to develop standards and strategies to protect the traveling public. Commissioner Ferrel will have more to say about this but I wanted to mention this as one area. They will have our attention as we move forward. Of course these are just a couple of examples of important policy areas before us this year. There are many more, however, Mister Chairman, in the interest of time I'll stop there in my remarks and make myself available to answer questions you or the Committee may have. Before I turn to questions because this is an introductory sort of hearing, I also want to introduce the Committee to the Head of legislative affairs for our agency, Rhonda Pascal. Rhonda, like myself, was a long time employee of the State Senate, worked for the Secretary of State's office before we were fortunate enough to get her at our agency. So she does good work and I know she's a very familiar face to the Committee. want to make sure everybody knows Rhonda. So with that, Mr. Chairman, thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 46, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 135, 'end': 146, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2916, 'end': 2920, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4234, 'end': 4247, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6212, 'end': 6218, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6780, 'end': 6793, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6795, 'end': 6801, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7075, 'end': 7081, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Joe Farrow: well good afternoon, mr chairman, mr vice chair and members of the committee. again, my name is farrow. i am the commissioner of the california highway patrol. i'm in my 37th year with the patrol and my ninth year as the commissioner. i'll try to be brief on the overview of the department. i think many of you are very familiar with our organization and what we do. but i'll just tell you a couple of things that maybe you don't know. our department is comprised of about 11,000 employees. about 7,800 are uniformed members, sworn officers. we divide our department into 103 local commands and i think you're probably familiar with your local commander. they are either lieutenants or captains on the patrol and they have a responsibility to serve that specific community in which they reside in which they work. all of them have been asked to make introductions with you on a regular basis about every 90 days. someone from that office should be coming by your office to introduce themselves. talk to you, get acquainted and deal with the local issues within those commands. our department is funded through the motor vehicle account of about $2.3 billion per years comes directly out of the motor vehicle account. for our department, generally the mission of the organization is quite simple. it's to efficiently and safely move people, property, and goods across the state's highway system. for us, it can comprises about a 106,000 miles of roadway when you take in consideration the freeway system and the local roads in which we patrol. i think that's important for all to understand that in the unincorporated communities, that is chp jurisdiction in terms of traffic. we work very closely with the sheriff's departments in those communities in which we work. a little bit about some programs that you may not be totally familiar with. you maybe have a little bit of knowledge, but i want to talk a little bit about our area operations program we complies 30 aircraft. this has been a focal point of the legislature over the last couple of years about how that program is funded. but the role and mission of those programs are we have 15 helicopters, 15 fix wing. what their primary focus is public safety and the the assistance to local allied agencies in search and rescue missions. to put things in perspective per year, we served about 8,000 search and rescue missions for the patrol at about 65,000 requests for service with our allied agency partners and our partners. we were credited last year with 477 rescue missions where we actually pulled people out of a place of danger, place of safety, credited with 14 lives saved. so it kind of puts things in perspective a little bit about what we do there. also too in 1995, the california highway patrol and the california state police combined their services. the state police was merged into the patrol, that's why you see uniform personnel here at the capital in all state facilities. all state infrastructure places are protected by the california highway patrol which was formally the california state police which we do. a program that you may not be familiar with that is run by the california highway patrol is the state amber alert system. we merged that into our department in 2002 from the department of emergency services. since the program was devised in 2002 we've had 261 activations of the system accounting for 322 abductions that were activated. sadly we didn't bring every child home. we brought 312 recoveries under that system. 10 were not recovered, they were either killed or never recovered in that system and we still look for them today. but that amber program is one very near and dear to our organization, run by the highway patrol. i want to talk a little bit about an accomplishment is that we're very, very proud of this. over the last five years this department has worked hard to regain public trust within our organization remains a center focus of what we do. part of what we did with that is to go out and seek international accreditation within our organization. we are one of a few california law enforcement agencies that are accredited. we are accredited in our law enforcement department, our academy training, our communications, our evidence collection, and our air operations program. i think we remain one of the only departments in the nation to receive accreditation in all of those standards. we've very, very proud of that. issues that we are dealing with, that i think you'll find of interest, and you'll deal with us over the next year or two is sector kelly mentioned, proposition 64. and i believe there's an information hearing, we'll meet tomorrow and we'll go into much greater detail that is one though that we are named in the proposition of playing a significant role in determining the training that our officers are going to need to know the quantities amount of marijuana that can legally be utilized. and still be able to drive, what the standards are going to be, and how we're going to partner with our local law enforcement agencies in the communities. a lot of work has to be done over the next 18 months as we roll this thing out. we are beginning the elementary stages of meeting collaboratively with many different organizations that work together to try to figure out how we are going to move forward. so i'll either leave that open to q&a for you, or we'll go into greater detail tomorrow with that. also, too, that the issue of mental illness, i think that's important for us to realize that we deal with about 7% of the 4 million people that we contact per year suffer from some form of mental illness. that's a significant member when you take out of that, that we're starting with the base of 4 million people, 7% of that is a large number. we recognize several years ago for us to be contemporary with the standards of care and how we are going to deal with those individuals, is that we went out and we are just about done with the memphis model of critical incident training. that is the standard across the nation for law enforcement officers to have. and we're at 96% completed out of that, that we have self funded and moved along on our own to be able to deal with that population. law enforcement in community, the public trust issue. as you well know, there is a conversation going on across this country about the profession of law enforcement, the conversation was concerning to us i would say. and it was something of great interest. we have followed that, we have engaged and without reason many different respects to be able to move this department forward to be an integral part of those communities in which we serve. and i would like to at any time to sit down with you and your office and talk about what that means to us. we would have to go into great detail, for me to do that here today but it is something that is ongoing. everyone of our commanders are well versed in what that outreach program is, how they're interfacing with your specific communities. and i would invite you to reach out to them or myself. and we could spend a lot of time talking about what that initiative is all about. last year, this legislature asked us to go and test the use of body cameras. that conversation is part of the public trust initiative. we started with the two area offices. one out of oakland, and one out of stockton that went live in november and we're now just concluding the third month. i have data up to january 13th and what that is, is about each of those two area offices are collecting about 11,000, 10,000 videos per month. i mean, i'm sorry, total since that time period. and the issues that we're dealing with really is storage, is that going to be cloud or it's going to be server-based? and so that's why we have two different commands to figure out which one is best and how should the department move forward, keeping in mind that we contact about 4 million people per year and we have to decide how that information is going to be collected, who are we going to collect it from, who will be filmed, who will not be filmed. how it will be released, and really what do you do with this material when it's all said and done? we will supply you with a report to the legislature at the conclusion of the pilot, which is december of 2017. and those are the issues that we're really dealing with. i will just end by just saying this, that we've had a great relationship with this legislature and we're very supportive of the patrol. i'm here to answer any questions that we may have. the face that you'll see on a regular basis is captain rich desmond. he is sitting here to my right. you probably know that he played a helping hand for the last month by working very closely with you, with the sergeant-at-arms. rich will be here on a regular basis. asking any questions you have, i will always be here for the budget or any requests of the chair. so, i'll open it up to any questions you may have.
[{'start': 96, 'end': 102, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 4565, 'end': 4570, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8602, 'end': 8614, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8776, 'end': 8780, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jean Shiomoto: so thank you, so good afternoon, mr. chair, vice chair, and members. so i'm jean jonah shiomoto, the director of the california department of motor vehicles. and here today with me is patrick barrett, our legislative director. i know a lot of you have worked with him. so patrick keeps you apprised in all the issues facing dmv and our legislative staff. so thank you for the invitation to join you today. so i wanted to, first, take the opportunity to familiarize you all with what the department does, and our core functions and programs. so we have provided binders for you, in advance, so you could take a look at that and learn more about what we do in our programs. so california, for dmv, we have more direct contact with california residents than any other single state department. and many view the department of motor vehicles as a face of state government. as such, we recognize our responsibility to provide the highest levels of customer service to ensure that vehicles are registered and drivers are licensed. so the california dmv sets the trend, and is a recognized leader among the dmvs in the nation for our service and our innovations. so we have built applications to make it easier to access our services, and more user-friendly. so in today's climate, customers expect flexible customer service 24/7. and the complete listing of our services that we offer is listed in the back tab of your binder. so just to name a few, we offer online services. our website continues to offer convenient online services 24/7 for customers. as a result, the number of online transactions continue to increase. so in 2016, californians conducted more than 16 million transactions online. and customers can also now conduct business with dmv using a redesigned dynamic website. so we redesigned our website. so the upgrade means that now, automatically, the screen adapts to a viewer's device and will adjust the layout to fit the screen of your laptop, your smartphone, or a tablet device. so just recently, we added 10 additional dmv now self-service terminals to our field offices, including the offices of pittsburg, riverside, and long beach. so the dmv now allows you to complete a vehicle registration renewal or file for a planned operation status of your vehicle at a self-service kiosk, instead of waiting in line to see a technician, and frees up our technicians to do the more complicated transactions. so since the first dmv now self-service terminal was installed in october 2010, we have done approximately 5.4 million vehicle registration renewals since we have used and rolled out these kiosks. so now we have a total of 60 of these self-service terminals statewide. and we are in the process of expanding these locations to external sites, such as grocery stores and universities, in the coming months. and we're working with the vendor of these self-service terminals to get into more external sites. so since veterans day of 2015, the department has increased service opportunities for veterans by issuing a driver's license or identification card with a veteran's indicator. and so far, we have issued over 35,000 driver's license or id cards with that veteran indicator. and also, in 2016, the department and california donate life recognized our ten-year anniversary partnership. so dmv partners with donate life, and in 2016, there were nearly 14 million people on the organ and tissue registry. and 95% of the people on this registry are registered through our dmv field offices. also, in 2016, dmv continued its commitment to local communities by participating in local assistance centers, specifically for the sand fire, cervantes fire, ... fire victims to assist them in getting, at no cost, a replacement driver's license, identification card, registration, and title, or substitute plates and stickers, or a disabled placard. so as secretary kelly had shared, we continue our progress toward the deployment of fully autonomous vehicles, while ensuring public safety by implementing a permitting and testing process that serves as a model for the nation. as secretary kelly shared, we will be releasing the regulations for driverless testing and driverless deployment of vehicles in the next four to six weeks, and start the formal rule-making process. and yes, i have been to the concord naval weapons station, also to bishop ranch. and so we have been and visited, and we have talked with the staff there. and we continue that dialogue with the contra costa staff, in terms of their goal of getting the shuttles on the road. so we continue to keep you appraised on how we progress on that. so some facts and figures about our department. we have a budget of $1 billion, primarily funded from three sources, the motor vehicle account, the state highway account, and the vehicle license fee account. we have approximately 8,400 staff onsite. so we have 5,500 employees in our field offices and about 2,900 employees at our headquarters in sacramento. so in 2016, we handled approximately 27 million customer transactions at our 170 field offices located throughout the state. and we collect approximately $7.8 billion in revenue that is dispersed to local government, the california highway patrol, the general fund, caltrans, and other agencies. we have four core business programs, the driver's license/identification card program, vehicle title and registration, driver safety, and occupational licensing. so in 2016, approximately 30 million californians held a driver's license or id card, and there were nearly 35 million registered vehicles. and california has the most licensed drivers and the most registered vehicles of all the states and the district of columbia. and we maintain many service delivery options for our customers, including by mail, in-person office visits, the internet, which is available 24/7, self-service terminals in our field offices. you can call the dmv or visit a business partner. so we also understand the changing nature of our workforce and some of the challenges that we have. and so we have the experience and institutional knowledge, and lots of lots retirement. so we are working to develop a highly skilled and dedicated staff. so we are in the process of developing a workforce development succession plan at the division enterprise level. and we're taking a systematic approach for the continued success of the department employees in having a succession plan ready to implement. so in closing, i'd like to thank the committee for your interest. and i'm happy to answer any questions that you may have.
[{'start': 76, 'end': 95, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 184, 'end': 199, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 272, 'end': 279, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3876, 'end': 3881, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4101, 'end': 4106, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Allen Garfinkle: Yes. Good afternoon, Chairman Frazier and Committee Members, and thank you for giving this opportunity to present to you today. My name is Allen Garfinkle. I'm the Executive Director at the Board of Pilot Commissioners or commonly referred to as the Pilot Commission. I want to apologize for the absence of our board Chairman, Jennifer Ferrera Schmid. She couldn't be here with us today, she's a working fire fighter in the City of Oakland and she could not re-arrange her schedule to join us. So I'll be doing the presentation. I'll try to leave time for questions at the end, but the Pilot Commission regulates the 60 or so marine pilots that bring all the ships in the San Francisco Bay. It's the oldest Commission in the state, was founded in 1850 in the first session of the California Legislature. The pilots facilitate more than 8,000 ship movements annually and move more than 35 billion in the imports and 15 billion in exports each year attributed to the San Francisco Bay. Pilotage Grounds are home to fishing tourists and recreational opportunities serving tens of millions of visitors annually. Our pilotage grounds and licensees move ships in various bases in San Francisco, all the way to Stockton, Sacramento and Monterey, and all the ports in between. The Pilot Commission is a constituent entity within the California State transportation agency and all of our expenses are paid by shipping industry fees, there are no tax payer dollars at play here. We have a seven member board appointed by the Governor and it includes representatives from the shipping industry and the pilots and the public sector. We have two pilot commissioners, two industry commissioners and three public commissioners. We have four full time staff including myself and a bulk of our work is done by advisory committees to the board. We do have administrative support from various state agencies including the California Highway Patrol, the Department of Justice, and CalHR. We hold meetings monthly and they are all subject to the Bagley-Keene Open Meeting Act, we're very proud of that. The main function of the board is licensing of the pilots and discipline. And we do a medical oversight of all our licensees, who's licenses are renewed annually. We're very proud of our medical oversight program. We've been working with our partners at UC Medical Center in San Francisco to provide that medical over sight and assessment of our licensees and so that program has been in place about three years and we're very proud of that. We also examined and trained new licensees, trainees for the program. And we're currently preparing an examination for this June where we'll offer an exam consisting of a written exam and a simulator exam posted at California Maritime University in Vallejo. And that's an exciting opportunity for professional mariners to move into our pilot program. We run the training program for new pilots, we currently have six trainees in our program. Once we offer the exam, will then develope a list of applicants who, has pilots retire and licenses, licensing opportunity is open up, will move those trainee from the training program into he license opportunities. And we have very succesful programs it operates with the cooperation and the assistance of licences who very generously take our trainees out on the water with them to give them the experience that's required to safely acquire a license to pilot in our challenging jurisdiction. We also run a continuing education program where all of the licensees Have to attend continuing education. We have two phases of that. One is a manned model training, which all the licensees attend at least once every five years, where they go to a facility that has manned models. These are scaled models that simulate the properties of there were the hydro dynamic properties of the ships underway and it's the most effective way to train pilots where they have low risk opportunities to get in situations that will challenge their abilities. Another phase of our training is Is a combination course, bridge resource management and course dealing with elements of fatigue. And we host that account maritime as well currently and that's also every five years for each of the licensees. Another function of the Commission is to play a role in pilot safety and we continually investigate any incidents involving pilot ladders, pilot hoists or the rigging of pilot boarding facilities and we get those quite often. We send the board Commission investigators out to investigate those incidence and work closer with our partners in the industry particularly the Coast Guard to enforce any actions against those violations. We got a great cooperative working relationship with our industry partners, in the Coast Guard and Caspar and state lands commissions. That we are very proud of those relationships. We also have a role in pilot rate determinations of the board holds rate hearings at the behest of any of the stakeholders and then we make recommendations to your body as well as the Senate on those rates. We have a pilot pension oversight, we currently oversee the pilot pension program. Which the pilots are work through to get their pension and I am the primary producer g/ for that plan right now. We have some of the items that I want to thank your body for, is the navigation technology surcharge that we're currently working on. That was Assembly built 1422 of 2016, that provides for a movement fee, that funds $1.2 million worth of technology and this is really going to make an improvement on safety on the bay. This will be used to purchase the route piling and software, which each pilot has to carry on his jobs. And also finance the purchase of precision docking equipment which the path will take on particularly the ultra large container vessels which have been coming in at local. And these are 1100 to 1300 foot ships that are turning in a narrow 1500 foot basin and the palace put a special, they put two pilots aboard. One pilot, particularly just to man the navigation precision docking software and to advise the pilot of record on that move. So similar ships leave only about 100 feet on each end of the ship to turn in the basin in open. So that's quite a move, very challenging but this equipment that you've authorized the purchase of will help do that. And finally, I'd like to talk about the pile of fatigue study that was Senate bill 708 of 2012 that mandated the board conductive fatigues that the of the pilot's is working rest hours. And from that study were to promulgate regulations governing the pilot's fatigue work hours and rest hours. So that study is currently underway. We've partnered with San Jose State University Research Foundation to conduct that study. And that study we anticipate that study taking about two years, and then we'll get into the regulatory writing phase. And hopefully, then once we write regulations will then return back and have a look at how those the efficacy of those regulations and see how they are working and maybe tweak them. So with that I would open the floor to any questions you have about what we do.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 37, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 139, 'end': 154, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 327, 'end': 350, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rhonda Craft: mister chair, members of the committee, i'm rhonda. i am the director of the office of traffic safety, and i also serve as the governor's highway safety representative. i really appreciate the opportunity to be here to share with you about the good work that the office of traffic safety does to save lives. with me, i have chief deputy randy wiseman, who is responsible for operations and is really a jack of all trades and helps me out legislatively as well. under the direction of the california state transportation agency, the office of traffic safety is responsible for administering the state's traffic safety program and probably, before i got too much further, i should let you know what you've just been passed out. so first of all, i have a powerpoint that you can follow along with more or less. there's also an excel spreadsheet that provides information about active grants in the assembly districts that are represented on the transportation committee as well as the office of traffic safety's 2017 highway safety plan. so as compared to our sister agencies, caltrans, department of motor vehicles, and chp, we're a small, but mighty little agency located in, just, what? south of sacramento in elk grove, california. we have approximately 35 employees that do the work of saving lives. so using funds obtained from the national highway traffic safety administration each year, the office of traffic safety develops a highway safety plan that not only identifies the key highway safety problems in the state but offers the most effective countermeasures to bring about the changes and behaviors to move the state closer to its goal of zero deaths. california is the largest traffic safety program in the country receiving approximately 80 to 84, $1 million annually to create and sustain innovative programs at the state and local levels that are designed to reduce fatal and serious injuries on california's roadways. again, i have provided you with the spreadsheet that gives you a good idea about the types of acts of grafts that are going on in us assembly districts as well as the amount of money that is being used that goes towards traffic safety initiatives in your communities. ots identifies business partners in stakeholders and solicits proposal state wide to address california's traffic safety problems that are rated against several criteria, including potential traffic safety impact, collision statistics and rankings, seriousness of identified problems and past performance. the programs are designed to address federally designated top funding programs which correspond directly to specific problems in california. these problem areas include: drunk driving, drug driving, distracted driving, drowsy driving, also known as the 4 ds in my arena. emergency medical services, motorcycle safety, occupant protection, pedestrian and bicycle safety, police traffic services, traffic records, and roadway safety. some of the proven countermeasures in 2016 that were funded by the office of traffic safety include more than almost 1,500 dui checkpoints throughout the state. we increased the number of law enforcement officers trained in drug recognition evaluation. we established additional training sites to accommodate law enforcement training. we establish the training network for prosecutors to improve the conviction rate of dyd, that's driving under the influence of drug cases. our public outreach in education programs, many of them you're probably familiar with, include quick it or ticket, which we believe is responsible in part for the 97-98% seat belt compliance rate in the state of california, the highest in the nation. as well as drive sober or get pulled over, it's not worth it, which is a distractive driving campaign. some of our newer campaigns include pedestrians don't have armor. this campaign features a mascot dressed in armor made out of car parts to demonstrate that pedestrians, if involved in a collision with the vehicle, the car is going to win. the pedestrian is not, so it's basically a reminder reminding the public both pedestrians and drivers alike, that pedestrians do not have armor and to be careful while you're driving. we also recently launched the new dwi doesn't just mean booze, which not only addresses the consequences of drinking and driving but increases the awareness of driving under the influence of marijuana as well as prescription and illegal drugs. additionally we launched the first of its kind, ddvip mobile app, that's the designated driver very important person. this app is available on itunes or your android phones for download. it can be used to let users know about bars that are choosing to reward designated drivers with discounts and free non-alcoholic beverages. you can also use the app to access alternative transportation such as uber and lift. we also work alongside our state partners at the chp and caltrans to develop the traffic safety messaging you see on the fix freeway, changeable message signs throughout the year. such as report drunk drivers call 911. other activities include funding, live dui, court proceedings in high schools to give students an opportunity to see up close and personal the consequences of drinking and driving. ots is also an active participant on the state's strategic highway safety plan. many of its outcomes often results in future funding, which include efforts to create a traffic safety culture that does not accept traffic collisions as the price we pay for mobility. as well as data improvements and efforts to increase partnerships. most recently, ots gathered together a group of experts including the department of motor vehicles, california highway patrol, department of justice, alcoholic beverage control, as well as local law enforcement, prosecutors, toxicology, department of education, to develop a duid blueprint for california. the blueprint is expected to address long standing issues through proven counter measures and enhancement of existing programs, such as increasing law enforcement training, addressing equipment deficiencies in laboratories and enhancing data collection. in closing, ots will be celebrating 50 years of progress in saving lives. including a decline of more than 20% in highway deaths dating back to 2000, but although recent numbers are increasing we're optimistic about how our continued efforts combined with the advances in technology will help bring this state closer to its goal of zero. i'll end right there and i would be more than happy to take any questions the members might have.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 337, 'end': 350, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Reed Addis: thank you, chair and members. reed jonah addis on behalf of the california wilderness coalition today here in support. on a personal note, i grew up in joshua tree, california. i was a writer, but i also saw the destruction of that writing and so as you can imagine to be a land manager it's very complicated and this program
[{'start': 30, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Fearing: Good afternoon, again, Jennifer Fearing, in support on behalf of Defenders of Wildlife.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Johnson: kyle reed johnson, sierra club california, in support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stan Van Velsor: Good morning, my name's Stan Van Velsor. I represent The Wilderness Society and we support the bill.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Beth Wurzburg: Beth Wurzburg, California Native Plant Society. President of the East Bay Chapter representing Alameda and Contra Costa counties in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Straub: Hi my name is Mary Straub. I'm a resident of Davis and I'm here as a private citizen and avid outdoorswoman, and a wildlife veterinarian in support of this bill.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Celeste Garamendi: Good morning, Celeste Garamendi, with Friends of Tesla Park. I strongly urge your support of this bill. Both with regard to the resource, protection, the reorganization, the funding and the various measures to ensure that the majesty that you see behind you on the picture is maintained throughout California. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Tan: david kyle tan, citizen of alameda county, representative of sprawldef, which is active on not only park and wildlife issues, but landfill and recycling issues in the east bay. ours is one of the four organizations in litigation against the proposed expansion of the carnegie area into a rich biotic and scenic and cultural area. we strongly urge support for this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Connolly: Mark Connolly, lifetime cattle rancher from Alameda and San Joaquin County whose family's been there since the 1870s, and watched the degradation caused by what we see is unregulated off-highway vehicle use within state parks. We strongly support it.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Mott: good morning, john david mott. i'm a retired 40 year employee with california state parks, private citizen. and i'm here just to give a historical perspective, because when ohv first came into state parks, it was considered kind of a bastard child. the chatter among employees, well what's next? are we going to have chainsaw parks to cut down forests? and so this shows how far ohv has come. it's now one of the most popular forms of outdoor recreation in california. our ohv division has done some of the most creative resource management that's going on. but, we do need to update and expand what's been happening in ohv. and i do support this bill. i'd just like to remind everyone that state parks including ohv, are managed not just for the next few years, but for the long term. they are in effect. and we did not do anything to get these ohv and it's all at the california state parks. they are gifts from prior generations who have entrusted them to us to pass on to the next generation. and i encourage this committee and i applaud the author for the reforms in this bill. and to move forward and make sure that we do have an ohv system and a state park system that is sustainable and ongoing for the future and not used up. thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 379, 'end': 382, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bob Ham: good morning, ham, representing the san diego off road coalition, the american sand association and the california off road vehicle association. i'm also retired, but dressed up specially for you mr. chairman today. we also oppose sb 249 for a number of reasons. and quite frankly as mr. mchale said we've gone through reauthorizations three times at five years since 1982 and then the last two were 10 year reauthorizations, and each time we did negotiate with those other stakeholders including the sponsors of this bill and we're quite frankly just surprised at the tone of this bill and the mean spiritedness of it towards the program. that we've always collaborated with to try to make it sustainable, to try to make it the best possible experience for everyone and we do have a great program. we've got a program that's become a national model just because of the way it's been run under the department of parks and recreation. true it is special an independent or not independent, but it's a separate division within the department. so is boading in water ways. because that used to be a department, now it's a division. and it's a very specialized kind of activity that takes some specialized expertise and it works. and this program has worked for 46 years. there's no need to dismantle it, in the fashion that they are proposing. you know we'll be happy, as the analysis suggest, we're very happy to go back and negotiate. we've negotiated in good faith in the past with many of these groups. the groups that are sponsoring this bill and others, local government is a big partner of this program. particularly in the rural county's, law enforcement. the rural sheriffs get a great deal of assistance out of this program to enforced the laws in our desert and our mountains. we do need, if we're going to go back and negotiate that we can't negotiate from this bill. there's just no way we're going to get to something with the assembly version that just reauthorizes the program would be a good start. but let's take out the really one sides stuff and create a platform from which we can go back. and if there are things that honestly need to be improved, things that we can make it a better program for everybody and for the environment, let's do it. we can do it, we're happy to do it and look forward to working with mr. craven and the committee.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 288, 'end': 294, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2334, 'end': 2340, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Billy Gorring: good morning senator hertzberg, it's been a while since i had an opportunity to present. members, gorring representing the motorcycle industry council. we represent all the manufacturers that produce off-road motorcycles, side-by-sides, quads, etc. the recreational off highway vehicle association, and especially vehicle institute of america. and we're opposed to the bill however, i think that mr. craven provides a great deal in his analysis about getting together. and trying to come up with some amicable solution which we've reiterated to staff. and we just don't want to throw the baby out with the bath water, because the testimony by mr. mchale and mr. ham covers the situation exceptionally well. and we look forward to negotiating. thank you.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 30, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 400, 'end': 406, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 647, 'end': 653, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 662, 'end': 665, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kelly Beam: good morning. beam here on behalf of honda and oem headquartered here in california, in opposition to sb 249. i apologize our letter was not submitted in time to be included in the analysis, but we would appreciate being included in future discussions on the bill. thank you.
[]
Nicholas Harris: good morning, nicholas. i'm the western states representative for the american motorcyclist association. we were involved in the discussions in 2007. we would love to be invited to the table again and we strongly oppose this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Granite: granite, executive director of the corva foundation, a division of california trail users coalition, and in this case i am a jeeper. this is what a jeeper looks like, and dog is my co-pilot often. when i became disabled i started off roading seriously with my young children and the svra's gave me an opportunity as with many disabled elderly people that they have nowhere else. so we strongly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
James Lumbar: Mr. Chairman, Members of the Committee, James Lumbar on behalf of the California Motorcycle Dealers Association. We've been involved in every reauthorization since May in 87 and we would hope to be involved in this one as well, because we're the ones that sell the motorcycles to the users and we always would request that they drive responsibly. Thanks.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Diana Mead: diana john mead, president california off road vehicle association. we oppose this bill. i'm also a mother and a grandmother and a copious consumer of california wines.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rico Mastrodonato: Rico Mastrodonato with the Trust for Public Land, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pam Loomis: Pam Loomis on behalf of Padre Dam Municipal Water District, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Vivian Ericson: Vivian Ericson on behalf of the Urban Corps of San Diego, County, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kurt Blackburn: kurt diana blackburn on behalf of the city of santee, in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: kyle kurt jones of sierra club of california in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gary Hughes: gary kyle hughes with friends of the earth, strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Victoria Rome: Victoria Rome for NRDC NCLCB in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Fenstermaker: Mr Chair, Mark Fenstermaker for Environmental Defense Fund and the Nature Conservancy, in support.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maximilian Ewalt: maximilian gary ewalt private citizen, strong support for our beautiful public lands.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyra Ross: Good morning, Kyra Ross on behalf of the Marin County Council and Mayor's and Councilmembers, in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Greg Suba: In support. Greg Suba on behalf of California Native Plant Society, in support of the bill.
[{'start': 12, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katie Grain: Katie Grain, with Environment California. In strong support. Jennifer Savage with the Surfrider Foundation. In strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 61, 'end': 76, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Leslie Tamminen: leslie maximilian tamminen, with seventh generation advisors. in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sara Aminzadeh: sara leslie aminzadeh, with california coastkeeper alliance. in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susan Jordan: Susan Jordan, California Coastal Protection Network. In strong support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Graham Hamilton: this is my first time up here. graham sara hamilton, surfrider foundation. i'm getting married in april in point reyes, i'm going to be having a bachelor party in joshua tree next week- we'll be honeymooning in big sur and yosemite. and i am in strong support of this.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kate Poole: Thank you, Chair Hertzberg, Members of the Committee, my name is Kate Poole, I'm a senior attorney with a water program at the Natural Resources Defense Council. I'm here today to express NRDC's strong support for SB 49, and urge your support as well. This bill is designed to maintain California's existing environmental, public health, and worker safety protections against attacks from a hostile Trump administration in Congress. On the day after the election, California's legislative leaders declared that the state would not be dragged into the past by a federal government that stands against the principle that have made California a hub of innovation, an economic powerhouse, and a great place to live and raise a family. Since that time, we have seen those feared attacks from Washington, DC become reality. With well established science being rejected out of hand, critical clean air and clean water protections being discarded with no consideration of the impact on the people who breathe that air or drink that water. And numerous proposals to sacrifice our most fundamental shared resources. This bill is about California protecting itself against those assaults. It would incorporate into state law existing federal standards under the Clean Air Act, Clean Water Act, Safe Drinking Water Act, Endangered Species Act, and workers' safety laws. Those standards currently apply to any affected industry or polluter. This bill doesn't change that. It simply insures that if the Trump administration and a hostile Congress try to undermine those existing protections, the state will take up the slack. California has long treated the federal government as a partner in protecting its natural resources. So even though the state already has several laws on the books to protect many of these resources, California hasn't incorporated all of the existing federal protections into state law but it's built on top of those existing federal standards. That partnership is now collapsing and the federal foundation being pulled out from under us. We need to keep that foundation intact by making sure that state law requires those baseline standards to remain in place. That's the goal of this bill. The political situation in Washington has never been more dangerous for public health and the environment. California can and must protect itself against these threats, and we urge you to do so by passing SB 49. Thank you.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 26, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 65, 'end': 75, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sara Eminzada: Good morning Chair Hertzberg, Committee Members. My name is Sara Eminzada, and I'm the Executive Director of California Coast Keeper Alliance. I'm here today to strongly support Senate Bill 49. What I believe to be the most important piece of legislation before the California Legislature this year. This bill protects California's economy and communities from the clear and present danger of this administration. By passing this bill we defend fundamental environmental protections that make our air and water cleaner, our economy more resilient, and ultimately ensure that more people in our state can enjoy a high quality of life. Already this bill has been applauded by diverse constituents throughout the state and beyond as the eyes of the world are on California to leave. I'd like to take a few minutes today to address one provision in particular, the Private Right of Action that provides for citizen suits. I want to make it clear. The citizen suit provision in this bill does not create a new right of action. It is simply a backstop to maintain the status quo if that right is weakened or taken away nationally. The effectiveness of any law depends on meaningful enforcement. Anticipating that a lack of government resources or political will power could undermine enforcement of clean water laws. Congress in the 1970s included a provision in the Federal Clean Water Act that allows private citizens to prosecute violations in cases where the government is unable or unwilling to do so. This right is more important now more then ever. The Private Right of Action protects California's most vulnerable and disadvantaged communities. Poorer communities are disproportionately affected by pollution and generally lack the resources and access to legal tools to address ongoing harms. The citizen's suit can be used to address industrial pollution in places like Sun Valley and Pacoima, where small scrap metal yards and auto dismantlers and other facilities may fly under radar of enforcement actions. I ask this Committee to support this bill and move us forward and send a clear message that California will not go backwards on clean air and clean water.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 28, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 60, 'end': 73, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Justin Milan: mr chair, members, justin graham milan on two groups, heal the bay, you've heard from them on the coastal issues, but this is probably as serious here. and others said, one of the most important bills for the environmental health directors association. we at the local level are desperately concerned about this bill, because it rolls back not only the federal issues but the state and the local issues. we do lose local protection if we have these rollbacks, and we urge the passage of this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Johnson: johnson sierra club of california, in support, thank you.
[]
Susan Jordan: susan justin jordan of the california coastal protection network, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Victoria Rome: Good morning. Victoria Rome I'm with NRDC, but I was asked to register support also for California League of Conservation Voters. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Graham Hamilton: graham susan hamilton surf rider foundation west la malibu, support.
[]
Noah Oppenheim: Noah Oppenheim Pacific Coast Federation of Fisherman's Association, SB 49 will protect California's fisherman and fish, from a retro aggressive regime in Washington. I urge your support thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Fenstermaker: Mr Chair, Mark Fenstermaker on behalf of the Environmental Defence Fund and the Nature Conservancy, in support.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rico Mastrodonato: thank you. rico with the trust for public land, in support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maximilian Ewalt: maximilian, again, private citizen. i strongly support this measure and encourage all of you to. and i am a strong supporter of all these incredible environmental organizations, that have been fighting or our environment.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
James Motlow: james graham motlow, private citizen, resident of the sacramento delta and i strongly support the measures.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gary Hughes: my name is gary james hughes, honorable chair, members, i'm working with friends of the earth united states as the senior california advocacy campaigner. and i want to reiterate the statement that our organization believes this could very well be the most important piece of legislation, before the california legislature this summer. it's an imperative, that this bill be passed. and we offer our strong support. and we hope all the member of this committee do as well. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyra Ross: good morning, mr. chair, ross on behalf of the marin county council of mayors and councilmembers, in support.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jenna Driscoll: Jenna Driscoll with Santa Barbara Channelkeeper, also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Savage: Jennifer Savage, Surfrider Foundation, also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Leslie Tamminen: Leslie Tamminen, Seventh Generation Advisors in support. Senators, to the barricades.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cory Ridings: cory, ocean conservancy, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Greg Suba: Greg Suba, Conservation Program Director for the California Native Plants Society, and our organization supports this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Monica Deacos: monica gary deacos from los angeles, private citizen, support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ian Jacobson: environment of california, ian monica jacobson, strong support.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Olga Reynolds: reynolds from californians together in strong support.
[]
Luinda Lacey: Yes, Luinda Lacey on behalf of California Chamber of Commerce, just to add to the California Farm Bureau Federation's points, we are concerned that it does create substantial uncertainty for businesses for a couple of reasons. What does other federal laws relating to environmental regulation, natural resources, or public health mean? And secondly, how do we define what a backsliding or less stringent standard is? And what the standard is by itself, when we have circuit court decisions that are split on some of these environmental actions? So when you have circuit courts that go different ways on certain standards or define what that standard is, which one are we telling our California agencies to adopt? And given those uncertainties, I'll leave the private rights of action to the Judiciary Committee. But those are uncertainties that we're concerned about. Thank you.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shaina Brown: Good morning, my name is Shaina Brown. I'm with that California Manufacturers and Technology Association. Also have similar concerns raised by the chamber In the purview in the other committees, so we'll bring those up there.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sheri Pemberton: Thank you, Senator. This is Sheri Pemberton on behalf of the California State Lands Commission and we're in support of the bill. The bill would dedicate funding that our staff needs to fully quantify the problem and determine where the wells are leaking. Pinpoint the sources of oil and then develop a strategy for us to have to go out together working with DOGGR to determine how to remediate these wells, and stop the oil for leaking, and improve access to the coast, and our marine environment. Thank you.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jenna Driscoll: Hello, my name is Jenna Driscoll and I'm the Watershed Marine Program Associate for Santa Barbara Channel Keeper. We're an environmental nonprofit that works to protect and restore the Santa Barbara Channel and its watersheds. The Santa Barbara Channel is known to be one of the most biologically productive ecosystems on Earth. It boasts nearly unparalleled species density and diversity, and it supports a $10 million commercial fishery, and the region's scenic beauty, and beaches are the foundation of $1 billion tourism industry. Today, we still live with the impacts of historic well construction and improper abandonment. Approximately 200 legacy wells are estimated to exist along our coastline and though, natural seepage is known to occur in the Santa Barbara Channel, abandoned and leaking oil wells exacerbate the impact of oiling and tarring on our local beaches. Impacting wildlife, the economy and public health. Additionally, most abandoned wells are located in or near the surf zone in close proximity to areas where beach goers are more likely to come into contact with this contamination. For decades, Summerland residents and tourists have played with oily beaches and noxious odors emanating from the Becker Well. And as the Senator mentioned, this beach was closed in 2015 for four days to protect public health. Not only were the water and beach entirely covered with well oil but harmful oil vapors made this popular county beach even unsafe to be close to. Inhaling vapors, skin contact, and potential ingestion of these chemicals can cause short term symptoms including dizziness, headaches nausea, and respiratory issues, and long term exposure risks include liver and kidney damage and cancer. Our organization regularly receives calls from concerned citizens about this issue. One resident, who suffers from serious health concerns, moved to Summerland at the recommendation of her Doctor to seeking relief from her health symptoms. Unfortunately, the conditions at Summerland due to legacy oil wells have only exacerbated her health concerns. She states, quote, I have been plagued by vertigo since our move. And my hearing has plummeted with each vertigo attack, to the point where I was forced to have cochlear implant surgery. I no longer want to be shut into our home, unable to open windows to the sea, avoiding toxic fragrance which makes our eyes red and my symptoms to present themselves. We had no idea when we moved here to improve my health that we would be met with such toxic conditions. Something needs to be done. End quote. SB 44 is necessary to help alleviate this blight on the environment and to public health. It will provide a systematic program to prioritize capping these leaking oil wells. And as our BG phase increasing storm surge due to climate change and intensified erosion, it is likely that more wells will be uncovered. It's a critical time that California needs to take action now to address this issue and cap these wells. Channel Keeper, thanks to Senator Jackson for bringing this bill forward and commends the State Lands Commission for their motivation to address this issue. Their support for this bill highlights why this bill is so important. Channel Keeper strongly supports SB44 and encourage your aye vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 3021, 'end': 3028, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kyle Johnson: Kyle Johnson, Sierra Club California in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Peters: get a cardboard cutout of you, kyle. my name's laura ian peters, i'm here on behalf of hillary hauser, the executive director of heal the ocean. and she's asked me to read a brief statement in support of this oil bill. heal the ocean has been working closely with the state lands commission to map offshore leaking oil wells of summerland beach, paying for the services of offshore dive companies, scientists, and officials of the state lands commission. to produce a map of leaking wells for the remediation with sb 44 funds, we are asking that these funds already in the state budget be earmarked for the purposes of capping leaking oil wells using this map as a guide. so, we thank you for the opportunity and-
[{'start': 31, 'end': 35, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 47, 'end': 63, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 87, 'end': 101, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Juan Altamirano: Juan Altamirano on behalf of Audubon California in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Graham Hamilton: graham laura hamilton, surfrider foundation in west la malibu support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susan Jordan: Susan Jordan, Director of the California Coastal Protection Network, in support. And I also get calls routinely about this situation, so we're very excited about with making some progress here, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Phil Alley: thank you. phil graham alley environemental working group, didn't get it in time for the analysis, but will for eq, in support, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 22, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Savage: Jennifer Savage Surf Rider Foundation in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gary Hughes: honorable chair members, my name is gary phil hughes and i work with friends of the earth, united states. we have 70,000 members here in the state of california and i am here to offer a strong support for this bill.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Evan Goldberg: Mr. Chairman, Evan Goldberg with State Controller Betty Yee, in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 50, 'end': 59, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Reed Addis: sir. reed gary addis on behalf of cal trout, in strong support.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 34, 'end': 43, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Noah Oppenheim: Mr. Chair, Noah Oppenheim, with the Pacific Coast Federation of Fishermen's Associations. When a consumer knows the name of the fisherman who caught their fish, everybody wins. Direct marketing approaches will enhance our members' ability to market their seafood product just assemble, healthy, and the best manager in the country. I urge an aye vote and I thank you for your time.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eric Sklar: Great, thank you very much. Chairman Hertzburg, Senators, it's a real honor and pleasure to be here today. And I do want to thank Senator Mcguire for his deep and long term support of the Commission and the work we do. My name again is Eric Sklar, President of the California Fish and Game Commission. And I'm here to testify on 161 and the Commission is officially supporting 161. Effective communication and consultation with California's native tribes is not only what we should do as a state agency, but is now mandated by executive order and by state law. Under Governor Brown's leadership, executive order B10-11 requires every state agency to encourage communication and consultation with California's tribes. And allow for meaningful input in the develop of legislation, regulations, rules, and policies on matters that affect tribal communities. Second, the passage of AB 52, as Senator Mcguire mentioned, the Sequa update. Requires the Commission consult with tribes that are traditionally and culturally affiliated with the geographic area of any proposed projects. These two laws impact the Commission in significant ways, as many of our regulations have a direct impact on the tribal communities. In addition, Commission staff must also acknowledge tribal sovereignty and confidentiality with respect to projects. Having a tribal Committee at the Commission addresses many of these issues. The very nature of the work at the Commission necessitates close and frequent interaction with Native American tribes in order to advance solutions to complex natural resource challenges. Additional consultation and early engagement with the tribes on proposed projects and regulations is something which needs to be structurally implemented within the commissions future proceedings. Serving both as the President of the Commission and chair of the marine resources Committee, I see the clear growth and important role for the tribal Committee. As the tribes and the state become more familiar with how we can all work together. For example, at a recent tribal Committee meeting, we recently discussed co-management concerns, health management, kelp harvest, tribal take, marine protected areas, and climate change. All of these discussions inform Commissioners so that they are well apprised of tribal concerns before the full Commission hears these issues and votes on them. Ensuring that the tribal Committee exists in perpetuity guarantees that the tribal matters with respect to Fish and Wildlife issues will continue to be heard and discussed. And can endure the political and tribal leadership changes that will occur over time. This adds clarity and confirms the state's commitment to ongoing work with the tribal community. And on a philosophical note, it's about respect as well. An ad hoc Committee is as the Senator said, is a short term effort, whereas making the Committee a permanent Committee. Like marine resources and wildlife resources will show the tribal community that we're committed to both the governor's order and also legislation. So with your support, I would ask for approval of this, thank you. Yeah.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 46, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 138, 'end': 145, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 236, 'end': 246, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 576, 'end': 581, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 896, 'end': 903, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jacque Hostler-Carmesin: My name is Jacque Hostler-Carmesin. I'm the Vice President of the California Fish and Game Commission. Thank you for having me here this morning to testify on Senate Bill 161, formally creating the Tribal Committee within the California Fish and Game Commission. My work on the Marine Life Protection Act for the North Coast, as a regional stakeholder representing Native American tribes, was the catalyst for my interest on the California Fish and Game Commission. I was nominated and confirmed due to my strong interest in representing Northern California tribes and all North Coast constituents. The vision was based on the need for tribes to have a voice and a forum for discussion, collaboration, and communication to work towards true government to government consultation. The California Fish and Game Commission Tribal Committee is an essential platform for California tribes to facilitate, coordinate, and communicate with the state. Before the tribal Committee began at the Commission, communication between the Commission and California Native American tribes was ad hoc and often took place after a conflict occurred. Facilitating better communication between the Commission and California Native American tribes has been a long standing challenge. We have seen benefits and positive resolution of many issues due to the creation of the informal tribal Committee. Formalizing the tribal Committee within the Fish and Game Commission not only ensures regular and frequent meetings. But leads to better, more informed decisions by the Commission regarding our precious natural resources. The format of the Committee is intentionally less formal than a full Commission meeting and allows for issues to be discussed at length. The Committee provides a space for tribes to have lengthy and thoughtful discussion, and time for tribal caucusing on matters before the Commission. For the state, the Tribal Committee, is a very effective use of staff time for both department and Commission staff to gather input on potential policies and regulations. So that the Commission is more informed of tribal concerns and possible impacts to Native American tribes. The overarching goal of the Tribal Committee is to engage in a timely and interactive process to respectfully seek, discuss. And considered tribes views on natural resource issues in an effort to resolve concerns at the earliest opportunity. And in a manner that respects and furthers the interest of tribes and the Commission. Institutionalizing the tribal Committee creates a permanent relationship and provides certainty for both governments regarding the form of intergovernmental relations. And the process through which Fish and Wildlife issues will be addressed. Statutorily mandating the tribal Committee also provides the Committee the ability to weather and withstand political changes in state leadership and tribal leadership to ensure the tribal Committee continues on through such changes. It is for these reasons and many more, that I believe formalizing the tribal community within the Commission is important now and will be for years to come. Ensuring the tribes have built end procedures for communication with the Commission. Commission staffs and Department of fishing and wildlife staff and natural resource issues will pave the road for better and more frequent interactions and hopefully better results at the end of the day. I would like to recognize the tribal leaders who have supported the tribal Committee and contributed to the development and success Committee. And specifically, I'd like to thank Mr. Reg Aljon, he has been the unofficial Co-Chair of the tribal Committee. He is the cultural from the Dry Creek Band of Pomo Indians. He is in the audience today, and I'd just really like to call him out because he's definitely helped build the Committee. I'd also like to recognize Sonke Mastrup, the previous Executive Director of Fish and Game. As well as Valerie Termini, current Executive Director for their dedication in working with California tribal nations and bringing the tribal Committee before you today. Special thanks to Senator Maguire and his staff for the opportunity to speak and for moving this important legislation forward. I welcome any questions.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 3595, 'end': 3604, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3876, 'end': 3889, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3952, 'end': 3967, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4137, 'end': 4144, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Thomas O'Rourke: Can you hear okay? Good morning, my name is Thomas O'Rourke Sr. and currently the Chairman of the Yurok tribe. Chairman, Senators Hertzberg, Vice Chair Senator Stone, and other Members of the Committee. I want to take this opportunity to thank you for hosting this Committee hearing on SB 161. Formal establishment of the Fish and Game Commission tribal Committee. The Yurok Tribe is the largest tribe in California with over 6,100 tribal members encompassing reservation approximately 57,000 acres. Along with the 57,000 acres we own about 90,000 in total. Our aboriginal territory extends continuously for 83 miles along the Pacific Ocean. As Yurok people we're charged with the thoughtful and prudent stewardship of all lands within the ancestrial territory. Because of the tribe's deepest interest in fishing game, contribution and protection as well as utilization. Tribal council has directed our technical staff and policy staff to closely monitor and engage with Fish and Game Commission to keep us abreast of what's going on. The state and the tribe share an interest in creating a framework where traditional knowledge, tribal science, and complex tribal issues can be discussed without traditional constraints of regular Fish and Game Commission meetings. Time for additional detail and discussion is valuable to the Yurok Tribe, as well as to the Commission's time. It is our hope that formal establishment the tribal Committee would also lead to hiring of a specific fishing game Commission staff to work on the important issues the Committee to the great benefit of the state tribes and public at large. Issues that are tribal Committee are complex and demand a high level of knowledge, and issues of federal Indian law and tribal law. The tribe strongly encourages hiring a dedicated tribal staff member to serve the Fish and Game Commission. In summary, on behalf of the Yurok Tribe, I support, we support on behalf of Yurok tribal council and our members. I do not write these things, so I prefer to speak my own language. We support SB 161, and thank you for this opportunity to speak.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 63, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 130, 'end': 139, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 160, 'end': 165, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Reg Elgin: thank you, mr. chairman. my name is elgin, i'm a full blood member of the dry creek band of pomo indians. we number about 10,000 pomos, for those don't know where pomo country is, some of you mistakenly call it wine country. but it's sonoma lake, mencino, parts of napa, and marin county, and that's home of the pomo. we haven't had a real romantic past when it comes to california indian history. we just celebrated our 48th annual california indian days. and three years ago, governor brown invited california indians for the first time to celebrate here in sacramento. now i know the wills of justice move slowly. but i want you to know that through the department of fish and game and wildlife commission and through the tribal committee, that luckily for me and for our tribe, i was a member of the original group that formed that committee. i want you to know that we have seen not only seen hope and dreams, we have testified before the commission every time they meet and they have heard us. and i want you to know that the tribal committee will go a long way to help us realize some of our dreams. [foreign] means thank you in my language.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 487, 'end': 492, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
George Osborn: george reed osborne for the california sportfishing league and the coastside fishing club in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Noah Oppenheim: Noah Oppenheim with Pacific Coast Federation of Fishermen's Associations, I support this bill. Urge an aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Savage: Hi, Jennifer Savage, Marine Life Protection Act, Regional Stakeholder Group, North Coast, I support this bill.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Olga Supatoranus: olga and i am with saint ... ranch, and we are in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
George Osborn: morning mr chairman, and members. george george osborn, representing the california sport fishing league, and the coast side fishing club. we're pleased to support sb 144 by senators mcguire and neilson. since 1992, through the implementation of the steelhead report card program, the angling community has fought back against declining steelhead populations. steelhead anglers that provided vital population monitoring data and modest funding for restoration and monitoring projects that are benefiting our water sheds and the angling community. we support re-authorization of the program and urge your aye vote. thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 183, 'end': 190, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 195, 'end': 202, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Matt Clifford: mr chairman, my name's clifford with trout unlimited, we strongly support this bill. steelhead have something of a unique status in the fisheries world in that they're endangered across much of the range, but a lot of places you can still fish for them. this very successful program lets anglers be part of the solution. it provides crucial harvest data that helps for mismanagement. it's great to the revenue for restoration. $2.5 million for restoration over a seven year period. it goes to very good projects that help restore the species, and let steelhead anglers be part of the solution.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Angela Howe: Hi, Angela Howe, I'm the legal director with Surfrider Foundation. And I do want to talk about this bill, but first I want to talk about the significance of Martins Beach. This is where people celebrated their weddings, their birthdays, their family reunions. And going through declarations last week, I saw that some people even spread the ashes of their loved ones in this spot. This is a place for the last, almost 10 years. Seven years has been cut off to the public. The new property owner came in, put a blocked gate, security guards and changes the signage so that the public could not get down to the beach. And Surfrider, about seven years ago we took up the campaign to try and convince the property owner that the public should still be allowed down to the beach and that we would work with them and try to do this without going to litigation. Unfortunately, four years ago on Sunday, we filed litigation, and it's been tied up in the appeals process, so we haven't been able to get final resolution through litigation. But this very smart, competent, and passionate Legislature did pass SB 968 In 2014, directing the State Lands Commission to work with the property owner and try to find an amicable solution, negotiate an easement right of way for the public down Martins Beach Road, as they had for generations to get to the beach. As you heard, that negotiation came to no amicable solution, but this Legislature allowed the State Lands Commission to use eminent domain If needed. And at this point, the State Lands Commission has seen that that may be the road that we need to go down. And so all of this work has been put in, and now SB 42 is to allow funding for that to happen. So this is really just making sure that your previous efforts can be completed. Additionally, this has regional significance. Everyone in Half Moon Bay Loves this local beach, but people from Tracy, people from inland would go there for their birthdays and special occasions. So regional significance, but also statewide significance. There is an eye on this issue, statewide. Are we going to let billionaires come in and take our beaches away, as Californians? Even though it's protected in the California constitution, protected in the Coastal Act and protected through our local coastal plans. So we ask that you please vote aye on SB 42 and support free and open access for Californians to beaches. Thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: kyle george jones, sierra club california in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Evan Goldberg: hi, mr. chairman and members. evan kyle goldberg with state controller betty yee, in support of the bill.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 71, 'end': 80, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Savage: Hi, Jennifer Savage, Surfrider Foundation, we are in support of this bill.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Denise Erkeneff: Hi, Denise Erkeneff, Surfrider, South Orange County chapter, in support of the bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susan Jordan: Susan Jordan, Executive Director of the California Coastal Protection Network, I work on coastal access statewide. In support, thank you very much.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Graham Hamilton: Graham Hamilton, Surfrider Foundation, staff for the West LA Malibu Chapter. In support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert Sumner: yes, good morning, robert with the california department of justice. i'm happy to be here this morning in front of these three committees, i think it will be a really great panel throughout the morning. i'll keep my portion brief and largely submit to the role of the attorney general as the constitutional chief law officer for the state. both the medical marijuana legislation that was passed and prop 64 actually largely omits a direct role for the department of justice, aside from our administrative duty and then disseminating criminal history information. that said, as i go through a basic overview of the bill, you'll see that as the lawyer for virtually every government entity in the state, the attorney general will be continuing to assess the impact that prop 64 and the legislation proceeding is going to have on our day-to-day responsibilities through our various legal divisions and sections. we've actually appointed a coordinator within our government law section, an attorney whose sole purpose on this project is going to be to assess the cumulative impact of these new policies for marijuana on the department to understand whether or not we have the appropriate resources to handle all of the complex legal issues and regulatory frameworks that are going to be implemented as a result of the law. in addition to that, we're also going to be actively using our case management system to track any litigation that comes to the various sections that have a core nucleus subject of cannabis or marijuana legalization in order to track the progression of those issues. as a quick overview, i believe the background paper does a fairly good summary of the prop 64 language, but i can just give a refresher. it's that it makes cannabis under state and local law for adults 21 and older. they can possess up to one ounce of marijuana for personal use and cultivate up to six plants for personal use in a private, locked residence. it can only be smoked and vaped in places where tobacco is allowed and it can't be ingested in a public place. from there, prop 64 is largely based on the previous medical legislation that was championed by members of this committee and the legislature in that it divides up a number of very complicated and necessary regulatory framework pieces across different areas of agency expertise. of course, the one newly created entity within the past few years is the bureau of medical cannabis regulation, which is going to be handling the licensure for the transport distribution sale, and, i believe, we'll be testing. that is a new bureau, that, as an entity of the department of consumer affairs, will be a client agency of our licensing section, and then, meanwhile, the food and agriculture department is going to be licensing the cultivation, which is a client of our natural resources section. department of public health will be licensing manufacturing, and that is a client of our health, education and welfare section. from there, those kind of key implementors that are obviously working on a tight timeline to implement regulation, there will be a number of other impacted agencies or legal issues that may come to light within the attorney general's office. the state board of equalization will obviously be in charge of collecting the special taxes implemented by prop 64, which is a client of our business and tax section. another client of that section is the treasurer, who is, of course, working on a number of issues related to dealing with the profits related to marijuana sales. the various environmental regulations that are going to be set by food and agriculture, as well as the state water resources control board, and the department of pesticides. so, kind of our natural resources section, and then on top of that, we expect that there will be a number of reduced penalties as a result of prop 64, which allows for marijuana felonies to be reduced to misdemeanors with petitions for reduced charges. and so our appeals, rights and trials section, which handles many of those cases, will likely be dealing with those issues, as well as our correctional law section. from there, and as our employment administrative mandate section, prop 64 continues to allow employers discriminate against users of marijuana and that may come up as well as in setting some professional licensure, which is one of the primary bnp committee issues. both our health, quality and enforcement section, which deals with the healing arts boards, and our licensing section, which deals with many of the other boards may end up seeing litigation involving disciplinary or license or revocation cases where one of the factors behind the investigation was use of marijuana. to the extent that local ordinances restrict cultivation or use of marijuana in a zoning context. we have a land law section that would deal with that. prop 64 also envisions the possibility of non-profit licensees, and that would fall under our charitable trust section. it got to a point when we were assessing this, that as we go thru all of those issues which unfold thru the language of prop 64. nearly every legal section within the department of justice is likely going to have some case or some matter that involves a new issue that has been brought to light by the signing of the initiative. as i mentioned earlier, we do also have a direct role in that we are the state's criminal history depository. so, to the extent that prop 64 and previous legislation continues to lay out fitness criteria for licensees with the idea they cannot have been convicted of a substantially related crime or a serious or violent felony, felonies involving fraud and deceit, or employment of a minor in a drug business. all of that background check workload will be coming to our cjis division, or california justice information services division, and then, finally, i would also point out that as far as the driving impaired issue, there is obviously going to be a lot of discussion about what constitutes driving impaired following the ingestion of marijuana. we're looking at all the new scientific ways to be able to do roadside testing, and other types of testing by law enforcement and that's something that the various folks that work in toxicology in our bureau of forensic services is likely to have to handle from it workload issue. finally, to the extent that law enforcement training and standards impact as chief law enforcement officer. i'm sure we'll be working closely with the various associations, and with post and chp, to make sure that we are adequately preparing folks that are doing local enforcement and statewide law enforcement for the new laws that will be large change in life for many of them, and then, just to book in with this, if there's any case just generally challenging the constitutionality of either proposition 64, any of its provisions, any of the regulations, or any local ordinance that will obviously fall upon the attorney general to defend as the chief law officer for the state. so, while we don't have a direct impact result of prop 64, you almost get a little annotation next to every provision in the law where the attorney general will likely have to be present to lend some legal guidance. so, in that serving as kind of a basic and hopefully, brief summary of the provisions of the bill and how we see them from our role at the ag's office. i'm happy to answer any questions.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jim Houston: thank you, mr chair, and madam chair, members. my name is houston. i'm the undersecretary of the california department of food and agriculture. this has been echoed by my colleague, both the passage of mcrsa and prop 64 has presented new challenges to the department of food and agriculture. first and foremost, we're responsible for the licensing of the growth sites and enforcement of medical and adult use cannabis throughout the state, with particular consideration given to ceqa, so the california environmental quality act. we're the lead agency for purposes of that licensing. beyond that, we're also responsible for developing the track and trace system that we use from seed to sale to track the cannabis both through its flower state and then whatever sort of machinations occur after that. in terms of our regulatory work, we are sort of lock step with our other agencies. we held eight listening sessions throughout the state, all up and down, both in the north and the south and the central. many of those occurred with other agencies in tow. some did, some did not. we likewise have been proceeding expeditiously and plan to submit our regulations in early spring to oal. we've already prepared our economic analysis, otherwise known as a asra. and then that's with mcrsa. parallel to that is the ceqa timeline. so we will be shortly releasing our draft environmental impact report. we'll go early spring and then that will sort of begin the process. we've built in a lot of public comment for both of those and plan on submitting those late fall, around november for their final disposition. and then in august, likewise we plan on using our emergency regulatory authority to implement prop 64. it's been expressed both in legislature and here and in other hearings, and will continue to be discussed. the harmonization between mcrsa and prop 64 is dynamic and occurring. and so we want to be able to adapt and put in any of those changes in august so that we don't have to sort of unwind the clock. so august, use the emergency and then we will follow that up with regular rule making as well. and that also presents a unique challenge for us, that is ceqa, because we have our mcrsa ceqa and we also have to do prop 64 ceqa. but thankfully we were able, we believe we'll be able to utilize the information that's in our mcrsa ceqa analysis, apply that to our prop 64 analysis. and where there are some differences, we believe that that overlap will allow us to meet the january 1, 2018 deadline. there is currently an rfp out to do the consulting work for that. so we anticipate that should be wrapped up shortly, and then we will begin. so i will say i've been very, very impressed with the level of coordination that we've had, and the level of dialogue that we've had with both yourselves, stakeholders in our sister agencies, and so i look forward to seeing this through to completion. i'm happy to answer any questions you may have.
[{'start': 58, 'end': 65, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 202, 'end': 207, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 479, 'end': 483, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2168, 'end': 2172, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Karen Smith: thank you. so good afternoon, chairs, or good morning, committee members. i am dr. karen jonah smith. i'm the state public health officer and the director of the california department of public health. today i'm going to talk briefly about the department of public health and its implementation of the medical cannabis regulation safety act and prop 64. as you all know, the medical cannabis regulation safety act and 64 both mandate the department of public health to license and oversee medical and adult use cannabis product manufacturers. the department's approached these regulations with the intent of creating a strong foundation for the protection of public health and safety without making the regulatory compliance so onerous that manufacturers of the cannabis products would choose to remain in the underground market. we're drafting regulations that are substantially similar to the manufacturing practices currently in place for food manufacturers. and the regs will include things along the lines of licensing requirements, process control, security, safety, sanitation, destruction, labelling, packaging, product standards and compliance enforcement. we developed the regulations to include those substantively similar both to food, but also to dietary supplements, because there are things about cannabis being added to food products that are very similar to that. from microbial contamination by employees or the environment to incorporation of foreign elements like glass, hair or insects to contamination of a product with unintended allergens, the manufacturing processes provide numerous opportunities for hazards to be introduced. the minimum facility requirements and standard operating procedures for sanitary manufacturing established by the department's proposed regulations are intended to reduce or eliminate potential contamination. the regulations also limit the products that are allowed to be infused with cannabis. because certain types of manufactured products are more susceptible to microbial contamination. the department's highest priority in implementing the act and proposition 64 is the protection of the public's health. based on feedback that we received from stakeholders, the department is contemplating additional license types beyond those allowed for in the current regulation. one of which is an additional license type for businesses that only manufacture products such as edibles, but don't conduct the extractions from the plant. and then a second license type for businesses that do not manufacture the actual product, but package and label them. we have extensive experience in the food manufacturing, processing and safety, but the cannabis industry is new to us as well as others. we estimate that there will be approximately 1,000 applications for medical cannabis manufacturing and potentially as much as twice that for the adult use manufacturing. this required us to really quickly develop an understanding of this entirely new industry which is evolving very rapidly as i think you're all aware. and because of the nature of the industry there isn't a great deal of data actually available. so it becomes difficult to verify. to educate ourselves we met with numerous industry representatives and associations and the department staff visited manufacturing sites of various types throughout the state to learn more about extraction and manufacturing processes. the staff also had numerous calls with other states who have implemented similar programs during the pre-regulatory stakeholder meetings. we also heard from local health jurisdictions and others within the local jurisdictions who represent, they are very clear about their desire to both maintain some level of local control, and that they are important partners in the regulatory process. this is consistent with the way that we practice in food manufacturing, and other activities, in the department. timely completion of the regulatory packages is also a top priority for us and we've been coordinating, as has been said before, we also are on the same timeline. we anticipate releasing the medical cannabis regulations for public comment in the early spring, and full adoption by january 1st. because of the compressed timeline, we also anticipate using the emergency regulatory process for the adult use regulations, which will substantially be the same as proposition 64, although there are some differences that will need to be addressed. do thank you for the opportunity to share our progress and plans, and implementation and i'm happy to answer any questions that you may have.
[{'start': 83, 'end': 100, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cara Martinson: thank you. good morning, i'm martinson, of the california state association of counties. thank you so much for having us come speak to you today to provide some feedback. and i really do appreciate the conversation and some of the comments that were made by previous panels because i think they highlight some of the issues that we [unknown] are continuing to focus on. we were very involved in the development of the mcrsa and were able to provide some early and initial input into prop 64. and that local control piece was extremely important to local governments, and while we recognize that it's difficult to manage 58 counties and 480 some cities, different regulatory programs, we thought that that was necessary for jurisdictions to be able to reflect the will of their community. so there is a lot happening at the local level. and i think we can tell by where prop 64 passed about two thirds of california counties voted in favor of proposition 64. and we do think that will be somewhat reflective of how cannabis is regulated at the local level with that local control piece in there. as i mentioned, there's a lot of activity happening right now within the city and county level. just as a snapshot, i believe there were 53 local city and county ballot measures on the november 2016 ballot related to cannabis, 39 of those successful. and out of those, there were seven county tax measures. so in addition to what the prop 64 already sets into statute. so folks at the lower level are thinking about this. they're working with the regulatory agencies that were up here and i would like to thank them for their outreach to us and being available to answer our questions, because that coordination is going to be extremely important. in order for the state to meet its statutory obligation of issuing licenses january 1, 2018, local governments are going to have to have their programs in place as well. so we have a vested interest in seeing the state be successful, and have them achieve their goals, so that we are able to do that as well at the local level. but we do have a concern related to timing, because of the urgency and drafts still out there and that we have not seen yet. and we would encourage the agencies to continue need to outreach to us because there are a number of counties out there that are ahead of the curve, that have been working on medical marijuana, have developed their own track and trace programs, that have developed their own licensing schemes. so we feel that we have a lot of expertise in this area and some jurisdictions that can offer comments and inputs into that regulatory process. in addition as some of the other fellow panelist have made comments and i won't reiterate but there are many differences between the ncrsa and prop 64 in addition to the local licensing piece. we've heard a lot about the role of the ag commissioners and the role of environmental health directors and we're very interested to see what those draft regulations look like and if they they contemplate a role for our department heads in any type of state regulatory scheme, that will be very important to coordinate with us, obviously. we are also very concerned about enforcement at the local level and who takes care of that and what that piece looks like and i'm sure some of my colleagues on the law enforcement side will touch on that. and then finally i do think the revenue collection and the banking component of this conversation is extremely important and probably one of our most challenging issues. if i do say so myself, csac and my boss amat kay, sits on the treasurers banking working group. and we are committed to working with all those entities involved to develop an interim solution. i think it is fair to say that there is an extreme amount of uncertainty at the federal level and as we wait for clarity, and guidance, we are also working on implementing our program. and so we need to be thinking about how we deal with that cash situation. it's my understanding that there are two boe districts that accept cash and likewise at the county level with their treasures, tax collectors at the counter they are not equiped to deal with the amount of cash that would be collecting if there is also local tax measure in place. so we're working with folks at the level, talking to folks at the state level and trying to develop some creative solutions to that challenging and nuanced problem. but, again, thank you for having me here today. happy to answer any questions, and look forward to the continued partnership.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 3564, 'end': 3568, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3581, 'end': 3589, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ron Lawrence: (chief? )thank you, sir. good morning, chairman salas, and member of this critically important joint oversight hearing. thank you for including the perspectives of local law enforcement on this panel. my name is ron karen lawrence. i'm the police chief of the city of citrus heights. i'm also the third vice-president for the california police chief's association of whom i'm here talking on behalf of today. as a state wide association, the california police chiefs find themselves in the interesting situation of supporting the medical marijuana legislation signed by governor brown in 2015. and we strongly opposed proposition 64 for a wide variety of reasons. we now join many of the stakeholders here today in working together, to balance the often conflicting interests behind the mcrsa and the auma, to develop one regulatory structure for cannabis. in doing so, california police chiefs will continue to advocate for absolute local control, dual state local licensing, limits on vertical integration, and cross licensing and thorough background checks for licensees. however, in ushering in the commercial structure of marijuana through ballot initiative brings a new set of problems, as police chiefs have challenges and issues facing us. and we look forward to working with you and all the stakeholders at getting them addressed. i'm going to stick with five fundamental overarching concerns that the police chiefs have, and i'm going to keep them in very brief summary. thank you. first and foremost is for us to protect local control. each of our communities is vastly and wildly unique and different, with different sets of expectations. and our policy makers at the local level, the city councils and our board of supervisors, must have the latitude and the agility to craft policy and ordinances that best suit the needs and expectation of our local communities. secondly, the commercial system is one based on increased use in sales. it is critical that stakeholders work together to deter, identify, and successfully prosecute marijuana impaired driving. the chp spoke very eloquently about that, so i won't speak too much more on that. but it is important issue to california police chiefs. number three, advertising and branding are sure to come with the newly established for-profit industry. we urge all of us to prevent our history with the tobacco industry, and its impact on our youth, from repeating itself, to ensure that joe cannabis, or marijuana man, don't crop up and become common fixtures in our society. we're very supportive of the regulations surrounding proper packaging of edibles and the non-advertising to our youth. number four, state and local law enforcement entities in our criminal justice system need to work across jurisdictional boundaries to ensure that our legal justice system is not exploited to embolden the black market. number five and lastly, we can not ignore the inflexible nature of a barred initiative, as new challenges and needs present themselves will be heard first to identify solutions that do not conflict with the language in proposition 64. this will require all of us to have a creative thinking. all us leaders and stakeholders who cannot be deterred from solving real problems as a result to the initiative's stringent amendment language. mr. chairman on behalf of the california police chiefs association, we look forward to working with you and all the stakeholders on moving this forward.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 53, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 212, 'end': 230, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 579, 'end': 584, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jerry Alejandre: Good morning. Captain Jerry Alejandre, Southern Kings County Sheriffs Office, also representing Cal State Sheriffs Association. Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, and Subcommittee, thank you very much for this opportunity to speak. As Chief Lawrence just eloquently put, that the Cal State Chief of Police Association agree with the sentiments on their concerns on there. I'm kind of here as more of a boots on the ground and work a task force that deals with narcotics and stuff. And so the goals are looking. We're developing policies and procedures now to follow the new laws as written, provide best service to community while upholding the law of the state and that public safety is number one. I was fortunate enough to go to Colorado during July to meet with Colorado chiefs of police and other leagues of supporting in and supported that to understand what the impact had occurred in there. From what we've Learned from that and we believe we anticipated increase in the marijuana activity in several areas, including a lot of them in the black market. It's still rampant there. Drug driving is a concern. Obviously, vehicle accidents, the rise that occurred from this. Marijuana use in and near schools and parks. Increase in emergency room visits due to toxicity, overdoses and psychotic episodes that will come from this. We're kind of at right now we've unknown as to where the licensing regulation agencies are going to be. As they Learned in Colorado, one key component they did is law enforcement was tied directly with the regulatory agencies. So they created a task force, as you would, to work with them because you can be dealing with a dangerous commodity in here, so it's a concern. So we look forward to developing a relationship with regulatory board in the state and with local things. Another concern will be, talked about the pesticides found in there. Currently going to, as we do, as we eradicate marijuana cultivation sites, right now. As we go to these sites we are finding common household pesticides in there, you can purchase at Home Depot. So that's obviously a concern for the Regulatory Agencies, and while they'll deal with that. As you know cigarette smoking is banned in different areas just like smoking of marijuana is banned in areas. Well that is a hard road to enforce, as you see, because with the new vaporizing cigarettes, you're really not sure what people are smoking. And so it's going to be an interesting challenge, With law enforcement to work on that. Just in general and just to give you a rough ideas in my county in the last five years. In the last five years we've eradicated illegal cultivation growths, 650,000 plants and that's involving 525 cases. Just a analysis in the last five years on there. So the hopeful of this is that we move forward and in the different areas, work together. The other thing is, with these regulatory commissions with the Department of Justice. Years back we had the Bureau of Narcotics Enforcement as a regulatory arm with them. That would probably be very helpful in having a creation of that again to help work with these murals in the dealing of these issues. Thank you. ATF or something.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 230, 'end': 238, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cara Martinson: i'll just jump in really quick. cara ron martinson with california state association of counties. i think that's an excellent point. and i think that was really sort of the genesis of our local control argument within specifically prop 64. it's extremely important for local jurisdictions to decide a, do they want to regulate or do they want to ban, they need to make that decision from the will of the community, if you will. and then what that local land use and zoning looks like. and that is a process that a lot of folks are going through now at the local level. identifying sensitive use areas, obviously we don't want these facilities next to schools, or children, or other areas, so, that is all-
[{'start': 32, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kristi Knoblich: thank you for the opportunity. my name is kristi, i'm excited to be here to provide some feedback, so thank you for the opportunity. i'm the owner and co-founder of kiva confections, we're a chocolate manufacturing company, edibles company, located in oakland and we also do distribution throughout the state. i'm here as a member of ccma and ccia, the california cannabis industry association. i sit on the board of directors there and i also chair the manufacturing committee. the ccia has worked with this legislature to provide feedback on both merca and prop 64 and we're excited to continue to do that with you, to work together and provide some collaboration so we can make sure we get the system done right. so one of the first items is the importance of a phase in with the licensing program, so laurie ajax mentioned this earlier as well,  but the ability for a licensed business to also be able to work with unlicensed businesses for a set amount of time and that will just allow the industry to get going and won't bring things to a complete standstill. i'm here as a member of ccma and ccia, the california cannabis industry association. i sit on the board of directors there and i also chair the manufacturing committee. the ccia has worked with this legislature to provide feedback on both merca and prop 64 and we're excited to continue to do that with you, to work together and provide some collaboration so we can make sure we get the system done right. so one of the first items is the importance of a phase in with the licensing program, so laurie ajax mentioned this earlier as well,  but the ability for a licensed business to also be able to work with unlicensed businesses for a set amount of time and that will just allow the industry to get going and won't bring things to a complete standstill. i'm here as a member of ccma and ccia, the california cannabis industry association. i sit on the board of directors there and i also chair the manufacturing committee. the ccia has worked with this legislature to provide feedback on both merca and prop 64 and we're excited to continue to do that with you, to work together and provide some collaboration so we can make sure we get the system done right. so one of the first items is the importance of a phase in with the licensing program, so laurie ajax mentioned this earlier as well,  but the ability for a licensed business to also be able to work with unlicensed businesses for a set amount of time and that will just allow the industry to get going and won't bring things to a complete standstill. as part of the association, we've created 12 major points that we are looking to focus on. i'm only going to talk about four today, but to highlight we really want to emphasize the importance of one system. so, medical and recreational coming together, and we think that will ease in the ability to become compliant. the other item is the thresholds for ownership. so, currently merca has 5% ownership, we'd like to see that come up to where prop 64 is with the 20% ownership. the concern there is with the 5% ownership component, there will be a restricted access to capital and that could potentially stifle growth for our new growing industry and also could present problems for publicly traded companies. if 5% is that threshold for ownership, they may be coming in and out of compliance as a publicly traded company. so, we'd really like to see 20% on that ownership component and then also we'd like to see the elimination of the cross licensure restrictions with mcrsa to allow vertical integration just like we see it in prop 64 that's been proposed there. so, mrsa is restrictive and prop 64 has that vertical integration component, and then finally, the last issue in this one is of the utmost importance to me personally and to the groups that we represent, is distribution, and so, we would like to see the distribution component that's brought up in prop 64 versus the one that's in merca, which requires a third party independent distributor. as a manufacturer a large component of my business and really, of the way that the industry is operating right now, allows for both manufacturing and distribution. so we're definitely concerned that restricting the amount of distribution licenses just to those who are solely doing distribution could have serious implications on the industry and specifically around innovation and kind of the entrepreneurialistic spirit of california.  so, we would like to be able to bring products, see products brought to market, through manufacturers, cultivators, everybody having access points in terms of distribution. so, thank you.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 805, 'end': 816, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1560, 'end': 1571, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2315, 'end': 2326, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3644, 'end': 3648, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Keith Stephenson: chair and members, greetings. chair, members, salas, wood, caballero, i wish to speak about a few topics. one is multiple permits under one roof, also known as co-location. definition of premise, also suitability, also known by some cities as equity based permits. modify the closed distribution model under their merca and allow for both their party distributors and licensed in house distributors owned by licensed cultivators, manufacturers, and, or retailers. and eliminating cross licensure restrictions in the merca by allowing vertical integration as currently authorized by prop 64. my name is keith cara stephenson, i am the owner and operator of the purple heart patient center dispensary which has been serving patients since september the 18th, 2006 and is the longest running dispensary in oakland. as a former resident of los angeles, i went to aviation maintenance college and became a licensed technician for united airlines for 17 years before two hip replacement surgeries forcing early retirement which led to my involvement in the medical cannabis industry. i started purple heart from the ground up and currently have 26 employees. i am the textbook definition of a small business owner. i am fortunate that, unlike some of my colleagues, i have not been incarcerated nor do i have a criminal record. i have also been fortunate that the cannabis industry has given me and has open many other doors that would not have been open in other fields. before i give my input on a path forward into the new cannabis world, i would like to thank mrs. ajax and her staff, as i was the second dispensary they visited and i appreciate their efforts to make themselves accessible, and learn about my industry. while distinctions between the medical and although those cannabis frameworks are important, discrepancies between the two frameworks will complicate implementation for state and local agencies and make compliance more difficult for licensees. with that stated, key points include multiple permits under one roof also known as co-location. multiple permits under one roof is helpful to the geographic fabric and zoning of cities. this maintains the composition of businesses in certain hubs, helps create natural clusters, and is beneficial to public safety as the businesses are easier to monitor. whether it's a dense urban city or smaller rural city, consolidating various usage and permits into one location is a better use of space. as an example, in medical, excuse me, as an example, a medicinal cannabis campus, similar to what biotechnology companies, or public private research centers do, should be encouraged. excuse me, definition of premise, so previous topic, the final definitions of where premises as determined by the licensing entities will have a significant impact on local ordinances, as well as on a licensee's ability to legally operate law state license or issue. with so many cities and counties banning or severely restricting cannabis businesses in their communities it is critically important that multiple licenses, both medical and non-medical be permitted on one premise. this model will allow cannabis businesses to relocate to locally approved hubs encouraging excuse me, the creation of natural clusters, and minimizing potential impacts to public safety, as clustering multiple businesses in one location is easier to monitor and regulate. suitability also known by some cities as equity. the war on drugs has been a war on people of low income of color. as part of the remedy, arma must benefit low income people of color and low income communities of color. any efforts by proponents of mass incarceration to roll back the sinising reforms to limit community and reinvestment, or to create barriers to economic participation by persons with limited capital, or prior drug records would undermine, excuse me, basic fairness of the act, and reinforce the institution of racism of the war on drugs. considering that men and women of color have been disproportionately punished by the war on drugs and suffered  immense harm, many individuals with past drug offenses on their records have been excluded from participating in this new industry. thereby furthering historic inequities, modified the close distribution model under the mrsa, and allow for both their party distributors and license in-house distributors. thank you so much, cheers. owned by license cultivators, manufacturers and retailers. strict tack, excuse me, strict track and trace requirements in the mrsa language will already be tracking cannabis products from seed to sell. the state already has the authority to audit the operation of all licensees, mandating the excuse me, mandating that distribution only be performed by an independent distributor who will now reduce or prevent unlawful diversion, and could have the unintended effect of increasing diversion at earlier points in the supply chain, prior to the distribution choke point. my last topic, eliminating cross-licensure restrictions in mrsa by allowing vertical integration, as currently authorized under prop 24. the mrsa language places restrictions on the number and type of licenses cannabis business may acquire. prop 64 does not include prohibitions against cross-licensure, and permits, in existing vertically integrating small business in the industry to be licensed by the state, without forcing it to divest itself of any part of its enterprise. to facilitate enforcement and compliance, there should be parity between cross-licensure rules in the medical anecdotal use cannabis regulations. with that, i look forward to your questions.
[{'start': 59, 'end': 68, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 602, 'end': 623, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1563, 'end': 1567, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Hezekiah Allen: Thank you very much. It's an honor and a pleasure, great responsibility to be here, today, discussing the path forward after Prop 64. Chair Caballero, Chair Salas, Chair Wood and indeed, Chair Ridley-Thomas, we think all four of your committees need to play a very important role in this going forward. My name is Hezekiah Allen, Executive Director of the California Growers Association, membership organization with more than 900 members, 40 board members representing communities in 17 counties, from LA to Humboldt. My comments, today, focus on closing the gap between MCRSA in Prop 64. First and foremost, cannabis cultivation is agriculture, and should be regulated by the Department of Food and Agriculture. Chair Caballero, your presence today, and your Committee's attention here is a great breakthrough in this policy area, and I'm going to primarily direct my comments to you, and vice-chair Mathis, though he stepped out of the room. First and foremost, one size that does not fit all for cultivation licensing, both Prop 64 and MCRSA have tiered licenses. MCRSA contains cottage, specialty, small, and medium to ensure that regulatory requirements and fees are appropriately scaled to the size of the grow. Prop 64 creates all of these licenses, with the exception of the Cottage Cultivation License. Additionally, Prop 64 creates the Type 5 unlimited scale license in 2023. When it comes to cultivation licenses, we have two recommendations and a word of caution.
[{'start': 140, 'end': 149, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 157, 'end': 162, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 170, 'end': 174, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 193, 'end': 206, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 314, 'end': 328, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 720, 'end': 729, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 902, 'end': 908, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Glenn Backes: Good morning, Glenn Backes for Drug Policy Alliance. Our C4 partner, Drug Policy Action, was part of the drafting Committee for Prop 64, part of the steering Committee for 64, and the second largest donor to 64. I would like Drug Policy Alliance to be a resource to the Committee, to the members, to the staff. Feel free to blow up my phone. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Regina Wilson: Yes, my name is Regina Wilson, and I am the Chair and Executive Director of California Black Media. I would just like to echo Assemblymember Ridley-Thomas's comment. I do believe that there is a deep concern. I believe earlier, Mr. John Sawyer also pointed to the lack of outreach to the actual community. So I hear a lot of local governments talking, but the community is not. I represent over 22 African American-owned media outlets, zero conversations, zero invitations to any of the meetings to be able to talk about this. It's affected our community In a way that many of you know how the war on drugs has effected our community and I just believe that, I'm hoping that I can work with the committee in some kind of way to talk about how public notices can happen within these local communities, so that they're a part of the regulatory process, yeah.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 141, 'end': 154, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 232, 'end': 243, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Robert Sumner: yes, good morning, robert jonah sumner with the california department of justice. i'm happy to be here this morning in front of these three committees, i think it will be a really great panel throughout the morning. i'll keep my portion brief and largely submit to the role of the attorney general as the constitutional chief law officer for the state. both the medical marijuana legislation that was passed and prop 64 actually largely omits a direct role for the department of justice, aside from our administrative duty and then disseminating criminal history information. that said, as i go through a basic overview of the bill, you'll see that as the lawyer for virtually every government entity in the state, the attorney general will be continuing to assess the impact that prop 64 and the legislation proceeding is going to have on our day-to-day responsibilities through our various legal divisions and sections. we've actually appointed a coordinator within our government law section, an attorney whose sole purpose on this project is going to be to assess the cumulative impact of these new policies for marijuana on the department to understand whether or not we have the appropriate resources to handle all of the complex legal issues and regulatory frameworks that are going to be implemented as a result of the law. in addition to that, we're also going to be actively using our case management system to track any litigation that comes to the various sections that have a core nucleus subject of cannabis or marijuana legalization in order to track the progression of those issues. as a quick overview, i believe the background paper does a fairly good summary of the prop 64 language, but i can just give a refresher. it's that it makes cannabis under state and local law for adults 21 and older. they can possess up to one ounce of marijuana for personal use and cultivate up to six plants for personal use in a private, locked residence. it can only be smoked and vaped in places where tobacco is allowed and it can't be ingested in a public place. from there, prop 64 is largely based on the previous medical legislation that was championed by members of this committee and the legislature in that it divides up a number of very complicated and necessary regulatory framework pieces across different areas of agency expertise. of course, the one newly created entity within the past few years is the bureau of medical cannabis regulation, which is going to be handling the licensure for the transport distribution sale, and, i believe, we'll be testing. that is a new bureau, that, as an entity of the department of consumer affairs, will be a client agency of our licensing section, and then, meanwhile, the food and agriculture department is going to be licensing the cultivation, which is a client of our natural resources section. department of public health will be licensing manufacturing, and that is a client of our health, education and welfare section. from there, those kind of key implementors that are obviously working on a tight timeline to implement regulation, there will be a number of other impacted agencies or legal issues that may come to light within the attorney general's office. the state board of equalization will obviously be in charge of collecting the special taxes implemented by prop 64, which is a client of our business and tax section. another client of that section is the treasurer, who is, of course, working on a number of issues related to dealing with the profits related to marijuana sales. the various environmental regulations that are going to be set by food and agriculture, as well as the state water resources control board, and the department of pesticides. so, kind of our natural resources section, and then on top of that, we expect that there will be a number of reduced penalties as a result of prop 64, which allows for marijuana felonies to be reduced to misdemeanors with petitions for reduced charges. and so our appeals, rights and trials section, which handles many of those cases, will likely be dealing with those issues, as well as our correctional law section. from there, and as our employment administrative mandate section, prop 64 continues to allow employers discriminate against users of marijuana and that may come up as well as in setting some professional licensure, which is one of the primary bnp committee issues. both our health, quality and enforcement section, which deals with the healing arts boards, and our licensing section, which deals with many of the other boards may end up seeing litigation involving disciplinary or license or revocation cases where one of the factors behind the investigation was use of marijuana. to the extent that local ordinances restrict cultivation or use of marijuana in a zoning context. we have a land law section that would deal with that. prop 64 also envisions the possibility of non-profit licensees, and that would fall under our charitable trust section. it got to a point when we were assessing this, that as we go thru all of those issues which unfold thru the language of prop 64. nearly every legal section within the department of justice is likely going to have some case or some matter that involves a new issue that has been brought to light by the signing of the initiative. as i mentioned earlier, we do also have a direct role in that we are the state's criminal history depository. so, to the extent that prop 64 and previous legislation continues to lay out fitness criteria for licensees with the idea they cannot have been convicted of a substantially related crime or a serious or violent felony, felonies involving fraud and deceit, or employment of a minor in a drug business. all of that background check workload will be coming to our cjis division, or california justice information services division, and then, finally, i would also point out that as far as the driving impaired issue, there is obviously going to be a lot of discussion about what constitutes driving impaired following the ingestion of marijuana. we're looking at all the new scientific ways to be able to do roadside testing, and other types of testing by law enforcement and that's something that the various folks that work in toxicology in our bureau of forensic services is likely to have to handle from it workload issue. finally, to the extent that law enforcement training and standards impact as chief law enforcement officer. i'm sure we'll be working closely with the various associations, and with post and chp, to make sure that we are adequately preparing folks that are doing local enforcement and statewide law enforcement for the new laws that will be large change in life for many of them, and then, just to book in with this, if there's any case just generally challenging the constitutionality of either proposition 64, any of its provisions, any of the regulations, or any local ordinance that will obviously fall upon the attorney general to defend as the chief law officer for the state. so, while we don't have a direct impact result of prop 64, you almost get a little annotation next to every provision in the law where the attorney general will likely have to be present to lend some legal guidance. so, in that serving as kind of a basic and hopefully, brief summary of the provisions of the bill and how we see them from our role at the ag's office. i'm happy to answer any questions.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jim Houston: thank you, mr chair, and madam chair, members. my name is jim. i'm the undersecretary of the california department of food and agriculture. this has been echoed by my colleague, both the passage of mcrsa and prop 64 has presented new challenges to the department of food and agriculture. first and foremost, we're responsible for the licensing of the growth sites and enforcement of medical and adult use cannabis throughout the state, with particular consideration given to ceqa, so the california environmental quality act. we're the lead agency for purposes of that licensing. beyond that, we're also responsible for developing the track and trace system that we use from seed to sale to track the cannabis both through its flower state and then whatever sort of machinations occur after that. in terms of our regulatory work, we are sort of lock step with our other agencies. we held eight listening sessions throughout the state, all up and down, both in the north and the south and the central. many of those occurred with other agencies in tow. some did, some did not. we likewise have been proceeding expeditiously and plan to submit our regulations in early spring to oal. we've already prepared our economic analysis, otherwise known as a asra. and then that's with mcrsa. parallel to that is the ceqa timeline. so we will be shortly releasing our draft environmental impact report. we'll go early spring and then that will sort of begin the process. we've built in a lot of public comment for both of those and plan on submitting those late fall, around november for their final disposition. and then in august, likewise we plan on using our emergency regulatory authority to implement prop 64. it's been expressed both in legislature and here and in other hearings, and will continue to be discussed. the harmonization between mcrsa and prop 64 is dynamic and occurring. and so we want to be able to adapt and put in any of those changes in august so that we don't have to sort of unwind the clock. so august, use the emergency and then we will follow that up with regular rule making as well. and that also presents a unique challenge for us, that is ceqa, because we have our mcrsa ceqa and we also have to do prop 64 ceqa. but thankfully we were able, we believe we'll be able to utilize the information that's in our mcrsa ceqa analysis, apply that to our prop 64 analysis. and where there are some differences, we believe that that overlap will allow us to meet the january 1, 2018 deadline. there is currently an rfp out to do the consulting work for that. so we anticipate that should be wrapped up shortly, and then we will begin. so i will say i've been very, very impressed with the level of coordination that we've had, and the level of dialogue that we've had with both yourselves, stakeholders in our sister agencies, and so i look forward to seeing this through to completion. i'm happy to answer any questions you may have.
[{'start': 58, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 198, 'end': 203, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 475, 'end': 479, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2164, 'end': 2168, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Karen Smith: Thank you. So good afternoon, Chairs, or good morning, Committee Members. I am Dr. Karen Smith. I'm the State Public Health Officer and the Director of the California Department of Public Health. Today I'm going to talk briefly about the Department of Public Health and its implementation of the Medical Cannabis Regulation Safety Act and Prop 64. As you all know, the Medical Cannabis Regulation Safety Act and 64 both mandate the Department of Public Health to license and oversee medical and adult use cannabis product manufacturers. The department's approached these regulations with the intent of creating a strong foundation for the protection of public health and safety without making the regulatory compliance so onerous that manufacturers of the cannabis products would choose to remain in the underground market. We're drafting regulations that are substantially similar to the manufacturing practices currently in place for food manufacturers. And the regs will include things along the lines of licensing requirements, process control, security, safety, sanitation, destruction, labelling, packaging, product standards and compliance enforcement. We developed the regulations to include those substantively similar both to food, but also to dietary supplements, because there are things about cannabis being added to food products that are very similar to that. From microbial contamination by employees or the environment to incorporation of foreign elements like glass, hair or insects to contamination of a product with unintended allergens, the manufacturing processes provide numerous opportunities for hazards to be introduced. The minimum facility requirements and standard operating procedures for sanitary manufacturing established by the department's proposed regulations are intended to reduce or eliminate potential contamination. The regulations also limit the products that are allowed to be infused with cannabis. Because certain types of manufactured products are more susceptible to microbial contamination. The department's highest priority in implementing the act and Proposition 64 is the protection of the public's health. Based on feedback that we received from stakeholders, the department is contemplating additional license types beyond those allowed for in the current regulation. One of which is an additional license type for businesses that only manufacture products such as edibles, but don't conduct the extractions from the plant. And then a second license type for businesses that do not manufacture the actual product, but package and label them. We have extensive experience in the food manufacturing, processing and safety, but the cannabis industry is new to us as well as others. We estimate that there will be approximately 1,000 applications for medical cannabis manufacturing and potentially as much as twice that for the adult use manufacturing. This required us to really quickly develop an understanding of this entirely new industry which is evolving very rapidly as I think you're all aware. And because of the nature of the industry there isn't a great deal of data actually available. So it becomes difficult to verify. To educate ourselves we met with numerous industry representatives and associations and the department staff visited manufacturing sites of various types throughout the state to learn more about extraction and manufacturing processes. The staff also had numerous calls with other states who have implemented similar programs during the pre-regulatory stakeholder meetings. We also heard from local health jurisdictions and others within the local jurisdictions who represent, they are very clear about their desire to both maintain some level of local control, and that they are important partners in the regulatory process. This is consistent with the way that we practice in food manufacturing, and other activities, in the department. Timely completion of the regulatory packages is also a top priority for us and we've been coordinating, as has been said before, we also are on the same timeline. We anticipate releasing the medical cannabis regulations for public comment in the early spring, and full adoption by January 1st. Because of the compressed timeline, we also anticipate using the emergency regulatory process for the adult use regulations, which will substantially be the same as Proposition 64, although there are some differences that will need to be addressed. Do thank you for the opportunity to share our progress and plans, and implementation and I'm happy to answer any questions that you may have.
[{'start': 83, 'end': 94, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cara Martinson: Thank you. Good morning, I'm Cara Martinson, of the California State Association of Counties. Thank you so much for having us come speak to you today to provide some feedback. And I really do appreciate the conversation and some of the comments that were made by previous panels because I think they highlight some of the issues that we [UNKNOWN] are continuing to focus on. We were very involved in the development of the MCRSA and were able to provide some early and initial input into Prop 64. And that local control piece was extremely important to local governments, and while we recognize that it's difficult to manage 58 counties and 480 some cities, different regulatory programs, we thought that that was necessary for jurisdictions to be able to reflect The will of their community. So there is a lot happening at the local level. And I think we can tell by where Prop 64 passed about two thirds of California counties voted in favor of Proposition 64. And we do think that will be somewhat reflective of how cannabis is regulated at the local level with that local control piece in there. As I mentioned, there's a lot of activity happening right now within the city and county level. Just as a snapshot, I believe there were 53 local city and county ballot measures on the November 2016 ballot related to cannabis, 39 of those successful. And out of those, there were seven county tax measures. So in addition to what the Prop 64 already sets into statute. So folks at the lower level are thinking about this. They're working with the regulatory agencies that were up here and I would like to thank them for their outreach to us and being available to answer our questions, because that coordination is going to be extremely important. In order for the state to meet its statutory obligation of issuing licenses January 1, 2018, local governments are going to have to have their programs in place as well. So we have a vested interest in seeing the state be successful, and have them achieve their goals, so that we are able to do that as well at the local level. But we do have a concern related to timing, because of the urgency and drafts still out there and that we have not seen yet. And we would encourage the agencies to continue need to outreach to us because there are a number of counties out there that are ahead of the curve, that have been working on medical marijuana, have developed their own track and trace programs, that have developed their own licensing schemes. So we feel that we have a lot of expertise in this area and some jurisdictions that can offer comments and inputs into that regulatory process. In addition as some of the other fellow panelist have made comments and I won't reiterate but there are many differences Between the NCRSA and Prop 64 in addition to the local licensing piece. We've heard a lot about the role of the ag commissioners and the role of environmental health directors and we're very interested to see what those draft regulations look like and if they they contemplate a role for our department heads in any type of state regulatory scheme, that will be very important to coordinate with us, obviously. We are also very concerned about enforcement at the local level and who takes care of that and what that piece looks like and I'm sure some of my colleagues on the law enforcement side will touch on that. And then finally I do think the revenue collection and the banking component of this conversation is extremely important and probably one of our most challenging issues. If I do say so myself, CSAC and my Boss Amat Kay, sits on the Treasurers Banking Working Group. And we are committed to working with all those entities involved to develop an interim solution. I think it is fair to say that there is an extreme amount of uncertainty at the federal level and as we wait for clarity, and guidance, we are also working on implementing our program. And so we need to be thinking about how we deal with that cash situation. It's my understanding that there are two BOE districts that accept cash and likewise at the county level with their treasures, tax collectors at the counter they are not equiped to deal with the amount of cash that would be collecting if there is also local tax measure in place. So we're working with folks at the level, talking to folks at the state level and trying to develop some creative solutions to that challenging and nuanced problem. But, again, thank you for having me here today. Happy to answer any questions, and look forward to the continued partnership.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 3569, 'end': 3573, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3586, 'end': 3594, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ron Lawrence: (Chief? )Thank you, sir. Good morning, Chairman Salas, and member of this critically important joint oversight hearing. Thank you for including the perspectives of local law enforcement on this panel. My name is Ron Lawrence. I'm the Police Chief of the City of Citrus Heights. I'm also the third vice-president for the California Police Chief's Association of whom I'm here talking on behalf of today. As a state wide Association, the California Police Chiefs find themselves in the interesting situation of supporting the medical marijuana legislation signed by Governor Brown in 2015. And we strongly opposed Proposition 64 for a wide variety of reasons. We now join many of the stakeholders here today in working together, to balance the often conflicting interests behind the MCRSA and the AUMA, to develop one regulatory structure for cannabis. In doing so, California Police Chiefs will continue to advocate for absolute local control, dual state local licensing, limits on vertical integration, and cross licensing and thorough background checks for licensees. However, in ushering in the commercial structure of marijuana through ballot initiative brings a new set of problems, as police chiefs have challenges and issues facing us. And we look forward to working with you and all the stakeholders at getting them addressed. I'm going to stick with five fundamental overarching concerns that the police chiefs have, and I'm going to keep them in very brief summary. Thank you. First and foremost is for us to protect local control. Each of our communities is vastly and wildly unique and different, with different sets of expectations. And our policy makers at the local level, the city councils and our Board of Supervisors, must have the latitude and the agility to craft policy and ordinances that best suit the needs and expectation of our local communities. Secondly, the commercial system is one based on increased use in sales. It is critical that stakeholders work together to deter, identify, and successfully prosecute marijuana impaired driving. The CHP Spoke very eloquently about that, so I won't speak too much more on that. But it is important issue to California Police Chiefs. Number three, advertising and branding are sure to come with the newly established for-profit industry. We urge all of us to prevent our history with the tobacco industry, and its impact on our youth, from repeating itself, to ensure that Joe Cannabis, or Marijuana Man, don't crop up and become common fixtures in our society. We're very supportive of the regulations surrounding proper packaging of edibles and the non-advertising to our youth. Number four, state and local law enforcement entities in our criminal justice system need to work across jurisdictional boundaries to ensure that our legal justice system is not exploited to embolden the black market. Number five and lastly, we can not ignore the inflexible nature of a barred initiative, as new challenges and needs present themselves will be heard first to identify solutions that do not conflict with the language in Proposition 64. This will require all of us to have a creative thinking. All us leaders and stakeholders who cannot be deterred from solving real problems as a result to the initiative's stringent amendment language. Mr. Chairman on behalf of the California Police Chiefs Association, we look forward to working with you and all the stakeholders on moving this forward.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 53, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 212, 'end': 224, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 573, 'end': 578, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jerry Alejandre: good morning. captain jerry robert alejandre, southern kings county sheriffs office, also representing cal state sheriffs association. mr. chair, madam chair, and subcommittee, thank you very much for this opportunity to speak. as chief lawrence just eloquently put, that the cal state chief of police association agree with the sentiments on their concerns on there. i'm kind of here as more of a boots on the ground and work a task force that deals with narcotics and stuff. and so the goals are looking. we're developing policies and procedures now to follow the new laws as written, provide best service to community while upholding the law of the state and that public safety is number one. i was fortunate enough to go to colorado during july to meet with colorado chiefs of police and other leagues of supporting in and supported that to understand what the impact had occurred in there. from what we've learned from that and we believe we anticipated increase in the marijuana activity in several areas, including a lot of them in the black market. it's still rampant there. drug driving is a concern. obviously, vehicle accidents, the rise that occurred from this. marijuana use in and near schools and parks. increase in emergency room visits due to toxicity, overdoses and psychotic episodes that will come from this. we're kind of at right now we've unknown as to where the licensing regulation agencies are going to be. as they learned in colorado, one key component they did is law enforcement was tied directly with the regulatory agencies. so they created a task force, as you would, to work with them because you can be dealing with a dangerous commodity in here, so it's a concern. so we look forward to developing a relationship with regulatory board in the state and with local things. another concern will be, talked about the pesticides found in there. currently going to, as we do, as we eradicate marijuana cultivation sites, right now. as we go to these sites we are finding common household pesticides in there, you can purchase at home depot. so that's obviously a concern for the regulatory agencies, and while they'll deal with that. as you know cigarette smoking is banned in different areas just like smoking of marijuana is banned in areas. well that is a hard road to enforce, as you see, because with the new vaporizing cigarettes, you're really not sure what people are smoking. and so it's going to be an interesting challenge, with law enforcement to work on that. just in general and just to give you a rough ideas in my county in the last five years. in the last five years we've eradicated illegal cultivation growths, 650,000 plants and that's involving 525 cases. just a analysis in the last five years on there. so the hopeful of this is that we move forward and in the different areas, work together. the other thing is, with these regulatory commissions with the department of justice. years back we had the bureau of narcotics enforcement as a regulatory arm with them. that would probably be very helpful in having a creation of that again to help work with these murals in the dealing of these issues. thank you. atf or something.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 237, 'end': 245, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cara Martinson: I'll just jump in really quick. Cara Martinson with California State Association of Counties. I think that's an excellent point. And I think that was really sort of the genesis of our local control argument within specifically Prop 64. It's extremely important for local jurisdictions to decide A, Do they want to regulate or do they want to ban, they need to make that decision from the will of the community, if you will. And then what that local land use and zoning looks like. And that is a process that a lot of folks are going through now at the local level. Identifying sensitive use areas, obviously we don't want these facilities next to schools, or children, or other areas, so, that is all-
[{'start': 32, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kristi Knoblich: thank you for the opportunity. my name is kristi jerry knoblich, i'm excited to be here to provide some feedback, so thank you for the opportunity. i'm the owner and co-founder of kiva confections, we're a chocolate manufacturing company, edibles company, located in oakland and we also do distribution throughout the state. i'm here as a member of ccma and ccia, the california cannabis industry association. i sit on the board of directors there and i also chair the manufacturing committee. the ccia has worked with this legislature to provide feedback on both merca and prop 64 and we're excited to continue to do that with you, to work together and provide some collaboration so we can make sure we get the system done right. so one of the first items is the importance of a phase in with the licensing program, so laurie ajax mentioned this earlier as well,  but the ability for a licensed business to also be able to work with unlicensed businesses for a set amount of time and that will just allow the industry to get going and won't bring things to a complete standstill. i'm here as a member of ccma and ccia, the california cannabis industry association. i sit on the board of directors there and i also chair the manufacturing committee. the ccia has worked with this legislature to provide feedback on both merca and prop 64 and we're excited to continue to do that with you, to work together and provide some collaboration so we can make sure we get the system done right. so one of the first items is the importance of a phase in with the licensing program, so laurie ajax mentioned this earlier as well,  but the ability for a licensed business to also be able to work with unlicensed businesses for a set amount of time and that will just allow the industry to get going and won't bring things to a complete standstill. i'm here as a member of ccma and ccia, the california cannabis industry association. i sit on the board of directors there and i also chair the manufacturing committee. the ccia has worked with this legislature to provide feedback on both merca and prop 64 and we're excited to continue to do that with you, to work together and provide some collaboration so we can make sure we get the system done right. so one of the first items is the importance of a phase in with the licensing program, so laurie ajax mentioned this earlier as well,  but the ability for a licensed business to also be able to work with unlicensed businesses for a set amount of time and that will just allow the industry to get going and won't bring things to a complete standstill. as part of the association, we've created 12 major points that we are looking to focus on. i'm only going to talk about four today, but to highlight we really want to emphasize the importance of one system. so, medical and recreational coming together, and we think that will ease in the ability to become compliant. the other item is the thresholds for ownership. so, currently merca has 5% ownership, we'd like to see that come up to where prop 64 is with the 20% ownership. the concern there is with the 5% ownership component, there will be a restricted access to capital and that could potentially stifle growth for our new growing industry and also could present problems for publicly traded companies. if 5% is that threshold for ownership, they may be coming in and out of compliance as a publicly traded company. so, we'd really like to see 20% on that ownership component and then also we'd like to see the elimination of the cross licensure restrictions with mcrsa to allow vertical integration just like we see it in prop 64 that's been proposed there. so, mrsa is restrictive and prop 64 has that vertical integration component, and then finally, the last issue in this one is of the utmost importance to me personally and to the groups that we represent, is distribution, and so, we would like to see the distribution component that's brought up in prop 64 versus the one that's in merca, which requires a third party independent distributor. as a manufacturer a large component of my business and really, of the way that the industry is operating right now, allows for both manufacturing and distribution. so we're definitely concerned that restricting the amount of distribution licenses just to those who are solely doing distribution could have serious implications on the industry and specifically around innovation and kind of the entrepreneurialistic spirit of california.  so, we would like to be able to bring products, see products brought to market, through manufacturers, cultivators, everybody having access points in terms of distribution. so, thank you.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 63, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 820, 'end': 831, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1575, 'end': 1586, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2330, 'end': 2341, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3659, 'end': 3663, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Keith Stephenson: chair and members, greetings. chair, members, salas, wood, caballero, i wish to speak about a few topics. one is multiple permits under one roof, also known as co-location. definition of premise, also suitability, also known by some cities as equity based permits. modify the closed distribution model under their merca and allow for both their party distributors and licensed in house distributors owned by licensed cultivators, manufacturers, and, or retailers. and eliminating cross licensure restrictions in the merca by allowing vertical integration as currently authorized by prop 64. my name is keith kristi stephenson, i am the owner and operator of the purple heart patient center dispensary which has been serving patients since september the 18th, 2006 and is the longest running dispensary in oakland. as a former resident of los angeles, i went to aviation maintenance college and became a licensed technician for united airlines for 17 years before two hip replacement surgeries forcing early retirement which led to my involvement in the medical cannabis industry. i started purple heart from the ground up and currently have 26 employees. i am the textbook definition of a small business owner. i am fortunate that, unlike some of my colleagues, i have not been incarcerated nor do i have a criminal record. i have also been fortunate that the cannabis industry has given me and has open many other doors that would not have been open in other fields. before i give my input on a path forward into the new cannabis world, i would like to thank mrs. ajax and her staff, as i was the second dispensary they visited and i appreciate their efforts to make themselves accessible, and learn about my industry. while distinctions between the medical and although those cannabis frameworks are important, discrepancies between the two frameworks will complicate implementation for state and local agencies and make compliance more difficult for licensees. with that stated, key points include multiple permits under one roof also known as co-location. multiple permits under one roof is helpful to the geographic fabric and zoning of cities. this maintains the composition of businesses in certain hubs, helps create natural clusters, and is beneficial to public safety as the businesses are easier to monitor. whether it's a dense urban city or smaller rural city, consolidating various usage and permits into one location is a better use of space. as an example, in medical, excuse me, as an example, a medicinal cannabis campus, similar to what biotechnology companies, or public private research centers do, should be encouraged. excuse me, definition of premise, so previous topic, the final definitions of where premises as determined by the licensing entities will have a significant impact on local ordinances, as well as on a licensee's ability to legally operate law state license or issue. with so many cities and counties banning or severely restricting cannabis businesses in their communities it is critically important that multiple licenses, both medical and non-medical be permitted on one premise. this model will allow cannabis businesses to relocate to locally approved hubs encouraging excuse me, the creation of natural clusters, and minimizing potential impacts to public safety, as clustering multiple businesses in one location is easier to monitor and regulate. suitability also known by some cities as equity. the war on drugs has been a war on people of low income of color. as part of the remedy, arma must benefit low income people of color and low income communities of color. any efforts by proponents of mass incarceration to roll back the sinising reforms to limit community and reinvestment, or to create barriers to economic participation by persons with limited capital, or prior drug records would undermine, excuse me, basic fairness of the act, and reinforce the institution of racism of the war on drugs. considering that men and women of color have been disproportionately punished by the war on drugs and suffered  immense harm, many individuals with past drug offenses on their records have been excluded from participating in this new industry. thereby furthering historic inequities, modified the close distribution model under the mrsa, and allow for both their party distributors and license in-house distributors. thank you so much, cheers. owned by license cultivators, manufacturers and retailers. strict tack, excuse me, strict track and trace requirements in the mrsa language will already be tracking cannabis products from seed to sell. the state already has the authority to audit the operation of all licensees, mandating the excuse me, mandating that distribution only be performed by an independent distributor who will now reduce or prevent unlawful diversion, and could have the unintended effect of increasing diversion at earlier points in the supply chain, prior to the distribution choke point. my last topic, eliminating cross-licensure restrictions in mrsa by allowing vertical integration, as currently authorized under prop 24. the mrsa language places restrictions on the number and type of licenses cannabis business may acquire. prop 64 does not include prohibitions against cross-licensure, and permits, in existing vertically integrating small business in the industry to be licensed by the state, without forcing it to divest itself of any part of its enterprise. to facilitate enforcement and compliance, there should be parity between cross-licensure rules in the medical anecdotal use cannabis regulations. with that, i look forward to your questions.
[{'start': 59, 'end': 68, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 602, 'end': 625, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1565, 'end': 1569, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Hezekiah Allen: Thank you very much. It's an honor and a pleasure, great responsibility to be here, today, discussing the path forward after Prop 64. Chair Caballero, Chair Salas, Chair Wood and indeed, Chair Ridley-Thomas, we think all four of your committees need to play a very important role in this going forward. My name is Hezekiah Allen, Executive Director of the California Growers Association, membership organization with more than 900 members, 40 board members representing communities in 17 counties, from LA to Humboldt. My comments, today, focus on closing the gap between MCRSA in Prop 64. First and foremost, cannabis cultivation is agriculture, and should be regulated by the Department of Food and Agriculture. Chair Caballero, your presence today, and your Committee's attention here is a great breakthrough in this policy area, and I'm going to primarily direct my comments to you, and vice-chair Mathis, though he stepped out of the room. First and foremost, one size that does not fit all for cultivation licensing, both Prop 64 and MCRSA have tiered licenses. MCRSA contains cottage, specialty, small, and medium to ensure that regulatory requirements and fees are appropriately scaled to the size of the grow. Prop 64 creates all of these licenses, with the exception of the Cottage Cultivation License. Additionally, Prop 64 creates the Type 5 unlimited scale license in 2023. When it comes to cultivation licenses, we have two recommendations and a word of caution.
[{'start': 140, 'end': 149, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 157, 'end': 162, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 170, 'end': 174, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 193, 'end': 206, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 314, 'end': 328, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 720, 'end': 729, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 902, 'end': 908, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Glenn Backes: Good morning, Glenn Backes for Drug Policy Alliance. Our C4 partner, Drug Policy Action, was part of the drafting Committee for Prop 64, part of the steering Committee for 64, and the second largest donor to 64. I would like Drug Policy Alliance to be a resource to the Committee, to the members, to the staff. Feel free to blow up my phone. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Regina Wilson: Yes, my name is Regina Wilson, and I am the Chair and Executive Director of California Black Media. I would just like to echo Assemblymember Ridley-Thomas's comment. I do believe that there is a deep concern. I believe earlier, Mr. John Sawyer also pointed to the lack of outreach to the actual community. So I hear a lot of local governments talking, but the community is not. I represent over 22 African American-owned media outlets, zero conversations, zero invitations to any of the meetings to be able to talk about this. It's affected our community In a way that many of you know how the war on drugs has effected our community and I just believe that, I'm hoping that I can work with the committee in some kind of way to talk about how public notices can happen within these local communities, so that they're a part of the regulatory process, yeah.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 141, 'end': 154, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 232, 'end': 243, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Robert Sumner: yes, good morning, robert with the california department of justice. i'm happy to be here this morning in front of these three committees, i think it will be a really great panel throughout the morning. i'll keep my portion brief and largely submit to the role of the attorney general as the constitutional chief law officer for the state. both the medical marijuana legislation that was passed and prop 64 actually largely omits a direct role for the department of justice, aside from our administrative duty and then disseminating criminal history information. that said, as i go through a basic overview of the bill, you'll see that as the lawyer for virtually every government entity in the state, the attorney general will be continuing to assess the impact that prop 64 and the legislation proceeding is going to have on our day-to-day responsibilities through our various legal divisions and sections. we've actually appointed a coordinator within our government law section, an attorney whose sole purpose on this project is going to be to assess the cumulative impact of these new policies for marijuana on the department to understand whether or not we have the appropriate resources to handle all of the complex legal issues and regulatory frameworks that are going to be implemented as a result of the law. in addition to that, we're also going to be actively using our case management system to track any litigation that comes to the various sections that have a core nucleus subject of cannabis or marijuana legalization in order to track the progression of those issues. as a quick overview, i believe the background paper does a fairly good summary of the prop 64 language, but i can just give a refresher. it's that it makes cannabis under state and local law for adults 21 and older. they can possess up to one ounce of marijuana for personal use and cultivate up to six plants for personal use in a private, locked residence. it can only be smoked and vaped in places where tobacco is allowed and it can't be ingested in a public place. from there, prop 64 is largely based on the previous medical legislation that was championed by members of this committee and the legislature in that it divides up a number of very complicated and necessary regulatory framework pieces across different areas of agency expertise. of course, the one newly created entity within the past few years is the bureau of medical cannabis regulation, which is going to be handling the licensure for the transport distribution sale, and, i believe, we'll be testing. that is a new bureau, that, as an entity of the department of consumer affairs, will be a client agency of our licensing section, and then, meanwhile, the food and agriculture department is going to be licensing the cultivation, which is a client of our natural resources section. department of public health will be licensing manufacturing, and that is a client of our health, education and welfare section. from there, those kind of key implementors that are obviously working on a tight timeline to implement regulation, there will be a number of other impacted agencies or legal issues that may come to light within the attorney general's office. the state board of equalization will obviously be in charge of collecting the special taxes implemented by prop 64, which is a client of our business and tax section. another client of that section is the treasurer, who is, of course, working on a number of issues related to dealing with the profits related to marijuana sales. the various environmental regulations that are going to be set by food and agriculture, as well as the state water resources control board, and the department of pesticides. so, kind of our natural resources section, and then on top of that, we expect that there will be a number of reduced penalties as a result of prop 64, which allows for marijuana felonies to be reduced to misdemeanors with petitions for reduced charges. and so our appeals, rights and trials section, which handles many of those cases, will likely be dealing with those issues, as well as our correctional law section. from there, and as our employment administrative mandate section, prop 64 continues to allow employers discriminate against users of marijuana and that may come up as well as in setting some professional licensure, which is one of the primary bnp committee issues. both our health, quality and enforcement section, which deals with the healing arts boards, and our licensing section, which deals with many of the other boards may end up seeing litigation involving disciplinary or license or revocation cases where one of the factors behind the investigation was use of marijuana. to the extent that local ordinances restrict cultivation or use of marijuana in a zoning context. we have a land law section that would deal with that. prop 64 also envisions the possibility of non-profit licensees, and that would fall under our charitable trust section. it got to a point when we were assessing this, that as we go thru all of those issues which unfold thru the language of prop 64. nearly every legal section within the department of justice is likely going to have some case or some matter that involves a new issue that has been brought to light by the signing of the initiative. as i mentioned earlier, we do also have a direct role in that we are the state's criminal history depository. so, to the extent that prop 64 and previous legislation continues to lay out fitness criteria for licensees with the idea they cannot have been convicted of a substantially related crime or a serious or violent felony, felonies involving fraud and deceit, or employment of a minor in a drug business. all of that background check workload will be coming to our cjis division, or california justice information services division, and then, finally, i would also point out that as far as the driving impaired issue, there is obviously going to be a lot of discussion about what constitutes driving impaired following the ingestion of marijuana. we're looking at all the new scientific ways to be able to do roadside testing, and other types of testing by law enforcement and that's something that the various folks that work in toxicology in our bureau of forensic services is likely to have to handle from it workload issue. finally, to the extent that law enforcement training and standards impact as chief law enforcement officer. i'm sure we'll be working closely with the various associations, and with post and chp, to make sure that we are adequately preparing folks that are doing local enforcement and statewide law enforcement for the new laws that will be large change in life for many of them, and then, just to book in with this, if there's any case just generally challenging the constitutionality of either proposition 64, any of its provisions, any of the regulations, or any local ordinance that will obviously fall upon the attorney general to defend as the chief law officer for the state. so, while we don't have a direct impact result of prop 64, you almost get a little annotation next to every provision in the law where the attorney general will likely have to be present to lend some legal guidance. so, in that serving as kind of a basic and hopefully, brief summary of the provisions of the bill and how we see them from our role at the ag's office. i'm happy to answer any questions.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jim Houston: Thank you, Mr Chair, and Madam Chair, members. My name is Jim Houston. I'm the undersecretary of the California Department of Food and Agriculture. This has been echoed by my colleague, both the passage of MCRSA and Prop 64 has presented new challenges to the Department of Food and Agriculture. First and foremost, we're responsible for the licensing of the growth sites and enforcement of medical and adult use cannabis throughout the state, with particular consideration given to CEQA, so the California Environmental Quality Act. We're the lead agency for purposes of that licensing. Beyond that, we're also responsible for developing the track and trace system that we use from seed to sale to track the cannabis both through its flower state and then whatever sort of machinations occur after that. In terms of our regulatory work, we are sort of lock step with our other agencies. We held eight listening sessions throughout the state, all up and down, both in the north and the south and the central. Many of those occurred with other agencies in tow. Some did, some did not. We likewise have been proceeding expeditiously and plan to submit our regulations in early spring to OAL. We've already prepared our economic analysis, otherwise known as a ASRA. And then that's with MCRSA. Parallel to that is the CEQA timeline. So we will be shortly releasing our draft environmental impact report. We'll go early spring and then that will sort of begin the process. We've built in a lot of public comment for both of those and plan on submitting those late fall, around November for their final disposition. And then in August, likewise we plan on using our emergency regulatory authority to implement Prop 64. It's been expressed both in Legislature and here and in other hearings, and will continue to be discussed. The harmonization between MCRSA and Prop 64 is dynamic and occurring. And so we want to be able to adapt and put in any of those changes in August so that we don't have to sort of unwind the clock. So August, use the emergency and then we will follow that up with regular rule making as well. And that also presents a unique challenge for us, that is CEQA, because we have our MCRSA CEQA and we also have to do Prop 64 CEQA. But thankfully we were able, we believe we'll be able to utilize the information that's in our MCRSA CEQA analysis, apply that to our Prop 64 analysis. And where there are some differences, we believe that that overlap will allow us to meet the January 1, 2018 deadline. There is currently an RFP out to do the consulting work for that. So we anticipate that should be wrapped up shortly, and then we will begin. So I will say I've been very, very impressed with the level of coordination that we've had, and the level of dialogue that we've had with both yourselves, stakeholders in our sister agencies, and so I look forward to seeing this through to completion. I'm happy to answer any questions you may have.
[{'start': 58, 'end': 69, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 483, 'end': 487, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Karen Smith: Thank you. So good afternoon, Chairs, or good morning, Committee Members. I am Dr. Karen Smith. I'm the State Public Health Officer and the Director of the California Department of Public Health. Today I'm going to talk briefly about the Department of Public Health and its implementation of the Medical Cannabis Regulation Safety Act and Prop 64. As you all know, the Medical Cannabis Regulation Safety Act and 64 both mandate the Department of Public Health to license and oversee medical and adult use cannabis product manufacturers. The department's approached these regulations with the intent of creating a strong foundation for the protection of public health and safety without making the regulatory compliance so onerous that manufacturers of the cannabis products would choose to remain in the underground market. We're drafting regulations that are substantially similar to the manufacturing practices currently in place for food manufacturers. And the regs will include things along the lines of licensing requirements, process control, security, safety, sanitation, destruction, labelling, packaging, product standards and compliance enforcement. We developed the regulations to include those substantively similar both to food, but also to dietary supplements, because there are things about cannabis being added to food products that are very similar to that. From microbial contamination by employees or the environment to incorporation of foreign elements like glass, hair or insects to contamination of a product with unintended allergens, the manufacturing processes provide numerous opportunities for hazards to be introduced. The minimum facility requirements and standard operating procedures for sanitary manufacturing established by the department's proposed regulations are intended to reduce or eliminate potential contamination. The regulations also limit the products that are allowed to be infused with cannabis. Because certain types of manufactured products are more susceptible to microbial contamination. The department's highest priority in implementing the act and Proposition 64 is the protection of the public's health. Based on feedback that we received from stakeholders, the department is contemplating additional license types beyond those allowed for in the current regulation. One of which is an additional license type for businesses that only manufacture products such as edibles, but don't conduct the extractions from the plant. And then a second license type for businesses that do not manufacture the actual product, but package and label them. We have extensive experience in the food manufacturing, processing and safety, but the cannabis industry is new to us as well as others. We estimate that there will be approximately 1,000 applications for medical cannabis manufacturing and potentially as much as twice that for the adult use manufacturing. This required us to really quickly develop an understanding of this entirely new industry which is evolving very rapidly as I think you're all aware. And because of the nature of the industry there isn't a great deal of data actually available. So it becomes difficult to verify. To educate ourselves we met with numerous industry representatives and associations and the department staff visited manufacturing sites of various types throughout the state to learn more about extraction and manufacturing processes. The staff also had numerous calls with other states who have implemented similar programs during the pre-regulatory stakeholder meetings. We also heard from local health jurisdictions and others within the local jurisdictions who represent, they are very clear about their desire to both maintain some level of local control, and that they are important partners in the regulatory process. This is consistent with the way that we practice in food manufacturing, and other activities, in the department. Timely completion of the regulatory packages is also a top priority for us and we've been coordinating, as has been said before, we also are on the same timeline. We anticipate releasing the medical cannabis regulations for public comment in the early spring, and full adoption by January 1st. Because of the compressed timeline, we also anticipate using the emergency regulatory process for the adult use regulations, which will substantially be the same as Proposition 64, although there are some differences that will need to be addressed. Do thank you for the opportunity to share our progress and plans, and implementation and I'm happy to answer any questions that you may have.
[{'start': 83, 'end': 94, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cara Martinson: thank you. good morning, i'm cara jonah martinson, of the california state association of counties. thank you so much for having us come speak to you today to provide some feedback. and i really do appreciate the conversation and some of the comments that were made by previous panels because i think they highlight some of the issues that we [unknown] are continuing to focus on. we were very involved in the development of the mcrsa and were able to provide some early and initial input into prop 64. and that local control piece was extremely important to local governments, and while we recognize that it's difficult to manage 58 counties and 480 some cities, different regulatory programs, we thought that that was necessary for jurisdictions to be able to reflect the will of their community. so there is a lot happening at the local level. and i think we can tell by where prop 64 passed about two thirds of california counties voted in favor of proposition 64. and we do think that will be somewhat reflective of how cannabis is regulated at the local level with that local control piece in there. as i mentioned, there's a lot of activity happening right now within the city and county level. just as a snapshot, i believe there were 53 local city and county ballot measures on the november 2016 ballot related to cannabis, 39 of those successful. and out of those, there were seven county tax measures. so in addition to what the prop 64 already sets into statute. so folks at the lower level are thinking about this. they're working with the regulatory agencies that were up here and i would like to thank them for their outreach to us and being available to answer our questions, because that coordination is going to be extremely important. in order for the state to meet its statutory obligation of issuing licenses january 1, 2018, local governments are going to have to have their programs in place as well. so we have a vested interest in seeing the state be successful, and have them achieve their goals, so that we are able to do that as well at the local level. but we do have a concern related to timing, because of the urgency and drafts still out there and that we have not seen yet. and we would encourage the agencies to continue need to outreach to us because there are a number of counties out there that are ahead of the curve, that have been working on medical marijuana, have developed their own track and trace programs, that have developed their own licensing schemes. so we feel that we have a lot of expertise in this area and some jurisdictions that can offer comments and inputs into that regulatory process. in addition as some of the other fellow panelist have made comments and i won't reiterate but there are many differences between the ncrsa and prop 64 in addition to the local licensing piece. we've heard a lot about the role of the ag commissioners and the role of environmental health directors and we're very interested to see what those draft regulations look like and if they they contemplate a role for our department heads in any type of state regulatory scheme, that will be very important to coordinate with us, obviously. we are also very concerned about enforcement at the local level and who takes care of that and what that piece looks like and i'm sure some of my colleagues on the law enforcement side will touch on that. and then finally i do think the revenue collection and the banking component of this conversation is extremely important and probably one of our most challenging issues. if i do say so myself, csac and my boss amat kay, sits on the treasurers banking working group. and we are committed to working with all those entities involved to develop an interim solution. i think it is fair to say that there is an extreme amount of uncertainty at the federal level and as we wait for clarity, and guidance, we are also working on implementing our program. and so we need to be thinking about how we deal with that cash situation. it's my understanding that there are two boe districts that accept cash and likewise at the county level with their treasures, tax collectors at the counter they are not equiped to deal with the amount of cash that would be collecting if there is also local tax measure in place. so we're working with folks at the level, talking to folks at the state level and trying to develop some creative solutions to that challenging and nuanced problem. but, again, thank you for having me here today. happy to answer any questions, and look forward to the continued partnership.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 3575, 'end': 3579, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3592, 'end': 3600, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ron Lawrence: (Chief? )Thank you, sir. Good morning, Chairman Salas, and member of this critically important joint oversight hearing. Thank you for including the perspectives of local law enforcement on this panel. My name is Ron Lawrence. I'm the Police Chief of the City of Citrus Heights. I'm also the third vice-president for the California Police Chief's Association of whom I'm here talking on behalf of today. As a state wide Association, the California Police Chiefs find themselves in the interesting situation of supporting the medical marijuana legislation signed by Governor Brown in 2015. And we strongly opposed Proposition 64 for a wide variety of reasons. We now join many of the stakeholders here today in working together, to balance the often conflicting interests behind the MCRSA and the AUMA, to develop one regulatory structure for cannabis. In doing so, California Police Chiefs will continue to advocate for absolute local control, dual state local licensing, limits on vertical integration, and cross licensing and thorough background checks for licensees. However, in ushering in the commercial structure of marijuana through ballot initiative brings a new set of problems, as police chiefs have challenges and issues facing us. And we look forward to working with you and all the stakeholders at getting them addressed. I'm going to stick with five fundamental overarching concerns that the police chiefs have, and I'm going to keep them in very brief summary. Thank you. First and foremost is for us to protect local control. Each of our communities is vastly and wildly unique and different, with different sets of expectations. And our policy makers at the local level, the city councils and our Board of Supervisors, must have the latitude and the agility to craft policy and ordinances that best suit the needs and expectation of our local communities. Secondly, the commercial system is one based on increased use in sales. It is critical that stakeholders work together to deter, identify, and successfully prosecute marijuana impaired driving. The CHP Spoke very eloquently about that, so I won't speak too much more on that. But it is important issue to California Police Chiefs. Number three, advertising and branding are sure to come with the newly established for-profit industry. We urge all of us to prevent our history with the tobacco industry, and its impact on our youth, from repeating itself, to ensure that Joe Cannabis, or Marijuana Man, don't crop up and become common fixtures in our society. We're very supportive of the regulations surrounding proper packaging of edibles and the non-advertising to our youth. Number four, state and local law enforcement entities in our criminal justice system need to work across jurisdictional boundaries to ensure that our legal justice system is not exploited to embolden the black market. Number five and lastly, we can not ignore the inflexible nature of a barred initiative, as new challenges and needs present themselves will be heard first to identify solutions that do not conflict with the language in Proposition 64. This will require all of us to have a creative thinking. All us leaders and stakeholders who cannot be deterred from solving real problems as a result to the initiative's stringent amendment language. Mr. Chairman on behalf of the California Police Chiefs Association, we look forward to working with you and all the stakeholders on moving this forward.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 53, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 212, 'end': 224, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 573, 'end': 578, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jerry Alejandre: Good morning. Captain Jerry Alejandre, Southern Kings County Sheriffs Office, also representing Cal State Sheriffs Association. Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, and Subcommittee, thank you very much for this opportunity to speak. As Chief Lawrence just eloquently put, that the Cal State Chief of Police Association agree with the sentiments on their concerns on there. I'm kind of here as more of a boots on the ground and work a task force that deals with narcotics and stuff. And so the goals are looking. We're developing policies and procedures now to follow the new laws as written, provide best service to community while upholding the law of the state and that public safety is number one. I was fortunate enough to go to Colorado during July to meet with Colorado chiefs of police and other leagues of supporting in and supported that to understand what the impact had occurred in there. From what we've Learned from that and we believe we anticipated increase in the marijuana activity in several areas, including a lot of them in the black market. It's still rampant there. Drug driving is a concern. Obviously, vehicle accidents, the rise that occurred from this. Marijuana use in and near schools and parks. Increase in emergency room visits due to toxicity, overdoses and psychotic episodes that will come from this. We're kind of at right now we've unknown as to where the licensing regulation agencies are going to be. As they Learned in Colorado, one key component they did is law enforcement was tied directly with the regulatory agencies. So they created a task force, as you would, to work with them because you can be dealing with a dangerous commodity in here, so it's a concern. So we look forward to developing a relationship with regulatory board in the state and with local things. Another concern will be, talked about the pesticides found in there. Currently going to, as we do, as we eradicate marijuana cultivation sites, right now. As we go to these sites we are finding common household pesticides in there, you can purchase at Home Depot. So that's obviously a concern for the Regulatory Agencies, and while they'll deal with that. As you know cigarette smoking is banned in different areas just like smoking of marijuana is banned in areas. Well that is a hard road to enforce, as you see, because with the new vaporizing cigarettes, you're really not sure what people are smoking. And so it's going to be an interesting challenge, With law enforcement to work on that. Just in general and just to give you a rough ideas in my county in the last five years. In the last five years we've eradicated illegal cultivation growths, 650,000 plants and that's involving 525 cases. Just a analysis in the last five years on there. So the hopeful of this is that we move forward and in the different areas, work together. The other thing is, with these regulatory commissions with the Department of Justice. Years back we had the Bureau of Narcotics Enforcement as a regulatory arm with them. That would probably be very helpful in having a creation of that again to help work with these murals in the dealing of these issues. Thank you. ATF or something.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 230, 'end': 238, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cara Martinson: I'll just jump in really quick. Cara Martinson with California State Association of Counties. I think that's an excellent point. And I think that was really sort of the genesis of our local control argument within specifically Prop 64. It's extremely important for local jurisdictions to decide A, Do they want to regulate or do they want to ban, they need to make that decision from the will of the community, if you will. And then what that local land use and zoning looks like. And that is a process that a lot of folks are going through now at the local level. Identifying sensitive use areas, obviously we don't want these facilities next to schools, or children, or other areas, so, that is all-
[{'start': 32, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kristi Knoblich: Thank you for the opportunity. My name is Kristi Knoblich, I'm excited to be here to provide some feedback, so thank you for the opportunity. I'm the owner and co-founder of Kiva Confections, we're a chocolate manufacturing company, edibles company, located in Oakland and we also do distribution throughout the state. I'm here as a member of CCMA and CCIA, the California Cannabis Industry Association. I sit on the board of directors there and I also chair the manufacturing Committee. The CCIA has worked with this Legislature to provide feedback on both MERCA and Prop 64 and we're excited to continue to do that with you, to work together and provide some collaboration so we can make sure we get the system done right. So one of the first items is the importance of a phase in with the licensing program, so Laurie Ajax mentioned this earlier as well,  but the ability for a licensed business to also be able to work with unlicensed businesses for a set amount of time and that will just allow the industry to get going and won't bring things to a complete standstill. I'm here as a member of CCMA and CCIA, the California Cannabis Industry Association. I sit on the board of directors there and I also chair the manufacturing Committee. The CCIA has worked with this Legislature to provide feedback on both MERCA and Prop 64 and we're excited to continue to do that with you, to work together and provide some collaboration so we can make sure we get the system done right. So one of the first items is the importance of a phase in with the licensing program, so Laurie Ajax mentioned this earlier as well,  but the ability for a licensed business to also be able to work with unlicensed businesses for a set amount of time and that will just allow the industry to get going and won't bring things to a complete standstill. I'm here as a member of CCMA and CCIA, the California Cannabis Industry Association. I sit on the board of directors there and I also chair the manufacturing Committee. The CCIA has worked with this Legislature to provide feedback on both MERCA and Prop 64 and we're excited to continue to do that with you, to work together and provide some collaboration so we can make sure we get the system done right. So one of the first items is the importance of a phase in with the licensing program, so Laurie Ajax mentioned this earlier as well,  but the ability for a licensed business to also be able to work with unlicensed businesses for a set amount of time and that will just allow the industry to get going and won't bring things to a complete standstill. As part of the association, we've created 12 major points that we are looking to focus on. I'm only going to talk about four today, but to highlight we really want to emphasize the importance of one system. So, medical and recreational coming together, and we think that will ease in the ability to become compliant. The other item is the thresholds for ownership. So, currently MERCA has 5% ownership, we'd like to see that come up to where Prop 64 is with the 20% ownership. The concern there is with the 5% ownership component, there will be a restricted access to capital and that could potentially stifle growth for our new growing industry and also could present problems for publicly traded companies. If 5% is that threshold for ownership, they may be coming in and out of compliance as a publicly traded company. So, we'd really like to see 20% on that ownership component and then also we'd like to see the elimination of the cross licensure restrictions with MCRSA to allow vertical integration just like we see it in Prop 64 that's been proposed there. So, MRSA is restrictive and Prop 64 has that vertical integration component, and then finally, the last issue in this one is of the utmost importance to me personally and to the groups that we represent, is distribution, and so, we would like to see the distribution component that's brought up in Prop 64 versus the one that's in MERCA, which requires a third party independent distributor. As a manufacturer a large component of my business and really, of the way that the industry is operating right now, allows for both manufacturing and distribution. So we're definitely concerned that restricting the amount of distribution licenses just to those who are solely doing distribution could have serious implications on the industry and specifically around innovation and kind of the entrepreneurialistic spirit of California.  So, we would like to be able to bring products, see products brought to market, through manufacturers, cultivators, everybody having access points in terms of distribution. So, thank you.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 814, 'end': 825, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1569, 'end': 1580, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2324, 'end': 2335, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Keith Stephenson: chair and members, greetings. chair, members, salas, wood, caballero, i wish to speak about a few topics. one is multiple permits under one roof, also known as co-location. definition of premise, also suitability, also known by some cities as equity based permits. modify the closed distribution model under their merca and allow for both their party distributors and licensed in house distributors owned by licensed cultivators, manufacturers, and, or retailers. and eliminating cross licensure restrictions in the merca by allowing vertical integration as currently authorized by prop 64. my name is keith cara stephenson, i am the owner and operator of the purple heart patient center dispensary which has been serving patients since september the 18th, 2006 and is the longest running dispensary in oakland. as a former resident of los angeles, i went to aviation maintenance college and became a licensed technician for united airlines for 17 years before two hip replacement surgeries forcing early retirement which led to my involvement in the medical cannabis industry. i started purple heart from the ground up and currently have 26 employees. i am the textbook definition of a small business owner. i am fortunate that, unlike some of my colleagues, i have not been incarcerated nor do i have a criminal record. i have also been fortunate that the cannabis industry has given me and has open many other doors that would not have been open in other fields. before i give my input on a path forward into the new cannabis world, i would like to thank mrs. ajax and her staff, as i was the second dispensary they visited and i appreciate their efforts to make themselves accessible, and learn about my industry. while distinctions between the medical and although those cannabis frameworks are important, discrepancies between the two frameworks will complicate implementation for state and local agencies and make compliance more difficult for licensees. with that stated, key points include multiple permits under one roof also known as co-location. multiple permits under one roof is helpful to the geographic fabric and zoning of cities. this maintains the composition of businesses in certain hubs, helps create natural clusters, and is beneficial to public safety as the businesses are easier to monitor. whether it's a dense urban city or smaller rural city, consolidating various usage and permits into one location is a better use of space. as an example, in medical, excuse me, as an example, a medicinal cannabis campus, similar to what biotechnology companies, or public private research centers do, should be encouraged. excuse me, definition of premise, so previous topic, the final definitions of where premises as determined by the licensing entities will have a significant impact on local ordinances, as well as on a licensee's ability to legally operate law state license or issue. with so many cities and counties banning or severely restricting cannabis businesses in their communities it is critically important that multiple licenses, both medical and non-medical be permitted on one premise. this model will allow cannabis businesses to relocate to locally approved hubs encouraging excuse me, the creation of natural clusters, and minimizing potential impacts to public safety, as clustering multiple businesses in one location is easier to monitor and regulate. suitability also known by some cities as equity. the war on drugs has been a war on people of low income of color. as part of the remedy, arma must benefit low income people of color and low income communities of color. any efforts by proponents of mass incarceration to roll back the sinising reforms to limit community and reinvestment, or to create barriers to economic participation by persons with limited capital, or prior drug records would undermine, excuse me, basic fairness of the act, and reinforce the institution of racism of the war on drugs. considering that men and women of color have been disproportionately punished by the war on drugs and suffered  immense harm, many individuals with past drug offenses on their records have been excluded from participating in this new industry. thereby furthering historic inequities, modified the close distribution model under the mrsa, and allow for both their party distributors and license in-house distributors. thank you so much, cheers. owned by license cultivators, manufacturers and retailers. strict tack, excuse me, strict track and trace requirements in the mrsa language will already be tracking cannabis products from seed to sell. the state already has the authority to audit the operation of all licensees, mandating the excuse me, mandating that distribution only be performed by an independent distributor who will now reduce or prevent unlawful diversion, and could have the unintended effect of increasing diversion at earlier points in the supply chain, prior to the distribution choke point. my last topic, eliminating cross-licensure restrictions in mrsa by allowing vertical integration, as currently authorized under prop 24. the mrsa language places restrictions on the number and type of licenses cannabis business may acquire. prop 64 does not include prohibitions against cross-licensure, and permits, in existing vertically integrating small business in the industry to be licensed by the state, without forcing it to divest itself of any part of its enterprise. to facilitate enforcement and compliance, there should be parity between cross-licensure rules in the medical anecdotal use cannabis regulations. with that, i look forward to your questions.
[{'start': 59, 'end': 68, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 602, 'end': 623, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1563, 'end': 1567, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Hezekiah Allen: thank you very much. it's an honor and a pleasure, great responsibility to be here, today, discussing the path forward after prop 64. chair caballero, chair salas, chair wood and indeed, chair ridley-thomas, we think all four of your committees need to play a very important role in this going forward. my name is hezekiah keith allen, executive director of the california growers association, membership organization with more than 900 members, 40 board members representing communities in 17 counties, from la to humboldt. my comments, today, focus on closing the gap between mcrsa in prop 64. first and foremost, cannabis cultivation is agriculture, and should be regulated by the department of food and agriculture. chair caballero, your presence today, and your committee's attention here is a great breakthrough in this policy area, and i'm going to primarily direct my comments to you, and vice-chair mathis, though he stepped out of the room. first and foremost, one size that does not fit all for cultivation licensing, both prop 64 and mcrsa have tiered licenses. mcrsa contains cottage, specialty, small, and medium to ensure that regulatory requirements and fees are appropriately scaled to the size of the grow. prop 64 creates all of these licenses, with the exception of the cottage cultivation license. additionally, prop 64 creates the type 5 unlimited scale license in 2023. when it comes to cultivation licenses, we have two recommendations and a word of caution.
[{'start': 140, 'end': 149, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 157, 'end': 162, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 170, 'end': 174, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 193, 'end': 206, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 314, 'end': 334, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 726, 'end': 735, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 908, 'end': 914, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Glenn Backes: good morning, glenn hezekiah backes for drug policy alliance. our c4 partner, drug policy action, was part of the drafting committee for prop 64, part of the steering committee for 64, and the second largest donor to 64. i would like drug policy alliance to be a resource to the committee, to the members, to the staff. feel free to blow up my phone. thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Regina Wilson: Yes, my name is Regina Wilson, and I am the Chair and Executive Director of California Black Media. I would just like to echo Assemblymember Ridley-Thomas's comment. I do believe that there is a deep concern. I believe earlier, Mr. John Sawyer also pointed to the lack of outreach to the actual community. So I hear a lot of local governments talking, but the community is not. I represent over 22 African American-owned media outlets, zero conversations, zero invitations to any of the meetings to be able to talk about this. It's affected our community In a way that many of you know how the war on drugs has effected our community and I just believe that, I'm hoping that I can work with the committee in some kind of way to talk about how public notices can happen within these local communities, so that they're a part of the regulatory process, yeah.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 141, 'end': 154, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 232, 'end': 243, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Al Muratsuchi: Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman for giving me this opportunity to make a statement. My name is Al Muratsuchi and I have the privilege of representing the South Bay Area of Los Angeles, which includes the City of Torrance. On February 18th of 2015, just about two years ago, there was an explosion at the Torrance Refinery. My wife, my then six years old daughter and myself lived just a few miles from the explosion site. The explosion caused an 80,000 pound sanction of the refinery to fly almost 100 feet. And land near a tank filled with a highly toxic and deadly chemical called hydrochloric acid. According to the chair of the US Chemical Safety Board the Torrance Refinery explosion was a near catastrophe. Hydrochloric acid if released can form a ground hugging cloud and drift for miles depending on which way the wind is blowing. Threatening the lives not only of refinery workers, but of thousands of people living in the densely populated suburban neighborhoods surrounding the Torrence refinery. I share this to highlight the importance of refinery safety for our families, and for our communities. As we all know, refineries can be dangerous places. And that is why I supported SB 54 in my first term in 2013. We need the best trained, most skilled workforce. Workers who have graduated from approved apprenticeship programs to maintain and operate our states refineries. We do not want, Out of state contract workers with little training and experience working at these hazardous facilities. Now, let me be clear. I'm not anti-oil and I'm not anti-refinery. I just want to make our refineries safer for our workers and for our communities. The Torrance Refinery like refineries throughout the state, the Torrance Refinery's a big part of the local economy. And obviously, a major source of jobs. I would like to see the Torrance Refinery continue to operate, but in a safer manner and I support refinery jobs, especially good union jobs with project labor agreements and prevailing wages. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[{'start': 107, 'end': 120, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Galliam: Thank you chair, thank you Committee for a chance to come here and speak today on this serious subject, we take very serious in the city arrangement. Again, my name is Jason Galliam, I'm an Iron Worker business agent. Born and raised in the City of Richmond. I spend my whole time there in the west county. I'm currently raising two daughters that attain west county Unified School District. I also am very proud to say that they are A students and looking forward to going to college. These types of things that are offered in these communities, but one thing over the years that we didn't have a big opportunity of is having these works and these refineries done by local people that are members of this well-skilled apprenticeship training program that was just mentioned and the qualified journeyman. I can remember back 31 years when I first started. I was involved in the project that's Philip 66 which was the first that I noticed anything being cleaned up about the environment. A new equipment was going in, and it was used bay water to actually go through and cool, used as the cooling process, and when it was discharged in the bay, it was actually cleaner than when it was drawn out in the first place. Since then, done turn arounds, shut downs on many of the refineries where I live there's refineries all around me, Shell, Tosarro, Phillip 66. Chevron are just minutes from my house. My house, with all the other people in the community, all sending our kids to the schools. I do remember that 2012 fire. And what I remember most was the shelter in place, hazardous warning that went out of the radio and TV. That was kind of shocking. We didn't know if we were getting bombarded or if the refinery was going to blow up. I also remember this gentleman getting beat up and his hair cut while he was walking with his wife, which is despicable. That was caused by an out of state workers, maybe went out and doing things that they shouldn't be done. But that was a lack of respect for the community and the members of the community. Which I'm not so sure is still going on with these people coming from out of town and working but getting back to my days working in the refinery's, I can remember these jobs very well. People we're making a great living of it, they were friends, I knew older people that we're working in these places, retiring with benefits and a pension. But those jobs slowly, but surely started to trickle away. The reason being was these out of state contractors coming in for way less wages, less training, and who knows what kind of safety they brought with them at a lesser rate. As these jobs disappeared, you know, everybody had to go to work elsewhere, they spent two and a half three hours in traffic going to Cupertino San Francisco. I'm sure we all know what the traffic's like today. While these jobs were being performed by people working in the community and sending all their money back home to Louisiana, Texas, Arkansas, wherever the case may be. And when the job was done they were gone as well without any community benefit whatsoever. So you basically had people that were left out in the communities. Richmond being a very strong community. Since SB 54, we've seen a lot of changes start. We've seen the refinery, especially Chevron opened up a little bit. And actually, we've got more people working in Chevron than I can remember in the last 30 years. I hope the rest of the refineries do the same to follow I think the quality of our work, I think the quality of the apprenticeship training built in with all the safety that's required to keep the community safe is a big asset and it has value. Not to mention that the money that's spent in the communities by sending their kids to schools, buying the clothes at the local markets. And so on. And there's value to having these people work to where is the value is zero when you have other people work in this community. The community would grow closer, there's involvement at community meetings, it's a lot better place. Kids go to school a lot happier because they got a home they can go to. They're don't having to move every five or six months. And it's a lot better. The training coming up in 2018, it's going to even make the refineries even safer, and I think that's what we're talking about here, we're talking about making these refineries even safer than before. To implement more training, it's fine with the building trades, and I'm just speaking for the building trades on behalf of the people that are willing and looking forward to doing this training I think it's going to make the refineries a safer place. I think the relationship between the refineries and the local communities is even growing even better and I'm looking forward to it. Thank you.
[{'start': 168, 'end': 181, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Doug Zubers: Thank you. Thank you Mr. Chairman. Doug Zubers on behalf of the Western States Petroleum Association. Good to see you Mr. Zubers. Nice to see you. We welcome your presentation as well. Yeah, thank you very much. I just wanted to introduce Bruce here who will be providing our testimony and stay if there's any questions.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 122, 'end': 128, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 239, 'end': 244, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bruce McDiarmid: Thank you. My name is Bruce McDiarmid, I'm legal council for the Western State's Petroleum Association. At the outset, I'd just like to say that the hate crime that's been discussed here is operant and none of the WSPA members would ever condone or accept any activity of that kind. You turning to the boarder discussion here, WSPA members absolutely share the commitment to safety that's been discussed I think by all the witnesses here. There extensive safety measures that are implemented, constantly improved and followed with regard to refineries. It's simply the highest priority of refinery operation is the safety of our employees, the community, and the environment. No one has a stronger interest in safety than the refiners themselves. Strong safety practices maintain continuous safe operations are imperative. Incidents, small and large, impact reliability, production, and economics. Minimizing unplanned stoppages is a fundamental goal of well run refinery. As far as reporting of information goes, the companies are expected to report shut downs or turnarounds to the Air Quality Management District in the event pollutants being released due to operations being shut down. Also, it was discussed SB 1300 by Senator Hancock requires refiners to provide by September 15 of each year, a schedule of all their plan turn arounds for the following year. Then in advance to the actual turn arounds, SB 1300 identifies certain safety processed information that can be reviewed by inspectors with the Department of Industrial Relations. As noted by the first witness, the Governor has established a task force on refinery safety that continues work on process safety management of California accidental release prevention and area planned regulatory updates. Industries collaborated with DAR on the Safety Training Program. Further WSPA continues to work collaboratively with all agencies implementing elements of the governor's task force report, including the Department of Industrial Relations, California Environmental Protection, and local governments to ensure. Safety works forward to working with the Committee and Chairman Thurmond on issues relating to enforcement, and transparency with regard to SB 54 moving forward. Thank you for the invitation. We'd be happy to answer any questions you might have.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1232, 'end': 1239, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2140, 'end': 2148, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mike Herald: Madam Chair, Mike Herald with the Western Center on Law and Poverty again. And again, we agree with everything the County Welfare Directors Association said on the bill. We do think the policy needs a revision after some 20-plus years. This was a policy that actually rose out of a lawsuit that the Western Center did back in the 1990s. But, one of the most illogical outcomes of the settlement in that case was this way that we consider 5 days 16 days somehow, and we strongly think this policy is long overdue and has led to harm for many families in our state. And we strongly support that provision of the bill and all the other pieces that are included, and we support the bill, thank you.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Aslanian: Kevin Aslanian, Coalition California Worker Rights Organizations, I will concur with the previous testimony, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Louise Sanchez: Louise Sanchez on behalf of labor's local 777 and 792 in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Diana Campos: diana jonah campos on behalf of the california catholic conference in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicole Wordelman: wordelman on behalf of the ventura county board of supervisors in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Monica Zemi: Monica Zemi with the California Alternative Payment Program Association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Aslanian: good afternoon, kevin diana aslanian, coalition of california welfare rights organizations. dr, arthur said, this bill basically would extend the 48 months to 60 months about 35 states and more than 35 states out of the 50 states, already have a 60 month and many of them are red states, so i'm not sure why california is behind that. and this change was made in 2008 during the recession, and it's about time to go back. and the other point i want to make is that, we looked at the numbers and the average stay on welfare's about 25 months for every person, on average. so only about 760 families hit the wall of the 40th month, so this would cost about $1.5 million a year. and finally, about the work incentives, what happens if you have earned income? they reduce your benefits, and then your food stamps go down. and i've talked to families where their net gain is about $2 an hour and this would basically make it worthwhile to work with pay, actually. thank you. i urge an aye vote.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 96, 'end': 102, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mike Carroll: mike kevin carroll with the western center on law and poverty. if i may briefly associate myself with the comments of the welfare directors, but additionally i would just note that the families in this program almost many of them are living in deep poverty which means their living on less than 50% of the federal poverty level. things like the minimum wage and the earned income disregard, are proven methods for lifting people above deep poverty and getting them out of that level and higher, and encouraging them to go even further. so, this measure is important, not only for all the reasons that you've heard from the other witnesses, but, also we must do more to not allow children in california to live in deep poverty. thank you very much.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Monica Zemi: Monica Zemi the California Alternative Payment Program Association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laurie Firstenfeld: good afternoon. my name is laurie mike firstenfeld, and i'm a staff attorney at the child care law center. we are also co-sponsors with parent voices, and first five california, and ab 60. thank you, assembly members gonzales and santiago for authoring such an important piece of legislation. we also frequently hear from parents who have to choose between working or keeping their affordable child care, turning down promotions like alicia, and raising the state minimum wage california invested in a prosperous future for every one, but we feel that that investment will be squandered if parents have to lose their childcare or lose their jobs. for these reasons, we ask for your aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 217, 'end': 225, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 230, 'end': 238, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 434, 'end': 440, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Theresa Cook: Good afternoon chair members, Theresa Cook on behalf of the County of Alameda, let me extend my apologies that we didn't get our support letter in in time, but happy to testify in support today.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Martha Guerrero: guerrero, representing the los angeles county board of supervisors, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Cero: David Cero with Los Angeles Universal Preschools, strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Donna Sneeringer: donna laurie sneeringer, childcare alliance of los angeles and childcare resource center in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Adam North: Adam North of the California Child Development Administrative Association in strong support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Herrill: mike with the western center alarm poverty in support for this long measure.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Beverly Yu: Beverly Yu with the UDW CCPU, I'd like to echo the comments made before me. Stability for family child care providers is so important, and for the families they serve as well, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Monica Zemy: monica donna zemy with the california alternative payment program association, and we are in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Jones: John Jones with the Contra Health Care Council. We're in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eric Peterson: good afternoon, eric monica peterson from northern director's group representing rural and urban counties in northern california in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Judy Creedy: Judy Creedy with Banana Resources from Alameda County. We also hold contracts, I just asked my staff about the number of children who lost their care last quarter, due to the fact that this particular law was not in place, and that was 32 within this last quarter.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Keisha Enzui: hi, keisha with the california child care resource and referral network, in very strong support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Begonia Grega: begonia, in strong support.
[]
Suzy Costa: Suzy Costa with the Santa Clara County Office of Education, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gladys Soto: Gladys Soto, San Francisco Parent Voices, strong support of AB60. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christopher Maricle: Christopher Maricle for the California Head Start Association, for strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Butte County: county, parent voices, in strong support.
[]
Jennifer Astrowsky: jennifer eric astrowsky, parent voices, solano, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erica Erics: Erica Erics on behalf of Community Action Marine, the largest provider of child care in the North Bay, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lexi Haylock: Lexi Haylock with the National Association of Social Workers, California Chapter, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
George Stevens: Thank you. Thank you Assemblymember Holden for introducing AB 279, and the opportunity to provide testimony in support of this bill. This bill has bipartisan support and broad community support. My name is George Stevens, I'm the Executive Director for the North Los Angeles County Regional Center. We serve over 24,000 consumers and their families in the San Fernando, Santa Clarita and Antelope Valleys. We the third largest Regional Center in the State of California, and one of the fastest growing. AB 279 is extremely important to the work that we do, to our families, and to our consumers. The bill is a first step towards stabilizing our service system and its work force, which are key elements in the provision of services. Without AB 279, our community service system will fail, or fall into a deeper crisis. A crisis that, in part, can be attributed to medium rates, over a decade of rate freezes, and no viable path for providers in our community to meet realistic challenges to increase costs that come their way. Labor is their biggest cost. AB 276 provides a mechanism for us to address these costs as they occur. We've heard discussions about unanticipated rate increases, adjustments, and we've heard about health and safety requests in order to address costs that occur by our providers. These are closed options, and are not viable solutions to addressing the local minimum wage. Many providers have had their requests for an unanticipated rate adjustment turned down, and have been told their program just doesn't qualify because their rate is not a permanent rate. A rate that has been offered in our system for a number of years. Health and safety requests are not viable. This too is a request that's done by a consumer. Imagine us having to put in 24,000 Health and safety requests each time a consumer changes the program. That is just not a viable path. The circumstances surrounding each consumer must be documented. And it's just a exercise that is not aimed at addressing minimum wage. AB 279 is intended to accomplish. The service system is in crisis. As an example, North LA has lost 24 residential providers in the last three years, impacting 153 consumers. Most of these providers closed for financial reasons. This is disruptive to the continuity of care for consumers. It's disruptive to our workforce because basically my staff is left with the job of finding new places for people to reside, and they just don't exist. Cost is a barrier. AB 279 is an affirmative step towards averting deeper crises. Just for an example, in the next two years the difference between the state minimum wage and the local minimum wage will be $2 an hour, $16 a day, $80 a week, or $4,160 a year. If you multiply that out by the number of workers that are at minimum wage, the figure is staggering, and cannot be absorbed by our community providers. So, again, I urge your support for AB 279, it's the right thing to do, and it will provide a safety net in our community.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 42, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 206, 'end': 220, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roxanne Gould: very briefly, madame chair and members. roxanne representing sixbeds.inc. it's an association of small homelike settings serving our most needy citizens, elderly, developmentally disabled. i have with me today our president and founder, gina wasdyke, who'd like to provide some remarks.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 237, 'end': 249, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Gina Wasdyke: good afternoon. i'm wasdyke, 6 beds founder and director. i'm also a care provider for adults with developmental disabilities in sacramento. 6 beds in a nonprofit organization providing safe and affordable housing and care to californians with developmental disabilities in a homelike setting. we operate in residential communities across california. we currently have over 2,000 member facilities throughout california, and many are operating in san francisco, santa clara, and los angeles. all which have higher minimum wage and higher cost of living. thus it is harder for those homes to remain open with local minimum wage exceeding california minimum wage, as labor is our biggest cost. this rate adjustment is critical to the survival of these homes. please vote aye to ab 279, thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kelly White: hi, i'm white with villa esperanza services, and please, i extremely encourage you to support ab 279. thank you, assemblyman holden.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 125, 'end': 131, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kevin Rath: kevin jennifer rath on behalf of california supported living network and the california respite association serving over 50,000 consumers throughout the state. we support this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barry Gherardini: Barry Gherardini from the California Disabilities Services Association asking for your support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jenny Huff: Jenny Huff, United Cerebral Palsy of the North Bay, please support this bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Steve Miller: steve kevin miller, disability planing and consultation, in strong support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Bernstein: David Bernstein, Hope House, strong support. This is a huge issue, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Doug Bergman: Doug Bergman, CEO of UCP of Sacramento, Northern California, support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Aslanian: Good afternoon, my name is Kevin Aslanian. I'm with the Coalition of California Welfare Rights Organizations and we work with the offices throughout the state and we've been hearing another complaints from offices, that veterans come in today their offices homeless and we found out that part of the reason that they're homeless is because the general assistance of many counties are limited to three months. Even though its three months, in LA County it's 12 months, but they still have a work requirement during those 12 months. And if they don't meet the work requirements, they will be sanctioned. So the work requirement is still applicable. The counties also under this bill have six months, if the decide that they don't want to extend veteran's benefits and thank them for their service, because they served our country for 12 months, they could back out of it within six months. We urge you to vote aye for the veterans of our country, thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tracy Ryan: hi, tracy with the rural country representatives of california and also for ucc, we are also in a position of concern for the previous stated reasons. the current program, requires that unemployable people get aid for 12 months. so we've already made exceptions at all. we're just adding another category of people to the same exception, which are the veterans who serve our country, and the bill also gives the counties six months to back out of this option, if they wish to do so.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : Okay, we have Ms. Aguiar Curry up.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 30, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kevin Aslanian: Kevin Aslanian, California Welfare Rights Organization in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Herald: Mike Herald with the Western Center on Law and Poverty, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Monica Zemi: Monica Zemi with the California Alternative Payment Program Association, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lola Cornish: lola steve cornish, california child care resource and referral network, support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Faith Word: faith parent voices oakland in support.
[]
Gladys Soto: Gladys Soto, San Francisco Parent Voices, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lordes Manuel: lordes lola manuel, oakland parent voices, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bruce Whitcher: Thank you, Senator Hill, distinguished Committee Members, and members of the public. I'm Doctor Bruce Whitcher, President of the Dental Board of California. I'm currently serving in my eighth year as a member of the board. And I practice oral surgery in Paso Robles, California. And with me, you've already introduced, Karen Fischer, our Executive Officer. And we're here today to present the board's report on pediatric sedation and anesthesia, as well as the recommendations that came out of that study. I provided you with a handout. This is information that we've shared at prior meetings and I'll go into the relevant material there as we go through today's presentation. Most of you will probably have had little experience with sedation or general anesthesia given by dentists. Perhaps you or a family member had their wisdom teeth removed under anesthesia provided by an oral surgeon. But most of you, when you go to the dentist, you might have some local anesthesia to numb a tooth for a filling or a crown or perhaps to have your teeth cleaned. But it's important to understand that many patients are unable to receive dental treatment without sedation or even general anesthesia. Whether this is due to fear, the extensive nature of the treatment, the ineffectiveness of local anesthesia for their condition. Very young and developmentally disabled patients may require general anesthesia because they are unable to cooperate with treatment. As a point of reference, dentists are among the pioneers who developed anesthesia in the early 19th century to make it possible to provide dental care to these patients. Dentists have utilized various forms of anesthesia ever since. And a group of dentists have even limited their practice to anesthesia after becoming trained as anesthesiologists themselves. Now, Senator Hill has indicated in his opening remarks why we are here today. And this is in follow up to tragic events that recently occurred. And we are here to make certain that we do what we can to assure that the treatment, whether it's sedation, anesthesia, or all dental treatment, is safe for our young patients. For the purposes of our discussion, sedation and anesthesia are generally thought to represent a continuum, ranging from minimal sedation, through moderate sedation, to deep sedation, general anesthesia. And I provided you with these definitions on the first page of that handout. And it's important to know that although there are separate definitions for deep sedation and general anesthesia, according to California law those states are considered one in the same and they're regulated as general anesthesia. A report on dental anesthesia and sedation is divided into three parts. The first part compares California laws, regulations, and policies to those of other states and dental associations. The second part provides a review of relevant medical and dental literature. And the third part provides a summary of all incident reports related to dental sedation received by the board for patients under age 21 for the six years from 2010 through 2015. Over the course of four public meetings held during 2016, the board received substantial public input On this issue and I believe you have as well. From stakeholders, professional organizations on this subject. Based on the findings of our study, which you've been provided a copy, the board has concluded that California's present laws, regulations and policies are sufficient to provide protection of pediatric patients during sedation and anesthesia for dental treatment. However, because the board's mission is protection of the public above all other considerations, we have recommended enhancements to the current statute and regulations to provide a greater level of public protection. With less than a year to complete the study, the board's Subcommittee determined that it was not possible to develop detailed recommendations to address all aspects of California sedation laws. The Subcommittee therefore chose to concentrate on what it determined to be the major issues. And most of these were identified with the help of our stakeholders. And basically, the work product here was to make five recommendations. And I will summarize them for you here. First, the board should continue to research the collection of high quality pediatric dental sedation and anesthesia related data to inform our decision making. Second, the definitions of sedation now in our laws should be updated for consistency with current terminology. Third, the board recommends adding pediatric permits for minimal sedation, moderate sedation and deep sedation anesthesia to the current permit system. At present, we have a pediatric sedation permit for oral moderate sedation. The requirements for record electronic monitoring and ancillary equipment should be updated. And finally, the board should be provided with additional authority to strengthen our on-site inspection and evaluation program that we use in conjunction with our permit system for sedation and anesthesia. Now with respect to patient monitors, I referred to them earlier in my description of the recommendations. There's a handout for you that'll be a visual aid that might be helpful. California law has required the use of electronic patient monitors that measure and display the patient's vital signs, for patients who receive sedation since the early 1990s. The use of capnography, a monitoring method that measures exhaled carbon dioxide, has long been used for general anesthesia. The use of capnography is now also being recommended for moderate sedation by a number of professional associations. And I've provided you with a summary of our recommendations. And although we received comment on all of them, recommendation number three, the proposed addition of pediatric sedation permits, received by far the most comment. I will therefore describe those recommendations in greater detail. The board recommends that these permits be issued to dentists who administer sedation or anesthesia to any patient under the age of 13. Why the age of 13? Well, this corresponds to the physiologic changes that occur around the time of puberty. And this has historically been recognized as defining the pediatric age group for dental sedation in California law, by the American Dental Association. And most other dental specialty organizations. As I mentioned, the board recommends pediatric sedation permits for each of the three levels of sedation. Minimal sedation, moderate sedation, and deep sedation general anesthesia. And I'll go through these in sequence here. First, we recommend replacing the current oral moderate conscious sedation for minors permit with a pediatric minimal sedation permit. This would permit dentists to provide oral sedation with the same amount of training as they now undergo for the Oral Conscious Sedation for Minors permit, which is 24 hours in a supervised case. It would be limited to a single dose of a single sedative medication per appointment. The dose of medication given, plus nitrous oxide and oxygen should be unlikely to produce a State of moderate sedation. The medical and dental literature recognizes that this approach provides a greater margin of safety, compared to multiple doses of a single drug, or the use of multiple drugs. Approximately 19 states have established a minimal sedation permit to provide this option. Next, the board recommends adding a pediatric moderate sedation permit, again for patients under 13, to obtain this permit. And this would need to complete pediatric sedation training to a level comparable to that provided in a pediatric dental residency. By purpose of comparison, the Ada guidelines for moderate sedation now recommends 60 hours and completion of 20 supervised cases. Sedation could be administered via any route, but the dosages and drugs given should be unlikely to produce a State of deep sedation. In addition, both dentists and their staff are required to complete training in pediatric advanced life support and airway management. And that brings me to a discussion of the pediatric advanced life support, currently known as PALS, offered by the Heart Association, that does offer this type of training. And has the advantage of being widely available. 17 states currently require dentists who sedate children to complete PALS. But the courts may not include sufficient emphasis on airway management and other aspects of sedation related emergencies. Therefore, a board approved course for sedation permits may require some additional development. That one is currently available. The board recommends that dentists be required to complete a specified number of cases each year, to maintain their moderate pediatric sedation permit. This competency requirement would ensure that dentists treat a sufficient number of patients to maintain their skills. This recommendation is based on principles described in the medical and dental literature, as well as stakeholder input. The specific number of cases necessary to establish competency requires further discussion. In addition, the board recommends that there be a staff member dedicated to monitoring for patients under seven who receive moderate sedation. Some stakeholders have stated that pediatric moderate sedation should only be given by a provider qualified to administer deep sedation or general anesthesia. who can manage patients who enter an unintended State of deep sedation. The board's Subcommittee was unable to identify evidence based guidelines that would support such a recommendation. According to the American Dental Association educational guidelines, a dentist trained in moderate sedation must be able to rescue a patient from an unintended State of deep sedation. And the board is recommending additional training to help ensure that dentists who administer moderate sedation are competent to manage the situation. Other stakeholders comment that additional training is unnecessary and would limit the availability of dental care. The board agrees that the effects of our recommendations on access to care are an important consideration and should be analyzed. Finally, the board recommends that adding a pediatric general anesthesia permit for patients under the age of 13. This permit would require completion of an approved residency training program, as does our current permit. This provides training in general anesthesia. In addition, the dentists and their staff would be required to have training in pediatric advanced life support, as with the moderate permit. The permit would have a competency requirement similar to the moderate sedation permit. And a staff member dedicated to monitoring the patient would be required. For children under age seven, the board recommends the use of a dedicated anesthesia provider in addition to the dentist. Based on the review of the literature, children under seven might be at a higher risk of sedation related complications than older children. And the board felt that addition of the separate provider, in that circumstance, was warranted. At our December 2016 meeting, the board discussed whether or not a dedicated anesthesia provider should be required for children of all ages. Who undergo deep sedation or general anesthesia. But our discussion indicated that this requirement should be reserved for patients under seven. Who may be at greater risk of complications than older patients. This recommendation is supported by literature reviewed as well as board data from our incident reports received by the board for the last six years. And the board received no reports of an office or anesthesia sedation or anesthesia related death, or serious injury if a patient age seven through 21 during the six year study period. And I mentioned capnography earlier, and the board does recommend capnography for pediatric patients who receive moderate sedation, deep sedation, or general anesthesia. This is recommended by the current Ada sedation guidelines, stakeholder input, and we feel that capnography has the potential to provide early warning and airway problems that may be difficult to detect by other means. In conclusion, board members express deep concern about the availability of sedation and anesthesia services for young patients, and heard much testimony about the effects that new regulations might have on access to care. The board recognizes that few topics generate more controversy than the use of anesthesia, especially for children. The challenge of reaching a consensus among interested parties is quite difficult. Although patient safety is always the foremost concern, the effects of regulatory change on healthcare can be fraught with unintended consequences. Any healthcare proposal should therefore strike a balance between established practice and evidence based changes that we can be sure provide greater patient safety. To achieve this balance, the board recommends that there be an analysis of the effect of any proposed new regulation on access to care for pediatric patients. That concludes my presentation. Thank you.>>Thank you Doctor.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 23, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 96, 'end': 110, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 319, 'end': 332, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1826, 'end': 1830, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brianna Pittman: thank you. good afternoon, i'm brianna jonah pittman, here with the california dental association. i want to thank you, senator hill, assembly member furman, this committee for your attention to this important issue. we would like to commend the dental board for the thoughtful and comprehensive report and recommendations that they put together. and to all the stakeholders who have come to the table over many months, on this important and sensitive issue. cities leadership is committed to ensuring that pediatric dentistry continues to be provided, and safe, regulated systems of care, and proving that system, where the evidence indicates a need to do so. increasing and improving the board's data collection, defining anesthesia by level of sedation, and restructuring the permit system to ensure the appropriate level of expertise is always available in the room with the patient, and expanding the board's enforcement authority. these are all important steps that the state should take. we also agree with the board's recommendation that as the legislature considers further laws and regulations in this area, that it must ensure that the systems of care that are available to all families who need care, provide those choices for safe, for safety and are accessible. so you're going to hear many strong perspectives on the different regulated dental models of care today. and we respectfully urge you to consider what you will hear from those who provide families and their children dental care day in and day out. what happened with caleb is heartbreaking. i mean no parent can understand the pain there. and what we know that death from pediatric dental care that are provided in her anesthesia are very rare. caleb's case was unique. well, there are few deaths that are reported in the dental board's report and most of them did occur was a separate anesthesia provider there, and we know that in the report that there were no other similar cases as caleb's. but yet we have to keep looking at this, and we need to keep learning and investigating and figuring out what we can do. and caleb was really the reason that we have to keep trying to do the best that we can to improve safety. we've been participating in many discussions with the board, with stakeholders, with assembly member thurmond. and we look forward to continuing those discussions today, as we go forward with legislation to figure out what we can do. so we're committed to exploring what improvements can be made to ensure that dental care in california is safe and accessible to all who need it. and with me here is dr. ariane truley.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 128, 'end': 132, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 150, 'end': 156, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1543, 'end': 1548, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1721, 'end': 1726, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2096, 'end': 2101, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2299, 'end': 2307, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2602, 'end': 2615, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Paul Reggiardo: Senator Hill, Members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity this afternoon to provide comment on the 2016 report of the Dental Board of California and the recommendations to the Legislature coming from that report. I'm Paul Reggiardo, a pediatric dentist, and I speak on behalf of the California Society of Pediatric Dentistry, the professional membership organization of California's nearly 900 pediatric dental providers, educators, and researchers. Our patients will be directly affected by any changes in law and regulation governing the administration of sedation general anesthesia. And we want to be certain that these changes improve safety, ensure access, are supported by evidence, and are commensurate with recognized national standards and best practices. Specifically, CSPD supports the recommendation to improve and build upon the board's data collection proficiencies to guide future decision making. And agrees with the need to improve the board's on-site inspection and permit holder evaluation program. In fact, we suggest that recertification for all anesthesia permits require not only specified continuing education, but sufficient case experience in the prior licensing cycle to validate continued competency. We agree with the board that updating the statutory and regulatory definitions of sedation levels to conform with recognized clinical guidelines is long overdue. And that permitting should be based on sedation levels, and not on the route of administration. We also agree that permitting based on the age of the patient and the training and the experience of the anesthesia provider with that age group as a condition of the permit is appropriate. Perhaps the most important is placing in California regulation that the least personnel that must be present for the administration of each level of sedation of the pediatric patient in the dental setting. And the education, training, licensing, specific duties and scope of responsibilities of that individual. In this regard, regulation should be consistent with the joint American Academy of Pediatrics, American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry guidelines for the monitoring and management of pediatric patients before, during and after sedation. Which is recognized as the gold standard for systematic safe sedation of children and to which the Ada guidelines defer for the sedation of infants, children and adolescents. And lastly we want to highlight the board's comment that workforce and economic considerations will be critical to the successful implementation of any changes to the dental sedation laws. There's little doubt that necessary change to improve pediatric patient safety and clinical outcomes will be disruptive. But that disruption should come to the provider and not to the patient. A system of care must be maintained during the transition of practice models and delivery systems and that will not occur overnight. Consideration of legislation to require health plans to cover all medically necessary adjunctive services associated with dental care for children, regardless of the setting, should be on the table. As should requirements that health and dental plans maintain adequate networks of anesthesia providers to assure access to dental services. Pediatric anesthesia in the dental setting is safe and the record on that is clear. This conversation is about finding out what we can do to make it even safer. The members of the California society of pediatric dentistry stand ready to implement those changes to existing law and regulation that support this end.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 12, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 229, 'end': 243, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gary Cooper: Thank you, Mr Chairman and members. And thank you, Mr Thurmond, for your activity and your extreme interest in this bill. It's been an honor, actually, working with both of you. I'm Gary Cooper, I represent the California Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons. And basically that is the group of professionals that you're really discussing today because that was specifically the provider that was involved in Caleb's Law. So today you're obviously going to be hearing about whether the questions about the safety of whether or not the provider should be doing the anesthesia at the same time as doing the procedure. So I'm not going to take a lot of time, because I have a lot of professionals here with me. But the one question that's going to be answered is, the reason why we are absolutely convinced, not because we have good intentions, not because we are considering ourselves just so professional that we don't make mistakes. But the folks that I deal with every day on this specific issue have been so well trained over the years, their training is so extreme and their results have been so professional. And there have been so many cases where nothing, absolutely nothing, adverse has happened during the course of the procedures and this has gone on for 50, 60, 70 years. It's very unfortunate that every now and then there is an adverse reaction and an adverse action and unfortunately this happened to Caleb. And again, we have no idea what the parents are going through because we can only imagine. But what our concern is today is that as we've heard previously, the access to care issue by having another provider in the room. If we truly thought, and the folks sitting to my right and to my left truly thought, that that was the best way to save another patient, we would certainly support it. But our concern is, as Dr Tulay mentioned, to have a four year old patient that she described, not be able to get dental care for five, six, seven, eight months and then had an adverse reaction because they couldn't get care. To us, that would be tragic. So I will let my professional colleagues here speak. But I just want to let you know that we are absolutely concerned about the safety of children and the safety of the public that the oral surgeons treat. But we'd like this particular recommendation to be studied a little bit further. As a recommendation was made in the board report that they should take a look at how it affects access to care, how it affects personnel, and how it affects economics. And with that I'll defer to my speakers.
[{'start': 54, 'end': 62, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 182, 'end': 193, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1424, 'end': 1429, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1846, 'end': 1851, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alan Kaye: okay, all right. first of all, thank you very much for this opportunity. my name is alan, and i'm here today wearing a couple of hats. i'm the current president of the california association of oral and maxillofacial surgeons. i'm also the past president of the california dental society of anesthesiology. and a former member of the california state dental board, serving as the president in 2013 for a year and a half. and i'm proud to say that [unknown] dr. tulay was on our board. i'm also an oral surgeon and i've been practicing for well over 40 years. speaking as an oral surgeon i share the strong concern my colleague has raised about how these changes are not only unnecessary but will limit our ability to help many patients. any requirement for an additional anaesthesia permit holder to be present is a feel good step that would make it more difficult for many patients to seek the treatment they actually need. the last thing we would want is the patients to avoid a put off having procedure because it was financially out of reach, and by no means are we ignoring the safety of the procedures. patient safety will always be our number one priority, and that commitment along with the system of training and accountability we now have adds up to reassurance of safe care. 10 years ago an entire community was devastated in prince georgia county, maryland, when a 12 year old, demonte driver died of complications from a tooth abscess. his mother alice who worked at low paying jobs had searched for a dentist who accepted medicaid to treat demonte's tooth ache. ultimately, alice took demonte to a hospital emergency room and he was given medication for a headache, sinusitis, dental abscess, sent home. his condition worsened, he was back to the hospital, rushed into .surgery, discovered the bacteria had abscessed and entered his brain. heroic efforts are made to save him, including two operations, eight weeks of additional hospitalization, totally over $250,000, but it was too late. demonte died. his life could have been saved by an otherwise routine dental visit of a $80 tooth extraction. a similar event was just made public just here. and the sacramento bee spoke about it where a 26 year old truck driver, father or two, young man, complications of untreated dental infection that spread to his heart. patient safety will always be our number one priority and that commitment, along with a system of training, accountability we now have adds up to a reassurance of safe care. if there is a way to enhance the safety record, we welcome that.
[{'start': 84, 'end': 88, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 461, 'end': 466, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1460, 'end': 1465, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1588, 'end': 1593, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mary Delsol: Thank you. I'm Mary Delsol. I've practiced oral surgery for 30 years. And I'm past President of the American Board of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery. I think it's important for the community to realize that we practice a team approach to anesthesia. In addition to the surgeon, there are highly trained assistants in the room and unlike a procedure that is happening in the operating when we will have a surgeon that is working on the knee and an anesthesiologist. We are up in the air way where we are trained. And we can, we have monitors for breathing, for oxygen in the blood, for end tidal CO2, for heart rhythm, for heart rate. We have all the monitors available to us to monitor that patient. We are right at the head, we are right at the airway. We have extensive years of training to able to address and recognize problems with the airway which is where most of the problems with anesthesia happen, and that is the difference. We also use a lighter local load of anesthesia because we also use local anesthesia when you have your appendix out. You can't have local anesthetics so they have to put you deeply asleep. Even intubate you. We don't have to do that, because of our local anesthesia. We're using less complex procedures than in the operating room, which is why our office based anesthesia has a record that is comparable to none in medicine.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Sibert: committee members, my name is dr. karen and i'm the president elect of the california society of anesthesiologists. i'm a physician and a full-time hands-on practice of anesthesiology at ucla medical center. we highly commend the dental board for their new recommendations. they're good common sense, but unfortunately they don't go far enough. anesthesia can be a risky business, and children are at higher risk than teenagers or adults. their airways are smaller, and they can easily get obstructed. every parent knows not to give small children big chunks of food because they can choke to death. if you're a parent, and i'm a parent, a mother and grandmother myself, you know what it's like taking a two year old for a haircut as opposed to a 12 year old. the 12 year old will hold still, the two year old won't. and the more scared children get, the harder they are to manage. young children and children who can't cooperate need more sedation, deeper sedation, just to keep them still for any painful procedure. when a healthy child enters a dental office, and dies or suffers devastating brain damage, it safe to assume that child was deprived of oxygen. not enough oxygen was getting into that child's bloodstream for too long a time. this can happen even under what was supposed to be moderate sedation. let me explain how. a child needs extensive dental work for whatever reason, not just a cavity but full mouth restoration or something extensive. the child gets a little sedation but it doesn't work and now the child isn't cooperating. maybe he's too young, maybe too scared or has a developmental delay. now, another medication is given and then another one on top of that to get the child to keep still, but there's no anesthesiologist in the room. there's no breathing tube keeping the airway open because this was just supposed to be moderate sedation. no one notices right away that the child has stopped breathing. no one in the office routinely deals with real life pediatric emergencies and by the time someone calls 911, and the ambulance arrives, it's too late. a surgeon would never dream of taking out your child's tonsils without a fully qualified anesthesia professional right there. it wouldn't be safe, and it's against california law. why would we not require the same precautions for children who need extensive dental work? every time a child needs more than a minor procedure under minimal sedation, that child deserves to have a licensed anesthesia professional, choosing the right medications, giving the right doses, and monitoring the child's every breath. that way, the dentist or the oral surgeon can pay full attention to the procedure. how can we support multitasking for tasks that are this important? the solution to access to care is not unsafe anesthesia. we need preventive care so that fewer children ever need anesthesia. we need to raise denti-cal payments so that more dentists will take these children and give them the care they need before dental caries turn into life threatening problems. today you've heard the argument that office staff can provide all the help that a dentist or an oral surgeon could need. the dental board even recommends that dental assistants get trained in pediatric life support pals or pals, but here's the thing, anybody in this room can go online and read the manual and take the pals test and get the wallet card. that doesn't mean you're ready to provide life saving medical care to children. to become a dental assistant requires only a high school diploma. they're being put in an impossible situation if an emergency happens. by law they are not licensed healthcare providers and they can not perform basic anesthesia tasks, insert breathing tubes, or start ivs. passing the pals test without having the medical skills is like passing the written test at the dmv, only you can't take the road test because you've never driven a car. senators, none of us ever wants to go to our own child's funeral. the only way that could be worse would to know that your child's death was preventable. every death of a child in a dental office is preventable, but it will take our collective will to redo the current laws and keep our children safe. thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Mashni: I will work as fast as I can and talk as slow as I can so you can understand me this time. Hello and thank you. My name is Dr. Michael Mashni. I'm a dentist anesthesiologist in private practice. I currently hold a faculty appointment at the Herman Ostrow School of Dentistry at the University of Southern California, and I'm past President of the American Society of Dentist Anesthesiologists, I appreciate the time here to discuss this topic in dentistry. The first point I'd like to make is in regards to overall safety in oral surgery offices. A recent study published in the journal of the American Dental Association shows that oral surgeons have a death or a brain damage event approximately once ever 5.4 weeks. It was also determined that 80% of these were attributed to human error. This reinforces the need for a separate qualified anesthesia provider dedicated to monitoring and managing the patient, something not left to a dental assistant. An important point of the data was this was from Omsnick, which is the oral surgery's own insurance company. We keep referring to the data in the pediatric report. It's important to know that in the report they only listed 45 or so cases. But they had reports of over 320 reports of hospitalizations and deaths to the hospital. But most of the records had been purged. So the data that's coming from the dental board is incomplete and they state that in the report. So if you look just before the part where it lists all the deaths. So they keep saying how low it is, but it's much less than that, it's much more than that. A competent and reliable pediatric advanced life support trained provider may help you get out of an accident, but it's much more important to avoid the incident in the first place. Constant vigilance in monitoring the patient is the keystone to safe practice. No place is this more important than in our pediatric population. Dr. Witcher, in his report to the Dental Board, from the Committee stated that children under 13 were at increased risk, but children under 7 were at high risk. Children are not small adults and cannot be treated that way. Simply put, an adult can hold his breath under water longer than a small child because of the Reserve he has. Adverse events happen much faster in children. Another earlier study from 2003 published in the Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery shows that the median age of an oral surgery patient for deep sedation general anesthesia was 28 years old. Plus or minus 16 years, which most of the patients are adults. They're not pediatrics. 65% of these patients were less than 10 minutes and 95.7% of those patients were an hour or less. Simply put the average oral surgeon does not treat these small patients with any regularity. My last points are concerning the PALS certification for dental assistants. PALS is a certification it does not equate to competency or proficiency. It simply states that you'd passed a course and it was given in earnest. Dental assistants do not have the knowledge base for this type of medical training and it's outside the scope of their licensed duties. They can't possibly administer rescue drugs as it goes against the Dental Practice Act. It is unfair to ask a dental assistant to take the responsibility of the life of a child when they don't have the medical basis or legal practice authority to do it. The one thing everyone in this room that we can agree on is that there should be an additional qualified person in the room. Those who advocate for the questionable operator anesthesia model feel a dental assistant with a two-day class in PALS will suffice. I strongly feel, it should be an independent qualified anesthesia provider such as doctors cyberg, Trapp or Stafford. Let me explain it this way. Does anyone here without a medical background believe that a two-day class in pediatric advanced life support would make you competent in knowing that you can monitor the safe delivery of a general anesthetic to a child? Who would you want for your child? It really is that simple.
[{'start': 127, 'end': 141, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1909, 'end': 1916, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3723, 'end': 3729, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3731, 'end': 3736, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3740, 'end': 3748, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Richard Stafford: i'm richard brianna stafford, i'm president of the california society of dentists and anesthesiologists. my comments today concern general anesthesia only. i'd like to thank the legislatures and their staff for hearing differing, and at times conflicting views. all parties are here today interested in doing what is safest for the pediatric patient without adversely affecting access to care. our societies recommendations are based on those two concepts. improve safety for children under seven receiving deep sedation and general anesthesia in the dental office, and access to care. we have two recommendations. first, there should be two doctors in the room. one providing the procedure and one providing the anesthesia. second, both doctors should be pal certified. the one providing the procedures and the one providing the anesthesia. this is slightly different than the dental board's recommendations, but it's critically different in that the dental board's recommendations, in our view, would adversely effect access to care. the dental board has recommended two doctors, one doing the procedure and one doing the anesthesia. however, unlike our recommendation, only the dental board has recommended one doctor pal certified with the addition of a lesser trained pals assistant. we believe that the california society of dentist and anesthesiologists recommendations provide a higher level of safety by having both doctors pal certified. the dental boards pal's assistant would decrease access to care when the assistant is not available. this would delay and increase the cost of care. the dental board model creates more opportunities for a system failure, again, decreasing the access to care. it is a slight difference, but a critical difference. the safest and most efficient and effective way to provide anesthesia care, and not affect access to car would be to have both doctors pal certified. one doing the procedure and one doing the anesthesia, and i just want to reiterate my comments are related directly to general anesthesia in children under seven.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Larry Trapp: thank you. my name is dr. larry, i'm a dentist, anesthesiologist. i was in practice for 24 years in private practice. i've taught anesthesia for virtually 40 years. i'm currently the assistant program director for dental anesthesiology at loma linda university where we train five people per year in a three year program. i want to kind of clean up some things that maybe needed to be said. you have a daunting task, because you have to figure out what safety is for pediatric patients and the problem is you have no data with which to do that. i thought the board was very good and she explained the reporting or the incidents reported. just the letter the practitioner sends to the board and says, i have this problem. and then if the board see fit, they will investigate. i'm also an investigator for the board. and i mostly, i've been given mortalities, but occasionally not. and the point is if you look at the article published in the dallas daily news on which is a year and a half study on data maintenance by dental boards around the country, it's an embarrassing effort. there's purging of files. there's no data collection at all. it is kind of a pathetic responsibility as it's carried out. so and i know time is of the essence, and i'm going to move along quickly. a critical part, because the data's so important is the implementation of the protocol by the dental board for the collection of data. now they can have and i would encourage them to wait on sheet development that they're talking about, the form development until they know what it is they need to collect, because we do need to ask ourselves what we need to collect. we need to know the training of the individual reporting, the patient's history. when i get a case, an outcome to review, i look at the medical records from the hospital, the office records. i look at the, if it's a death, the post-mortem report. there's all kinds of data to look at, but none of that comes in typically in the incident report. now, i would like to see the way they summarize the data is transparent to you, to me and everybody else including the evaluator's decisions.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Annie Kaplan: My name is Dr. Annie Kaplan. My healthy six year old nephew Caleb died in 2015 which is how I got involved with this. He was having general anesthesia done in an oral surgeon's office. After Caleb's death, I was shocked to learn that there was not a dedicated anesthesia provider providing his anesthesia. And worse, that this was normal among oral surgeons. This is not the way it's done in any other medical field. Caleb's oral surgeon didn't immediately recognize that Caleb had stopped breathing and he botched the rescue. Caleb's death was avoidable. Worried that I was biased when I was looking at this and because of my grief. I checked my instincts with my physician peers, and mentors and professors, my own Doctor. Each time I explain the current State of dental anesthesia, I was met with shock and disbelief that this was how it was done. You could do the same tests. When you go talk to your Doctor friends or visit your own physician, you should ask them if you would be comfortable having an oral surgeon do both the operating and the anesthesia at the same time. Ask them if you should be comfortable with the model, for you or your child. Last year I testified for the first time in my life at the Assembly B&P Committee, and it was very intimidating. Much more so than here. But, I gotta say the Assembly members inspired me. They ask tough questions, and I remember that Assembly Member Rocky Chavez spoke up to announce that after hearing all the testimony at the hearing, he immediately texted his grandchildren to make that whenever they underwent anesthesia, they would ask for a dedicated anesthesia provider. The Committee voted unanimously for our bill, and told us to come back next year with a stronger bill. The Senate B&P Committee was not much easier for me, but again, I was encouraged with all the Senators' compassion and rigor in questioning all the sides. In particular, I know Senator Hill's commitment to this issue is an enormous relief to our family. And Senator Jackson's urging the oral surgeons to accept the recommendations that came out of the dental board's review laid out a gauntlet for 2017. Candidly I believe that a separate anesthesia provider should be required for all patients not just the youngest children. But for children they are the most vulnerable. A typical 6 year old, we are talking about under 7 here, they are under 4 feet tall and they weight 40 lbs. They have smaller throats which are easier to block, say with gauze, or with fluids like water or blood. Kids are more likely to have laryngeal spasm, where their airway closes unexpectedly and they're just more likely to slip into a deeper level of sedation than intended and lose the ability to breathe on their own. Even when used on healthy adults, propofol and versed, some of the most popular drugs used in general anesthesia, come with FDA mandated warnings that there must be a separate anesthesia provider. In explaining this warning the FDA wrote, the medical professional administering propofol, should have the requisite experience, training, judgment and undivided focus to achieve and maintain the various levels of sedation appropriate for the procedure. And to monitor the patient continuously through the procedure and intervene quickly and appropriately as necessary. Individuals trained in the administration of general anesthesia and not otherwise involved in the conduct of the procedure, should be capable both of minimizing the incidence of these complications and handling them appropriately, should they occur. Others not so trained, or whose attention is divided between administering propofol and conducting other tasks associated with the procedure may not be. The FDA which is evidence based and data driven came to this conclusion in 2005. This is more than 10 years ago. The joint Commission, the American Society of Anesthesiologists, the Center's for Medicare and Medicaid, the national standards that were put together jointly by pediatricians and pediatric dentists also came to the same conclusion. Now, after hearing all of this evidence the California Dental Board came to the same conclusion and voted 11 to 3 to amend their subcommittees report and recommend dedicated anesthesia provider for children under seven. All last year we were advised to wait and see what the Dental Board would do. To be patient, let the board do its job. Now the board has done the right thing, at least for children under seven. The only question is left, whether the Legislature will act on these recommendations Before more children have to die or suffer injury.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 60, 'end': 65, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 191, 'end': 196, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 417, 'end': 422, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 472, 'end': 477, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 527, 'end': 532, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1406, 'end': 1418, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1922, 'end': 1926, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2003, 'end': 2010, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dean Blumberg: thank you senator hill, committee members, and assemblymember thurman. my name is dr. dean richard blumberg. i'm associate professor of pediatrics at uc davis children's hospital here in sacramento, but today i am testifying in a different role on behalf of the american academy of pediatrics in california representing over 5,000 board certified primary care and subspecialty pediatrician members statewide. as pediatricians, we have no financial interest in who administers and monitors anesthesia in a dental office. our interest is solely from our mission to protect and promote the health and well being of every child in all settings in california. if children have an adverse outcome in a dental chair, then we are the ones who provide care for them. we recently undertook an informal survey of more than 100 california pediatricians on experiences with their practice on this subject. they reported 29 incidents of adverse anesthesia outcomes from dental care 29. and we have already heard about the deaths that have occurred. we are taking care of these patients before they have dental care. and we continue as their primary care providers after. we are often the ones who inform families if a child dies or suffers brain damage from a dental anesthesia tragedy. the single operator anaesthetist model that is currently permitted in dental centers in california is not safe and is outdated. focusing on excellent technical skills during a dental procedure does not allow for multitasking. by adding administration and monitoring of anesthesia as well as performing emergency rescue procedures on the child if necessary. and i thought that senator hill's comment about texting, that texting analogy was really apt, was a good analogy, it just makes common sense. i think these standards that are so important for children under seven are very important. we have heard about the deaths that have been reviewed by the board. these are a relatively small number of deaths, seven, even though each one is tragic. and some have occurred in the hospital. i that it's likely that these cases, like senator pan's patients, are probably likely to have multiple comorbidities, to be sicker, to have increased risk of that outcomes. and that's why they ended up having their procedures done in a hospital setting. i would just urge caution in interpreting these data. and i think sometimes these data can be used to obfuscate the issue. in terms of the access to argument that children will fail to receive care at all if we require that the care is administered safely, i don't think this is a defensible position. it's not adequately supported by evidence. children do not just need access to any dental care, they need access to safe dental care. we respectfully request that the california legislature urge dentists and oral surgeons in california to adhere to the national aap and aapd guidelines on pediatric anesthesia in dental settings to implement these dental board recommendations in full by including the recommendation that there be a second qualified cms recognized anaesthesia provider for any child undergoing deep sedation in general anesthesia in a dental office in the bill. and also to publicly support an immediate and full moratorium on a single operator anaesthetist model when a young child is placed under general anesthesia and deep sedation in a dental office. these steps are not feel good recommendations, they increase the quality of care and safety. and we have heard that we should not take small steps, but instead, look at the big picture. we agree with looking at the big picture, but in the meantime, please take some incremental steps forward. the perfect is the enemy of the good. thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 22, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 62, 'end': 69, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 91, 'end': 107, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1657, 'end': 1661, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2108, 'end': 2111, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Karyn Karp: Okay, thank you. Mr. Chair, Members of the Committee and Assembly member Thurmond, my name is Karyn Karp, and I'm the practice director for the California Association for Nurse Anesthetists and I've been a practicing nurse anesthetics for 28 years. I currently am based in Northern California. I was asked by the Committee to testify on the current practice of CRNAs in California as well as give Candice thoughts on the Dental Board's reports. First, I'd like to thank Senator Hill and Assembly member Thurmond, as long as the Dental Board, for their leadership on the issue of pediatric dental anesthesia safety. Candice has participated through supporting Senator Hill's request and supporting Assembly member Thurman's legislation, as well as meeting with the dental board during their process and providing input into their report. First, a little about CRNAs in California. Certified Registered Nurse Anesthetists are advanced practice registered nurses who are required to have a minimum of eight years of combined education, training, and critical care nursing experience. Before passing a national certifying examination, and entering the anesthesia workforce with a master's or doctoral degree. By the year 2021, all nurse anesthesia programs in the United States will award a doctoral degree upon a completion. CRNAs do not require physician supervision in California. And practice independently in every health care setting where anesthesia's delivered from traditional acute care hospitals to ambulatory surgery centers, and physician offices. CRNAs are the primary providers of anesthesia in rural and medically underserved communities, and provide 65% of anesthesia services to these populations. Currently in California, there are nine counties that depend solely on CRNAs for anesthesia services. However, CRNA's also practice in team care settings through out the state, collaborating with surgeons, obstetrician's, anesthesiologist's, dentists and other healthcare providers to deliver safe, high quality, cost effective care. In regard to the Dental Board's report on pediatric anesthesia, and in light of time, Candice supports, in general, all the recommendations to improve collection of data, updating definitions, educational requirements, personnel, requiring capnography usage and increasing authority for the dental board to conduct on site inspections and evaluations and also supports the dental boards assertion that any change needs to strike the balance between established procedures and evidence based changes that provide greater patient safety. As well as the need to examine the effect of any proposed new legislation on access to care and cost effectiveness for pediatric dental patients and a resource-constrained health care system. Sara and I see every day on a first-hand basis the continued need of vulnerable communities for access to safe, effective anesthesia care. One current California statutory requirement impedes CRNA's ability to offer anesthesia services in dental office settings. Even though CRNAs have independent scope of practice, we currently are not able to obtain an anesthesia permit given by the dental board individually, like other anesthesia provider colleagues. Instead, dentists, many of whom practice in rural or underserved communities that may not have other anesthesia providers available, must obtain their own anesthesia permit, which requires additional educational requirements and fees. This creates an undue burden on dentists for using CRNAs in dental offices, which does not exist in any other setting. This includes hospitals and dental ambulatory surgery centers where CRNAs currently provide pediatric dental anesthesia on a regular basis, as well as office settings for a multitude of other specialty services. We do not see this as a scope battle at all between anesthesia providers. We work collaboratively in our daily lives. And there's a need in our communities that provides opportunities for all anesthesia providers. Hannah asks that this inequity in the dental permitting process be addressed in any legislation implementing the reports recommendations so that CRNAs can be utilized more easily in office settings and to provide services to communities in need. Thank you for the opportunity to speak.
[{'start': 73, 'end': 81, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 94, 'end': 104, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 478, 'end': 482, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 503, 'end': 511, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 667, 'end': 671, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 713, 'end': 720, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2774, 'end': 2778, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4011, 'end': 4017, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Viveka Rydell: i'm rydell and i'm the ceo of pdi surgery center. i'm not a dentist, i'm not a medical doctor. i'm actually a litigator who used to be a litigator in san francisco. i also am a professor of business law organizations and non-profit organizations.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kristin Johnson: Can you hear me? Great, my name is Dr. Kristin Johnson. I'm a pediatric anesthesiologist and have practiced pediatric anesthesia for 35 years. I currently am the medical Director of PDI Surgery Center where we provide efficient, high volume, general anesthesia dentistry for young children and special needs children up to 18 years of age. As Viveca mentioned, almost all of our patients are insured by denticow and medicow. Safety and quality have been our guided principles, in our eight years we have cared for 16,500 children, and that was starting with only one OR. We have an average age of 3.5 years and our patients are referred by their primary dentist throughout Northern California for an average of 12 diseased teeth per patient. We are an accredited ambulatory surgery center devoted to pediatric dentistry. We are the end of the line for these kids. They have very limited options. We fully support efforts to educate and provide preventative dentistry for these under serve children. In the meantime, our kids get general anesthesia with endotracheal intubation that is a protected airway. So that they can easily breathe despite the dental work occurring in their mouth. They're fully monitored and each child has a physician anesthesiologist, a nurse, a dentist and a dental assistant. This is a safe practice of anesthesia in dentistry and accredited hospitals and surgery centers. We keep down our costs by doing a high volume of cases very efficiently. Safety is the backbone of the medical practice of anesthesia. We are vigilant, always scanning in our visual field the patient, the surgery and all of the monitors. This focus has resulted in a culture of critical analysis of mishaps and mortality, with consequent technologic innovation, such as pulsoxymetrie and end-tidal carbon dioxide. Checklist protocols and best practice guidelines. Comparisons are made between us and the airline industry's focus on safety. The mortality of anesthesia has been dramatically reduced by our approach, a more than 10 fold decrease in the decades of my professional life. As a pediatric anesthesiologist, I am heartened to see the California Board of Dentistry embrace safer policy. I fully support them. However, it isn't quite enough in my opinion. I agree with Dr. Seibert's testimony in the CSA, recommendations regarding these issues. A few sedation points repeated here for emphasis. Morally, we are obligated to one standard of care regardless of income. Morally, we are obligated to one standard of care for high-risk procedures no matter office, surgery center, hospital, dentist or MD. Young children are particularly vulnerable. Conscious sedation, or moderate sedation, we use now is an oxymoron in the young pediatric patient. They are typically awake or deeply sedated. Sedation is a continuum and despite anyone's intention a deeper level of sedation is very possible. Practitioners that aim for moderate sedation, must be prepared to rescue a child from deep sedation immediately. This means that moderate sedation should have the same staffing and monitoring requirements as deep sedation. Propofal is a general anesthetic and it's use as a sedative equals general anesthesia without a protected airway. Any sedation medication in a high enough dose or in combination with other medications can result in general anesthesia and the loss of the ability to breathe. Dental assistants who become sedation assistants are required to have a highschool degree, a certificate and dental assistance and a less than two week course in sedation. They are not licensed medical personnel and are not qualified to provide Pals care or anesthesia services, all young children, and all uncooperative special needs children, should have a qualified anesthesia provider, unless the intent is minimal sedation. It has been stated that requiring an additional anesthesia provider may interfere with access to care, implying that the cost would be prohibitive. Oral surgeons and dentists charge for their anesthesia care and their dental care. They are paid for both activities.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 343, 'end': 349, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2280, 'end': 2287, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ray Stewart: thank you, chairman hill, members of the senate business and profession in economic development committee and invited guests. my name is dr. ray dean stewart. i am currently a board certified pediatric dentist, which i have been for, in excess of 40 years and am currently a full time educator at the school of dentistry and medical center at the university of california in san francisco where i hold the rank of clinical professor. i'm the faculty person who directs and coordinates the oral conscious sedation program for the 15 pediatric dental residents enrolled in our program. we serve as the safety net referral center for most of the community health centers and health centers in california. we currently do approximately 250 oral conscious sedation procedures a year and approximately 600 general anesthesia cases in children's hospital per year. in the brief time that i have this afternoon, i'd like to share with you the views of the pediatric dental faculty from ucsf, as well as two of the other pediatric dentistry programs here in california. as a group, we by and large, support the recommendations for enhancements to california law and policies regulating pediatric sedation and anesthesia. as outlined in the board's report of december, 2016. the one big caveat that we would encourage you to consider, prior to approving any proposals to implement changes or modify existing policies and regulations. would be to consider the potential outfall of unintended consequences which may result. these unintended consequences as you've heard several times today, may include, but are not necessarily limited to the imposition of added barriers to access to care as well as potential negative effects on the pediatric dental training programs in california. any additional regulations or requirements, which would add additional cost in overhead would quite likely lead to a decision on a part of our university administrators, and, quite likely, to providers in private practice, as well to curtail or, worse yet, discontinue the use of moderate oral conscious sedation. this would, in all practical purposes, limit or eliminate the access to moderate oral conscious sedation services for a significant segment of the denti-cal population in california. that program currently pays us $25 to do an oral conscious sedation procedure, which by our most recent calculations cost us $400 to do with all of the staff and equipment that is present. number two is that our pediatric dental training programs will be very much in danger of losing their accreditation which currently requires each resident to experience a minimum of 25 moderate oral conscious sedation procedures. if the state of california or the universities and training programs in california lose their accreditation. this would essentially reduce and eliminate the valuable resource of cadre of practitioners who are trained and willing to provide modern oral conscious sedation as an alternative to the far more costly and risky use of deep iv sedation and general anesthesia. number three, all patients who are currently being treated utilizing moderate oral conscious sedation option would be referred to care either by deep iv sedation and/or general anesthesia in a hospital or a surgery center setting. both of which are considerably, in my estimation, three times more costly than oral conscious sedation. this would have significant impact on the cost for services shouldered by the dental program. i've supplied footnotes to my written testimony today that shows you that in the course of a year, the oral conscious sedations that we provide at ucsf alone saved denti-cal in excess of a half $1 million. we are supportive of the dental board's recommendation to add a second and separate minimal sedation permit to the existing stretcher and thereby distinguish minimal oral conscious sedation for moderate level oral conscious sedation. minimal level sedation is safest and the least likely to produce adverse outcomes. however, this level of sedation gives us limited working time and patient control to provide anything but the simplest of procedures, precluding the completion of multiple restorations, extractions, placement of space maintainers, etc. in the same sedation appointment, moderate sedation achieved by either oral conscious sedation or iv sedation takes the issues of risk and patient safety to a completely different level. current requirements of additional staff, a higher level of training for provider and more rigorous monitoring through out the procedure as prescribed by ap and apd guidelines, we feel are fully justified. we do question however, the proposal to elevate the training of dental assistants and non dentist monitors from the level of basic life support to pediatric advanced life support levels and to require the addition of capnography to the monitoring standards during moderate level oral conscious sedation, where we use nitrous oxide, do not have the closed anesthesia system that the doctor next to me was talking about, where capnography and levels of co2 concentration are easily monitored. both of these recommendations would add significantly to the cost and overhead for practices offering these services and there is no evidence based data support data for any of these criteria in the interest of patient safety. in closing, we believe that the issue of patient safety should be the over arching consideration in this committee's deliberations. we believe that in children seven years and under are undergoing treatment under deep and iv sedation or general anesthesia. there should be appropriate requirements for the number of trained personnel and enhanced monitoring techniques such as ekg and capnography to minimize risks. we have serious reservations however, that any dentist, regardless of his specialty or level of training. should be simultaneously responsible for anesthesia delivery, monitoring performance of the dental procedures. we thereby the dental boards recommendation that when treating children under the age of seven, dedicate an anesthesia provider be present to administer the anesthesia. however, here again, we once again question the validity of the proposed requirements. that the dental assistant or whether non-dentist staff members present during the procedure be certified due to the lack of evidence based data that this would support the requirement. this ends my testimony and i'll be...
[{'start': 20, 'end': 24, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 141, 'end': 157, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeremy Pearson: thank you. my name is jeremy ray pearson, i am co-owner of happy bear surgery center, dedicated to only dental treatment for pediatrics down in tulare county. we are a joint commission, accredited facility and state certified. the way that we work is that a child will go to their local dentist. the dentist will do an exam. see the work that needs to be done. they'll try to do the work, either nitrous, oral sedation, whatever the case may be. whatever they're comfortable with in their office. at that point, if they say that the work still needs to be done and they can't do it, they will refer to our surgery center. i'm also here representing the coalition of surgery centers. there's about 18 dental surgery centers in california. we all work very much the same way. so, once they come to our office, we do an analysis and we have a dedicated team of five people. a dentist, an anesthetist, an rn, a medical assistant and an rda who follows that patient through the entire process. from the time that they come into our office until they are sedated under general anesthesia. fully intubated to protect the airway and then sent home once they wake up. just to answer some of your questions about the numbers, really quick. just the 18 dental surgery centers that register their information on oshpd, which is a state run website. there were over 32,000 pediatric patients who were seen under general anesthesia in dental surgery centers in 2015. 2016 numbers are not complete because fourth quarter has not all been updated on their website yet. as far as access to care, i want to make a very clear definition or distinction between denti-cal patients who are most of the kids who need this and kids who have private insurance. i would venture to say that probably the number of oral surgeons who take denti-cal patients is near zero. so the kids that are being treated are mostly, if a dentist cannot see them, they're being sent to a dental surgery center, similar to pdi or any of the other 18 dental surgery centers that are in the state.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dave Thompson: hi, my name's dave jeremy thompson, and i do represent two other surgery centers in the central valley and i just want to add to the statistics he was mentioning. as total we had about 34,000 in the 1 year, treated under not just our 2 centers, but all the dental surgery centers, under general anesthesia. i think if you add the hospital cases with that as well because we talked a lot about the number of deaths, but we didn't actually statistically compare them on a percentage and that's what's interesting to me, how many cases are being done in an office and then, the percentage is what we should be looking at in terms of safety. with everything, i just want to mention around the whole adding another provider as a requirement, is surprising to me because in a surgical center, there's so many compliance requirements about having that second provider. even to the point where we're required to have an incapacitated provider policy. in case what happens, what do you do if one of the provider falls over and he has a heart attack and you only have one, i mean it is such a big deal to have second person there. it's just surprising to me and then the data's all over the place so i would say the answer is not in the data. the answer is in common sense. there are so many, i don't know the time is up but that's just my point, thank you. thank you very much.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Cyrus: good evening, thanks for the opportunity to address the committee. my name is tim and 23 months ago today my wife eliza and i took our son caleb to an oral surgeon and two days later we held him in our arms as he'd passed away. caleb is a healthy boy and he should still be alive today. last year in the same room members of this committee made a commitment that after the dental board gave their recommendation they would act to protect our children and the dental board has made those recommendations including having a separate anesthesiologist provider for children under seven and so, i'd like to ask that you follow through on that commitment and to enact those recommendations. thank you.
[{'start': 78, 'end': 81, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 114, 'end': 119, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 139, 'end': 144, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 228, 'end': 233, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Victor Christie: good evening, mr. chairman, senator newman, mr. lambert thurman, my name is victor dave christie with california health plus advocates representing 1,200 not for profit community health centers and clinics from across the state. thank you for the opportunity to speak with you briefly. no one ever wants to see something terrible occur while being treated. however, we find no evidence grounded in science that proves that having three or four providers during sedation activities decreases the likelihood of an emergency event. we fear some of the board recommendations will create an access to care problem where we are already seeing a lack of providers being able to treat the already immense need of patients seen among our community health centers. we recommend enough time and thorough vetting of any official proposed recommendation. in addition, we recommend public health dentist and those dentists treating patients in our fku8cs, to be included in this process in order to speak to concerns relating to access in the special patient populations that will be impacted by this. thank you for your time and we look forward to being a partner with you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 42, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 48, 'end': 63, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 76, 'end': 96, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katherine Foster: good evening, thank you, i'm doctor katherine victor foster, i'm a pediatrician who was also involved in the founding of the pdi surgery center through first five commission, which is how it all started. one of the issues around the discussion between safety and access has to do with the cost of sedation and general anesthesia and i can say from pdi, we see probably about 2,500 cases a year at the grand cost of about $3 million. it is not cheap and i have been very involved in public health and prevention for my entire career as a pediatrician and i have been absolutely blown away how little attention is paid to preventing a totally preventable and outrageously expensive problem, and why we do not have aggressive prevention in dental care. our children don't get seen often until they're already in pain, because they can't see a dentist. by the time they get treatment it's expensive and it didn't need to be that way. my second point is i think anything you do if our data's going to be reliable, you got to have a whistleblower clause in your law. you need to make it safe for people who know of a death to report it because i think it is very underreported and i think it's going to be critical if you're going to use data to make important policy decisions that be reliable and i don't think you'll get reliable for patient without whistleblower.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kaneva Katreti: my name is doctor katreti, i trained at ucsf in stanford. i'm an internist. so children are very different from adults. i provide emergent and hospital medicine care in two hospitals in san francisco and i'm also an agile clinical professor of medicine at stanford. in a patient safety era where even one infection or one adverse even, in a hospitalized, patient is unacceptable. i find it hard to believe that one death in a previously healthy child is also, that it should be unacceptable and should be prevented, so i know we're all here to do that but i just want to make sure we understand that we don't accept even one infection of c. diff or we don't accept even one adverse event in a hospital. so this is very, in my view, very similar. as a practicing physician, my colleagues and i would never conduct or perform a procedure without a different colleague who's in charge of airway. when we learn basic life support cpr, abcs. a is airway, there's always someone in charge of airway. it doesn't matter how close you are to the head, you cannot do compressions and provide safety for the airway at the same time. we need to make sure dental care providing to california patients of all races and socioeconomic status is safe and i implore you to address the cost of insurance and access of care issue separate to the standard of care issues. i think their very different. i hope you will uphold the recommendation that there be a separate operator in so we make dental care safer for children and please do not continue to put the honest on the parent because right now the onus is on the parent to understand that this is something that they need to ask for when they go into office, thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sebastian Kapa: my name is sebastian katherine kapa and i'm caleb's uncle. i think that the safety debate is clear, there is inadequate data that has been compiled for various reasons. there are two responses to that is that in lieu of data you have a medical consensus where the only descent are the people who are financially benefited by the current model. the same as the climate change debate the only descent from the people who are financially benefited. that's a pretty clear medical consensus on safety. the second issue is that generally when you don't have data, you keep the status quo unless the people who control the data failed to bring it forward. here, the oral surgeons, the cda, they've had decades to bring the data forward, to compile it and their colleagues, the anesthesiologists have done that. and my wife spent hundreds of hours doing this research. you search for articles on anesthesia safety in the medical profession, you find hundreds of articles published over the last several decades. you search for the article specific to dentistry, you find a handful, a very small n numbers, a very small statistics, they haven't done the work and now they're asking you to wait, and let them do it while children die. they don't get rewarded for failing to do their job for the last several decades. the safety debate should be over. the access debate is way overblown. small number of cases about in office care. we've heard other people talk about hospital cases. we've talked about ambulatory surgery cases. that's all distorting the debate about the small number of cases that happen in dental offices, and whether there should be a dental assistant, or a trained professional who can intervene. right now, oral surgeons are practicing against fda warnings, against the medical consensus. this isn't a debate. this should be over and done and it should be done now. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 44, 'end': 49, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sharon Quirk-Silva: i won't do it like that. good morning everybody and welcome. welcome to our first assembly committee on jobs, economic developments in the economy. and i am assemblymember quirk-silva, and it's a pleasure to be serving as the chair of this committee. i do want to have the other members introduce themselves. so we'll start right over here.
[{'start': 172, 'end': 183, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sabrina Cervantes: yes, good morning, assembly member. sabrina, representing the 60th assembly district, which includes the cities of riverside, carona, norco, east bell and harupa valley.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sharon Quirk-Silva: okay, thank you and welcome. we will have members coming in and out as they have other committees. and as i said, i'm assembly member sharon and i represent north orange county, the 65th district. i also want to introduce our support team here with tony simons, our chief consultant with the assembly jobs committee. we also have matthew hurley who is our committee secretary. and we have julia king, our republican caucus support consultant. so we welcome them and are excited to get to work on jobs and the economy. i also want to remind everybody that this hearing is being televised and recorded and we do have a quorum, so we're going to go ahead and call the roll call even though we just introduced ourselves.
[{'start': 134, 'end': 140, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 249, 'end': 260, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 330, 'end': 344, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 389, 'end': 399, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dorothy Rothrock: Thank you, Chairman and members. I really appreciate the opportunity to speak to you today. I'm Dorothy Rothrock, I'm President of the California Manufacturing and Technology Association. We're a statewide organization representing manufacturers large and small, all sorts of types. We've been doing it since 1918. So next year, it will be 100 years. I am pleased to say that California is a huge manufacturing state, but I'm disappointed to tell you that we are actually lagging the country when it comes to new manufacturing investment and job growth. You have some data in the materials that have been provided to you by the Committee. In answer to that, the CMTA has a manufacturing growth agenda for California that falls into three different buckets. One is what you just heard about is workforce development side. Skilled workers are crucial for manufacturers and it really does give us a competitive edge to have the most highly skilled productive workers out there. We're really pleased that Nicole Rice, one of our Policy Lobbyist is been appointed to the Workforce Development Board and is going to be working closely with Tim Rainey and his team on getting that manufacturing apprenticeship program up and running and really relevant to manufacturing. We're also heavily involved with the CTE, Career Tech Education issues and the K through 12, particularly work hard on those. Another area that we're watching very closely and are pushing this year is an extension of the sales news tax exemption on the purchase of manufacturing equipment. That's destined to expire in 2022, which is well within the investment decision making horizon for manufacturers and we don't want to give any kind of signal that we're going to increase taxes on manufacturers in that planning cycle. The last is a whole bucket full of smart regulations that we need related to the environment, climate change and workplace safety and we want California to meet every single one of its goals, but we need to do it in a way that's it's very effective, that makes it easy for manufacturers to comply to understand the rules. because when the time they need to face new procedures or adopt new technologies, all the things that need to be done that make regulation smart, so we can keep manufacturers growing here. Thank you.
[{'start': 96, 'end': 112, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1001, 'end': 1012, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1134, 'end': 1144, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bob Lanter: good morning. thank you, madam chair. thank you, members of the committee. again, my name is lanter, i'm the director of the california workforce association. we are a state nonprofit that represents local workforce stakeholders throughout california. each of the 46 workforce development boards is a member of our association as well as about 80 other organizations, including community colleges, economic development chambers of commerce, community-based organizations. we focus primarily on workforce issues that affect local economies. we work directly with the local workforce development boards, and we are currently the key technical assistance provider for the california workforce development board on the implementation of wioa. we feel those local boards both after local communities level and regional are key to advancing our state workforce issues. we have 1,200 local workforce development board members across the state representing the key stakeholders appointed by local activist officials. out of those 1,200, 600 of them represent private sector business. the workforce boards are organized regionally as tim said, the 14 regions across the state. their task is to really work with economic development, education, community-based organizations, social services to really kind of bright down the silos and really develop a plan for workforce and economic growth in their local areas and their regions. we're currently working on redesigning our programs, so that it is transformational in nature. to mention the sling shot initiative, i think you guys should keep an eye on that sling shot initiative. it's $1 million investment for 12 regions throughout the state that had to be matched dollar per dollar by the local area, so it's 2 million in each region. those regions have organized primarily in sector-based work. we have had 119 businesses sign off as business champions, leading those sector developments and career pathways. 72 of them from the manufacturing sectors. so, i think that's something to keep an eye on. some of the challenges we currently have in the system, i just want to touch a little bit more on those. one of the key ones is to really continue to break down and organize the silos in ways that make sense for our business customers and our job seeker customers. breaking down silos between education, community-based organisations, economic development and workforce organisations. and really, one of the areas we can do that quickly is in the planning. the state of california has had significant planning activity over the last year to mention the strong work for task force money for the city e-programs, the community colleges. that required a regional plan from cte providers. we have the adult education block grant program that rolled out last year, that required a regional plans from adult education providers. we have the wioa planning, also required local and regional plans that are due next month. it would be great if someday we could have one plan for regional and economic development activities in local regions throughout he state of california. so we're working on kind of aligning and moving plans, planning activities together. performance continues to be a challenge, although i have to say since the federal government was three years late in promulgating regulations for wioa, we have continued to move forward in the state of california leading the country in reorganizing our system. but really, there is a challenge to connect these industry sector demand driven activities with the service delivery though the career center system and really have those two areas connect. but in spite of that challenge, we continue to serve a lot of people last year through our career center system. we have 200 career centers in the state of california. we saw about 1.13 million people in those 200 centers. we enrolled in intense of services about a 115,000. we placed 60,000 of those people's into jobs, that's adult and dislocated workers. that 60,000 jobs netted the california economy $1.36 billion in wages last year. so, wioa continues to be a significant driver to our economy. and lastly, let me just say, the disconnect, income ability. people have talked a lot about that this morning. we truly support the state's plan for the apprenticeship goals and the cte goals. we also support the states investment that they've made over the last several of years in k-12 system, in the cte system, but we continue to have a challenge in our state with income and equality. 16.2% of our population live in poverty. that's over 6 million people in california. of those 6 million people, about 60% have a working adult living in those. and those folks aren't able to fully participate in apprenticeship programs, in post-secondary education, in high wage, high growth careers, without remedial education, life skills, remedial life skills and remedial education skills. and that's where the network of community based organizations and workforce development career centers can come into play. the people coming through our career centers are the hardest to serve. there are numbers that show that the majority of those people have multiple barriers to employment, but we just don't have the funding to serve the need. wioa funds in our state have been reduced by over 50% since 2001, that's federal investment to the state of california. the state of california has not necessarily invested directly in this population that i'm speaking of. so cwa, along with the variety of other cbos, banded together last year to introduce the breaking barriers initiative, ab 2642. which was a grant initiative designed to fund community based organizations working with career centers and workforce development boards to re-mediate this population life skills and education skills, to participate in post-secondary education, apprenticeship programs and careers. and we will reintroduce a bill like that again this year. i think that's enough for now. thank you very much.
[{'start': 93, 'end': 99, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1125, 'end': 1128, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark Hebert: madam chair, members thank you very much for the opportunity to be here this morning to be part of this hearing. my name is hebert, i'm california director for small business majority. we are a national small business education and advocacy organization. when we think of small business, there are a lot of different definitions out there. we think of a business with less than 100 employees, to keep it simple and broad. and we really believe sort of two things. one is, we believe that entrepreneurs and small employers are essential building blocks to healthy, sustainable local economies. and they deserve all the tools and resources that they need to be successful. and we believe that there's an authentic voice of small business in the public policy debate and we seek to mine that perspective with scientific opinion polling. so, we don't necessarily poll our members in the research we do, we do opinion polling of small businesses to get their perspective. here in california we have over 90, around 97%, of all businesses are small, with that definition. that's over 800,000 small businesses with employees. two thirds of all new businesses and all new jobs, actually two thirds of all new jobs since the recession, have been created by small businesses. and most of those jobs are coming from small businesses that have between 1 and 4 employees. and then we know about half the businesses in the state have between 1 and 4 employees. so, as we continue to think about what are the tools and resources that our biggest job creators need? those are the small businesses that we're really thinking about. our work has really centered around making sure entrepreneurs have those resources. and we do that through hundreds of workshops that we do throughout the state with chambers of commerce and business associations. we have a team on the ground throughout the state, so if you would like to do a workshop with your constituents, we'd be happy to come and make sure that your small business owners have the tools and resources that they need. our focus most recently, and what we continued here, and what we see as an opportunity here in california, is addressing the challenges around access to capital. any business that's really thinking about expanding or growing their business, capital's always the number one issue that they are seeking to address. and since the recession it's been more difficult for small businesses to access that capital. and because of those challenges, we've seen an explosion of lending that's taking place online, and those lenders aren't necessarily subject to the same lending rules that traditional lenders are subject to. so, we see small business owners who may be denied traditional forms of credit from their local bank or through an sba loan. and can often find themselves in an online loan, or essentially in a predatory loan, and they're essentially pay day loans for small business. and this loans suck resources and local resources out of those business. so, we see a opportunity to think about what does transparency look like in this industry? what are ways that we can educate small business owners about this new industry and the choices and the decisions they need to make? nationally, this year, we launched the borrowers' bill of rights, which is a framework for a conversation around what does responsible lending look like? there are online lenders that offer responsible products. but and so, it's not necessarily an online lending versus traditional lending framework. it's really a responsible lending versus an irresponsible lending framework. so, we look forward to continuing to pursue that conversation here in california to ensure that local entrepreneurs have those tools and resources, and we appreciate the opportunity to be here this morning
[{'start': 124, 'end': 130, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lori Kammerer: i don't know if i should take the high chair or the low chair. good morning chair and members. lori jonah kammerer, small business california. i wanted to apologize that the president of small business california was unable to be here today due to medical reasons. but we wanted to thank you and staff for the hearing that you've put forth today. and, also, i have furnished a copy of the small business california survey on the business climate, to tony, and actually, it's been distributed to the legislature. so at some point we look forward to discussing more in detail with tony and with the committee, some of the recommendations that small business california has, thank you.
[{'start': 95, 'end': 114, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 450, 'end': 454, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 579, 'end': 583, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Scott Rogowski: thank you very much and good morning to the chair and thank you to the committee. my name is scott lori rogowski, i'm the new california liaison for the spbc. and i want to thank you very much for the jede committee for your support for the past years and also for your efforts to put the sbc in statute. to comment on panel discussion, the sbc, we're an existing program, we are already deployed throughout the whole state, so we do have support throughout the sbc network. to help out with small businesses and technical assistance, mainly around capital infusion. for our results last year, real quick. we did about 1,231 small businesses created throughout california, about 6,700 jobs created. and capital infusion technical assistance of almost 800 million across our 43 centers in the state. and then to talk about the panel discussion that we had here we're working more of a student engagement through the community college estate and uc colleges. to assist the credit and non credit issues they're talking about around education and curriculum. so that we can help out the workforce and get more business created and started. so thank you.
[{'start': 93, 'end': 112, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gayle Murphy: i'm going to start. let me pull it closer. my name is gayle jonah murphy and i'm the senior director for admissions for the state bar of california. so just a little overview of the committee of bar examiners by statute is an examining committee of the state bar and you have 10 members that are appointed by the board of trustees, including one young lawyer and the nine regular lawyers. and then you have three public members appointed by the governor, the senate and the assembly. just a little bit about the exam development. our questions are drafted by professors, those are essay questions and then our performance test questions are drafted by a performance test team which is composed of practitioners and law school clinical professors. so, they get together. they look at the questions. they edit the questions and then we send them out for pretests. so, we see how they're going to operate in the time constraints they have. and once we're ready to go, they are banked, then the committee basically is there to establish the policies for the administration of the emission requirements. it approves the final questions for the bar exam. it participates in our calibration sessions, which are conducted after each exam is administered. and then after every exam, there's a report on the administration and the grading. we have 13 subjects that we test in california and they are all here, and that list has been pretty much the same for several years now, but general bar exam is, we are giving it next week as a matter of fact, we will have six 1 hour essay questions and 2, 3-hour performance test, and then 200 multiple choice questions which is the mbe. beginning in july of 2017, we will have a 5 1-hour essay questions. one 90 minute performance test, and again the mbe. and the exam is weighted a little bit differently starting in july, it will be 50, 50. whereas right now, the written part which is two days out of the 3 is 65 and the mbe is 35. so once we give the exam, we download all the, over 90%, i think of the applicants take the exam by computer. we download, print out their answers. we give them another code number to make sure that they are very anonymous and when we give them to the graders. they're all sort of mixed up. so not one grader gets all of one school or one attorney applicants, or whatever it might be and then we have grading groups, 12 to 15 graders per each grading group and they get together in three calibration sessions to go over each question. they do an analysis. they see what the answers are. they all get the same answers first and then many answers, same answers. they see what grades they give. they reconcile in differences that they have through these calibration sessions, and then essentially each answer can be given a score of anywhere between 40 to 100%, 5 point increments. so in california, we have three phases of grading that's been in existence since the 70s essentially, if you have a 1,440 scaled score above, you would pass. if you have just below that, you would have your answers read by another set of graders. different graders in the same grading group and then those scores would be averaged, and then that score would be combined with the mbe. and if you got a 1,440 or above, you would pass. if you were still below that, if there was any question or answer to where there was more than a 10 point discrepancy, that would go to one of our senior graders. we call them the examination development grading team would basically resolve the difference. so which was the 70 awry, was the 50 awry. where is the difference? and they would give that score and that score is then used to compute the final score. so this is just an example, and i'm not really going to go through it now, because i'll spend majority of the time over here, but this shows you how, in fact, a result would come to how we calculate the results for the applicants. what i was going to talk about was a little bit of a history of the pass line and where we are today. i can tell you that i came on to the scene, if you will in 1980 and that was just after the california bar had administered several experiments. one was an oral sort of presentation, another was the performance test. actually, in its infancy and then a few other different tests with regard to what might be a good testing vehicle. and after that, there were several reports written, and out of that grew the performance test. and at that point, it was a three-hour performance test. so that was a big change in 1983, that was the first time the performance test was given. we really did not do much until, again, maybe increased the length of the time here and there. trying to figure out what was fairest to the applicants. and if more time helped them or didn't, it turns out that it didn't. so we went back to having a three-hour session for three essay questions, essentially then, the next big change was in 1987 and that's when we went to scaling. i'll toss it over to the psychometrician to explain the scaling in larger detail. but when scaling the written part of the exam, the written part of the exam was scaled to the multiple choice. now, is to ensure that the passing standards stay the same no matter what administration it was. and so if you had 1,440 on this, it meant the same thing two exams down the line. so, there was a lot of discussion. in fact, there was a hearing before the legislator at that point. and after that hearing, roger's predecessor, steve klein, appeared before one of these at a hearing. and essentially, scaling was written into the statute which basically permitted scaling for future exams. and in order to do that, the passing score had to be determined and that passing score was determined by looking at the past 10 years of exams, and looking at the 70% which was considered passing for each of those exams and doing all the calculating. and after all the calculating, that is where 1,440 came from. i think there has been questions with regard, it wasn't there a standard pass line and there has never been a national pass line. each state has more or less tended to do its own thing with regard to the admission requirements. so, that is a very short overview of what we do and i'm happy, of course, to answer questions. but at this time, i'm going to hand it over to, i think roger. thank you.
[{'start': 54, 'end': 72, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 5476, 'end': 5481, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5497, 'end': 5508, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6351, 'end': 6356, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Roger Bolus: my name is dr. roger gayle bolus. i have been a consultant to the board for about 30 years, originally through my partner, dr. steven klein. and most recently, myself, i do consult with 10 other states around the country. so, i understand that you do have access to some of the raw statistics. i'm going to try to put some of them into context for you. we are in process of completing a report, looking at some of these trends and some of the information that i will be providing is extracted from that report. the first thing this graph basically shows some of the ups and downs of bar passage on the bar for california, july administrations over the last 26 years could see that there have been drops in the percentage passing as recently as 2003. through 2008, there's a steady rise. and then from 2008 to 2016, there's been a gradual decrease. so, the july 2016 pass rate was the lowest to spend in basically at least in 26 years and here. this chart shows the performance on the multi-state bar examination. the multi-state bar examination is a standardized multiple choice test that is created and standardized by the national conference of bar examiners. the value of the multi-state examination is that it has been equated to past exams. so basically, someone scoring a scale score of 1,420 this year, basically has the same ability as someone who scored a 1,400 25 years ago. so, the california bar utilizes that as the standard to which do we do the scaling, and i would be happy to explain what scaling is if you have questions. this graph shows over that period from 1990 to 2016, what the relationship is between the average mbe score and the average percent passing. you notice that it's almost a perfect relationship. so basically, as the examinees performance goes up. so, does our passing rate and vice versa. so, a major predictor of what's going to happen with our passing rate is performance on the multi-state bar examination. so what we're doing in our analysis is basically, first thing that we wanted to do is to make a look-see at the changing composition of the test takers from 2008 which was the most recent peak through 2012 which was a midpoint to 2016 where we have seen the largest drop. first thing we notice in terms of number of examinees, number of examinees sitting for the california bar in july has dropped by 11%, which is a fairly significant decrease over time. if we focus on this last column which takes a look at the relative changes in the compositions of the participants, we see that for the california aba schools, there's been virtually no change in the composition of test takers. we further broke down those schools based on the median lsat of the schools that they attended and what we see is that we're seeing a 5% decrease in those schools or those students that attended schools in the middle of the lstat distribution. we also see that out of state students from aba schools have dropped 4%. we've seen a drop of 5% in first time takers. and generally speaking, first time takers perform much better on the exam. we have seen a drop of 6% in the proportion of whites sitting for the exam. this information, by the way, is collected during the admissions process. so we have access to that as well as gender and we are seeing that for the first time in 2016, males are a minority test taking group. and just to provide a comparison to the rest of the country, we notice that california historically scores higher on that multi-state exam than the rest of the country, and we also see how closely aligned the performance is. so, what we're seeing in california is being observed nationally. this chart shows on the bottom axis, that's the various school standards, or cut scores that states use. the information comes from the national conferences report 2015 and you could see the wide variation. it runs from a 129 all the way up to a 145. so there's a wide variation, that is what gayle had eluded to in the passing rate. you can see that the modal passing rate is about 135, and way out at the end are two states, california and delaware. so, graph indicates that california has one of the highest passing standards in the country. basically, the same composition of tests, but a higher passing standard. the other difference that california has is those boxes in red indicate those states in which the written portion of the exam is weighted more heavily than the multi-state. and here's another look at the comparison of performances for different states around the country from 2008 to 2015. these are all aba first timers, because california allows other types of applicants to sit for the exam from aba approved schools. so this made an apples to apples comparison. california is in black, florida, massachusetts, new jersey, texas and new york. what we see is a picture of the same decreasing trend nationwide. if we calculated the percentage decrease, we see it is a relatively narrow range running from about 11% to about 15%. so every state, again is experiencing this, the same drop. so what we did as part of our analysis for our report to look at some of these trends was to ask the question, what would happen if california had an alternative passing point a different standard? if we lowered it from 144, or we went to down to 135, which is the modal standard in the country all the way down to 133 which is the standard used by new york which tests, i believe, more applicants than any state in the country. so what we've seen is that whereas the difference in first time passing rates at 144 was 18% had the passing rate been set at 133 we would have seen an only 11% drop. if we had looked at the 144 passing rate of the repeaters, we see an 11% drop in that one would go to 14 percent at 133 all examinees. basically, a portion of the passing rates in california and the drops are a function of the current passing rate. so one thing that we wanted to do was to ask the question and there has been some complaints levied about the quality of applicants sitting for the examination in california versus those in new york, and why is there such a difference? so we simulated a passing rate for california said, if we set it at 133, we estimated what would happen and we made the comparison back to new york. so basically, what happened is we saw that actually 5% more would have passed back in 2008 and a similar percentage increase in 2016 and that the drop that was observed in california, this 9% decrease is basically exactly what was observed in new york. new york this year went to the uniform bar examination. back in 2008, they had their own examination. so, that's a quick summary. our report will be finished by the end of the month.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 127, 'end': 139, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4568, 'end': 4571, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4663, 'end': 4666, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Erica Moeser: don't give me that thing. good morning. i'm moeser. i'm the president and ceo of the national conference of bar examiners, and mr. liu asked me to appear to give you a national perspective of what's going on and see how california compares. dr. bolis has really stolen some of my thunder, but most of you should have a document in front of you that's comb-bound. and i thought given the brevity of time, i would like to just introduce you to this information. and then as the morning goes on, i would be happy to elucidate. but if you  would be kind enough to let me walk you through these documents, i would like to tell you what treasures await you in these pages. first of all, there's a notion that there's a dramatic change in california this year. and i think the first chart, a histogram, will refute that. there's a gentle shift of this curve to the left. that is, we are seeing weaker performances out of california, but we're certainly not seeing something that i would consider as falling off of a cliff. the next page is actually excerpted from our publication and derived from both the aba and law school admission council. just to give you a sense of what is going on law school by law school in california from 2010 through 2016. the numbers on the left side of that chart show you what has happened with enrollments and the percentage of decline in most cases. and on the right side of the chart shows you the point that the class that the law school has reported that was the 25th percentile of the class that entered law school in the fall of that year. so, for example, that first school on the list the top of the bottom core tie of the class had a score reported as 151 on the lsat scale. for those of you who don't remember or don't know the lsat scale, it runs from 120 to 180. so to put this into some kind of perspective, you can just take a look at the far right, you will see whether the school has maintained or not maintained the same level of incoming students. now that's not to say those students all finished or do they all finish at the school where they originally enrolled. this is simply an indicator, it is not dispositive. but it certainly, if you take a look at dr. bolis' last slide, and contemplate that and contemplate the fairly wide range of admission criteria. and the way the schools have really tried quite valiantly to meet what has been a drastic drop in applications. the one thing i will show you comparatively at the bottom of this chart is that where for california law schools, the overall drop in enrollment from 2010-2016 ran about 25.5%. in california was a 25.5%. overall, aba schools have dropped closer to 29%. so essentially you will see in a subsequent chart, i think there has been a decision on the part of some schools to hold on to enrollments, perhaps to their disadvantage in terms of our passage. the next chart is the national chart to give you a sense. this expresses in these four quartiles whether schools reduced enrollment or reduced their 25th percentile. and you will see that there is actually only one school. it happens to be a school located in california that managed to improve in both areas. but if you look, the dots speak for themselves, essentially this is what has been going on nationally over a period of time. and the following chart shows you, specific to california, what's happened with the lone school that has improved its entering credentials and increased its enrollment. all the other schools falling at bottom quartile of lower 25th percentile lsats and lower enrollment. i picked up off of a blog, i'm sure this is probably available information, but if it's on the blog, it must be true. i gave you in rank order, the 25th percentiles on the lsat from the top school to the one that reported the lowest. and then i also reported the first time taker performance on your bar exam in july. and you can see that some schools actually improved year to year, or over a three year period. and the reason that i picked the years that i did, the people who entered in 2013, that is the lsat number are likely the people who graduated three years later in 2016. the next chart gives you the array of jurisdictions that use, that scale their exams to the mbe to give you a sense, i have given you two ways to look at it. one is from essentially the weakest credential in the country, mbe score which is in wisconsin, to the most demanding which is delaware at 145 which you have already seen. and to the right i have just given you the states alphabetically, if you have a favorite state it would be easier to find it. the next two charts i think will be informative to you. i thought you might be interested to know that the cut scores on the mbe, where california falls. and obviously i am so relieved to know that dr. bolis' data and mine agree. california with its 144 is perched pretty far to the right. the next chart is the one that shows mbe mean scores. that is the mean score of the exam in july 2016. and not too surprisingly you will notice that california is pretty far to the right. it does quite well. one of the phenomena that we notice is that when you set a higher standard. test takers tend to try to reach it. and so it should not surprise you that california in a bar exam where the average score was 140 or so, that california test takers actually exceeded that. the next chart is the one that i was referencing earlier. if you take a look at the red line, that's the number of examinees in california and you can see it is slightly down. but notice that nationally the number is down. the graph is turning down a little bit more. it tells you that california is holding on to more people. and because of your cut score, you are also feeding more repeaters into your system. so you keep your numbers up. when you have a lot of people fail the july exam, they are going to turn up and sit in february and it is going to throw your numbers up. it is the reason why when you look at the total number tested in new york and california, they seem fairly close. but if you take a look at how many people take it in july in new york and pass and don't show up again in the system, their february numbers are quite low. it is intuitive. the next chart is simply a more graphic representation of exactly the same information. we had dueling researchers working on this and i did not have the heart to not put both charts in here. the next item is, again, the july scaled scores from 2011 to 2016. and you can see that nationally, the red line, they are starting to improve at a slightly higher rate than they are with the blue line in california. but this also expresses the same thing dr bolus did, showing you that california means were actually higher than the national mbe means. and the examinee counts though, which is that little bottom right hand corner, show you that california is holding on to more people and they're drifting away more on the state side. and the next chart, again, i did not have the heart to leave it out. the following chart, the one with the dotted line, the red dotted line, shows you the percentage passing the july exam from aba law schools over time. and you can see that that passage rate is down. but that red line is a little more encouraging than the blue line. the blue line is dipping, and that is you, and the national line is flattening out. and we are not out of the woods in terms of these enrollment numbers. if you go back to that second chart i gave you of the states, you will notice that there is still a falloff of applicants who entered law school in 2015. that's going to be reflected in the test taking that we see in 2018. the lsat 25th percentile is represented there to show you that the california test takers actually, as a group, are a stronger group of admitted lawyers, or admitted law students, than are the nation as a whole. and i would hope that would encourage you to think that california law schools are attempting to attract and retain a strong group of applicants. next, i show you just the difference in a chart that looks, i do not know, like an hour glass, where i got rid of part of it. it shows you where california fits in the national scheme in terms of your mbe mean from year to year. this is comparing 2015 and 2016. and you can see that roughly half the jurisdictions actually improved year over year between july 2015 and 2016. california was very close to being flat, but still below, losing some ground. the reason that some of those jurisdictions are up are there are specific reasons to the jurisdictions that i will not take your time to explain. but i can tell you that i do believe that some law schools are really heaving hard to try to address the issues that were identified out of the july 14 exam. and i would speculate, without any data to support it, that we are also seeing a reflection of the fact that there's some educational initiatives that are going on in law schools that are making a positive difference in terms of the preparation of law students. and finally, and perhaps compellingly, i would hope, these last two charts are designed to tell you two things that i think are very interesting. the first one that is headed july 2016 california mbe performance as a subset of the 12 items that were common to a previous exam. on that previous exam, the average mbe score for all of the candidates was a 144, or 1440, in your language. in 2016, it was a 140. in other words, because we know that's an equated exam, and because we know that a 140 on this test, it means the same things as it predecessor test, we know that there was a decline in the knowledge demonstrated on those 12 items. it is simply supporting information. and down below we did the same thing with those 12 items, looking at national numbers, which showed a decline, that are matched by a decline by california test takers. so there is supporting evidence that we are looking at a different caliber of student. not a huge change, but we are looking at a change and it is a negative change. and finally, as another piece of supporting information, applicants nationally take a test called the multistate professional responsibility exam. it is a two hour test on their knowledge of ethics. you will notice that the mbe mean and the mpre mean, it supports they are in decline. the reason that they are not completely in sync is because most people, a majority of people, take the mpre while they are still enrolled in law school. so they hit us at an earlier point than they hit the bar exam. but it is incontrovertible that we are looking at a decline. so it is not the test. something is going on. it is reflected in not just the bar passage numbers, but it is supported by other evidence. and it's a very troubling issue, and one i'm frankly very happy you're interested in addressing. thank you.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 131, 'end': 134, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 245, 'end': 250, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2205, 'end': 2210, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4813, 'end': 4818, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6694, 'end': 6699, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Barry Currier: good morning, my name is barry, i'm the managing director of accreditation and legal education at the american bar association. for a law school to be accredited by the american bar association, and actually it's the council of the section of legal education and admissions to the bar of the american bar association that's the actual accreditor. the aba, as a trade association, can't really control the standards. it's our council that sets them and applies them. to be accredited, a law school must operate in compliance with each of the aba standards of approval for law schools. these standards are in a variety of areas. they're pretty intuitive. the program of study that a school must require, the teaching resources that a school must assemble, the student services that a school should provide, the admissions program of the law school, facilities, information resources, and the like. one of these standards in the program of study area requires a certain level of performance by a law school's graduates on the bar exam. the reasons for that standard, at least as i understand them, are that the bar examination is a reflection, at least to some extent, of the soundness of a school's program of legal education. there should be and there is, has been, some relationship at least between bar exam outcomes and the quality of the program of education offered to students. and b, most students go to law school to become lawyer and the bar examination is a hurdle that must be jumped to obtain that law license. the council as it should respects the competency determination, cut score, that jurisdictions make. it really has no choice. whatever the states in which a law school's graduates want to practice is the market that that school's graduates must meet and the program must be designed to do that. the specific causes for declining bar passage outcomes in california are not, at least in my mind known and they no doubt result from a combination of factors. one fact is known, california bar exam takers outperform takers in other states on the mbe portion. that's the closest thing we have to a national measure. indeed, the california average is higher than the national average by several points. the letter that the california deans sent to the supreme court makes that point. the aba standards require a lot of consumer information to be disclosed, but in the current environment, that disclosure standard is not as effective as it should be. more is needed, a meaningful bar passage standard is part of that requirement. the present standard is complicated and it was adopted in a different era where bar passage rates were a lot higher. the council is proposing to change that standard to make it simpler and to be more responsive to the current environment. the council recognizes that bar admissions is a state by state matter, but the council observes the state's authority and power to regulate admission to practice comes with the responsibility and that responsibility is to design and administer bar exam that's fair and appropriate for the profession, the public, students and law schools. to be accredited, the school must be able to attract people and educate them sufficient to jump that hurdle at a reasonable rate. the standard posits that a law school whose graduates sit for the bar exam should pass in reasonable numbers within a reasonable period of time. if not, then there's some evidence that the law school may not be offering a sound program of legal education, and further, there's a risk of exploitation. if schools cannot meet a reasonable bar passage standard today, given the cost of legal education and the constrained job prospects graduates have if they cannot earn a law license. schools should not admit people who cannot take their programs and pass the bar in reasonable numbers. if that is so, then it is difficult to understand why the pass rate in california is so low. and the fact that it is, may be unfair to students and very disruptive nationally for law students and law schools. absent a compelling reason, such as a reason to believe california test takers are less competent or that the standard to be admitted to practice in california must be a lot higher than elsewhere in the country, it seems reasonable to suggest that california should align its passing threshold with other states, particularly other large states. that is, it should exercise the authority that it has to accept the admission standards responsibly. the council has not met since the dean's letter was prepared. it hasn't met since this hearing was called, so i can't speak officially for the council. i can say however, that i believe from recent discussions at the council surrounding bar passage that most council members would support the type of recommendations offered by the deans. make some sort of temporary adjustment to bring california more into alignment with the rest of the country and then go through the study that has been proposed. you can also say for what it's worth, that the council exercising its professional judgement concludes that a 75% bar passage rate in two years after graduation is a reasonable expectation to place on schools. that rate, together with the attrition that's allowed, actually allows law schools to succeed, that is, get to bar passage.  only 60% of the students that it admits who end up graduating and sitting for the bar. so there's plenty of room within this envelope for schools to admit people, not just driven by the numbers, to add to diversity, mission serving admissions, and the like. and so the 75% together with the attrition is the rate that the council has settled on. last point i'd like to make is the problems and unfairness that results from the california cut score. it may have actually existed for a long time. this rate has been, the cut scores has been in existence for apparently 30 years. and i think it's a mistake to say something is going on, maybe that was always too high a rate. and that there are a lot of people who took the bar in california and should have passed and been given the chance to practice who never got that chance. what's happening now is the applicant pool is declining is that we're exposing that the impact of that high score. it's just becoming more manifest as the applicant pool has declined, law schools are adjusting dramatically, i would say, to the environment in which they're now operating but they may not be adjusting as fast as the market for law students or law graduates is adjusting. so we're in a transition period here. and i think on of the things we're seeing is that yes, it's true that 25th percentile scores are falling at many schools. perhaps there's a problem with admissions. the council deals with that. but that phenomenon is really just exposing what may have been, all along, too high of a cut score and i hope you will take that into consideration. thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Samuel Chang: Good morning. Thank you for inviting me to speak today. My name is Samuel Chang and I'm a second year law student, the student body President of UC Hastings and student director on the Korean-American bar Association of Northern California. I'm also the 14th secretary Governor and serve on the AB law student division Board of Governors. But I do not speak for or on behalf of the ABA or the Law Student Division. Today, I'm testifying in my capacity as a California law student. I come to shed some light on how the decline of bar exam passage rates impacts students. I receive comments and stories from ABA law students members in California. So, what's important to law students? First, an affordability of their education and second, subsequent employment after graduation. The low bar passage rate exacerbates both. Simply put, no bar, no job. But this has emotional impact too. Here's some words the student's of law in California have used to describe the bar passage rate today: traumatizing, demoralizing, terrifying, deflating, and devastating. It's not simply a mere inconvenience to not pass the bar, the bar exam period is long and expensive. Right after a grueling three years in law school, another grueling three months of no pay, mounting debts, and continuous studying accompanies these students as they prepare for the bar exam. So imagine missing the threshold by 0.7% like one of the students. This student felt disheartened that, despite taking a commercial bar prep program, they could not pass and start their legal career or think of another student who lost a job offer at the Public Defender's office because they failed the bar. Subsequently, that student could no longer afford to live in the apartment they were in, and had to move back home. Yet California students, because of their low bar passage rate, is not any worse than those from other jurisdictions. In 2012, California students from ABA approved law schools pass the California bar 20% higher than those from out-of-state ABA-approved law schools. Last year California students still passed 3.3% higher than those from out-of-state ABA-approved law schools. If the California bar passage is any indicator, the quality of California students is in fact higher than those of out-of-state students. Naturally, this frustrates many California law students. This frustration has consequences. Students may choose instead, practice in a different jurisdiction simply because they have a greater chance to pass the bar there. The high financial incurred risk has prompted students to reconsider being in California. This means that California may lose lawyers simply because of a score. Many law students have written that they love California and they chose a California law school to practice here. But what's the point, they write, if they cannot pass the bar. Such a shift means less lawyers for the growing population of California, less lawyers to protect consumers Less lawyers for the state, less lawyers for legal aid.  In having a higher threshold for bar passage, California stands to lose quality attorneys all because of the bar and stands to widen the so-called justice gap. Low bar passage rate means a greater chance of unemployment for another year. Not many law firms or organizations are willing to retain students who have failed the bar. No job means an inability to pay the loans. The low bar passage rate does not just end job opportunities, but it influences it. A school's low bar passage rate excuse an employer against its students and may prevent students from receiving a job offer simply because their school's bar passage rate was low. The low bar passage rate by a school affects the reputation of the school, in turn, all the graduates of that school. Even students would base, in some manner, the success of the school on bar passage. Simply put, a low bar passage erodes students' and employers' confidence in the school, irregardless of what that bar should mean. In turn, students feel that because of a low bar passage rate, they, as students, feel second rate. And so, some students have expressed a lot of anxiety over a larger black hole of debt. Multiple retakes of the California bar exam mean more law students have to add to their already burdensome debt by paying again the $830 bar examination fee. Not to mention that the interest is beginning to accrue on their law school debts. My analysis of the Standard 509 forms of all 21 ABA-accredited law schools found a higher number than found in the white paper. On average, a student without any financial scholarship would accrue $226,851.71 in tuition and living expenses. On average, living expenses amount to be about 58.27% of what tuition is. However, even if we were to take into account that 67% of all law students receive some grants, the average debt would be $129,417, assuming that all students receive the median grant of $22,363 for three years. But the cost can be even higher. Most law students still have outstanding undergraduate loans. Some students have placed their whole life on hold just to do law school. They work hard to get jobs after graduation, but without the ability to pass the bar, they're left back in the place they started, only with a considerable amount of debt. But it's not just that. A low bar passage rate feeds into the predatory bar prep industry. The fact that top bar pass companies charge upward of $3,995 without publishing their bar passage rate is concerning. But add in the $830 bar examination fee, $677, if not using a laptop, each time one takes the test, another $2,000 more for bar prep, a few more thousands for living cost during that time and that's considerably more than the $148,167 average salary a lawyer receive in California. But that's the salary for all lawyers, not entry lawyers. According to the National Association for Law Placement, an average salary for an entry level lawyer in a public interest or a government entity ranges from $44,600 to $51,100. That means, even if a public interest lawyer were to give up their entire salary to pay the loans, they would still not be able to pay off their law school loans for more than three years. And then adding that, delaying a year to retake the bar only exacerbates that. But as it is, legal education also take the hit from a low bar passage rate. Students become more worried about passing the bar than getting a job. Instead of taking clinics or legal work, they stay at school and take more bar courses. One student phrased it well, that the great irony to be a lawyer is that all I have to do is to be more unprepared for the actual job. Even when the bar prep company does, there's no guarantee that one will pass the bar. For example, Themis, one of the three most popular bar prep companies, only had a 66% first-time pass rate in California and 77% pass rate for those who completed 75% of the course. But what are students supposed to do, not take it? They take this financial gamble because A, everyone around them seems to be doing it. B, they are encouraged to do so, and C, they would rather put in money to increase their possibility of passing the bar. But this is parasitic upon law student. Bar passage companies, not law students, not the California public, benefit from a low bar passage rate. Legal education was not made to teach the bar but teach practical skills and experiences to be a lawyer but the bar exam make legal education all about being better test takers than better lawyers. The bar fails to test the competence of law students. One student wrote that quote, the skills of a great lawyer cannot be measured by written exam. It is counterintuitive to choose to pass the bar but not give up the skills to be an attorney. Students have made it clear that despite a diminishing bar passage rate, the last thing law schools should do is throw the baby out with the bath water, and should continue instead to train lawyers, and not just teach the bar.  I've heard that the bar is a bar of confidence. But if it is of confidence, I hope you ponder this point, if US Senator Kamala Harris, former Dean of Stanford Law School, Kathleen Sullivan, and two California governors, Jerry Brown and Pete Wilson cannot pass on their first try but were wildly successful as California's Attorney General, a top law school dean, and governors of our great state, what does that say of the bar? Indeed, a student pointed out that a time test where one is required to memorize rules in and pull them out of one's head in a timed environment is something that no competent attorney would ever do when representing a client. And they agree, stating that the practice of law is not shotgun decision-making or racehorse exams. The white paper makes it clear, a lower threshold on the bar exam means a higher bar pass rate but a lower threshold, as one student puts it, also means less students putting their life on hold for another six months to retake the bar, less students who are unable to pay back their loans, less students who are unable to be lawyers. A lower threshold on the bar exam will also be life challenging. In response to failing the bar, a UC Hastings student committed suicide. So I ask, could this student have been here today if the state bar had lowered its threshold? Possibly. I leave you with this last quote. The UC Hastings Dean wrote letters soon after learning about the suicide of the student, writing, this is not the only story we need to tell, nor to hear. We need to hear that how we score on an exam is not the measure of our potential as a lawyer, much less our worth as a person. So, in recent times, the public has realized the importance of lawyers. There are many good law students in California. There can also just be as good and many good lawyers. And that starts with changing the arbitrary standards of the bar examination. And for that, I urge you to take action. Thank you.
[{'start': 67, 'end': 79, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 8107, 'end': 8120, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8158, 'end': 8175, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8207, 'end': 8218, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8223, 'end': 8234, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Salena Copeland: Good morning, my name is Salena Copeland, and I am the Executive Director of the Legal Aid Association of California and we also call it LAAC. And I am also a member of the State Bar Standing Committee on the Delivery of Legal Services. So in my role LAAC, I work with 100 legal nonprofits that serve as the invisible legal safety net for low income Californians who may need access to an attorney to help them with their legal problems. Whether it is help with a domestic violence restraining order, help with being taken advantage of for the work they performed, or perhaps help when they're stranded at LAX or SFO. So, here in California we have a justice gap. And I think that this background is really helpful when we are talking about how the Bar exam's low passage rate affects legal aid organizations and the clients and communities they serve. So, for every one attorney, every one legal aid attorney in California, there are about eight 8,000 Californians who are eligible for those services based on their income alone. So, for every one legal aid attorney at Legal Services of Northern California, at Lake County's Legal Services, Watsonville Law Center, there are 8,000 thousand people eligible. So, there have been a lot of studies trying to measure that justice gap, and they use turn away data. So they look at the number of people who walk in a local legal aid organization's front doors and they see how many people that organization can serve. And most of the studies show were about a 25%, were able to meet about 25% of the need. And there has now been some interest in looking at the unknown unmet needs. So, all of the people out there in the world who have legal problems or have life problems and they do not realize there's a legal solution and an attorney can help. So, this gap in California is really a chasm. We don't have the resources to help all the low income Californians, seniors and people with disabilities who need help. So legal aid organizations try to bridge that chasm by strengthening the safety net and hiring recent law graduates as legal fellows. So, typically fellows serve in one to two year terms beginning in August or September after the July Bar exam. Fellowships are a great way to launch a public interest career largely using outside funding from law firms, from the law schools that the students graduated from, or from foundations and individual donors. So, and this is actually a great way to get a job before you have your Bar card and before you can represent clients in court. And I started my career as a legal fellow. So, what happens when a fellow does not pass the bar exam on her first try? What happens when multiple fellows from the same organization don't pass the bar exam on their first try? It undermines the organization's ability to serve their communities and fewer clients are served. Fellowships are typically designed with the first couple of months getting the projects started under the supervision of an attorney. With the clear assumption that based on past information those fellows will have passed the July Bar exam and will be able to represent their clients in court in December. So, and of course file their own motions. So, if a fellow doesn't pass, she'll need one to two months off to study again. And then if she studies and passes for the February bar exam, she won't know until May if she passed. So, for fellows who are in one year positions like I was, virtually your entire fellowship is served as a non attorney advocate. And this means that fewer clients are served because you are not in the office as often and also you cannot appear in court. All you can do is a lot of the background organizing work and another attorney must help on your case. So, what this means of course to the program is fewer clients are served. And in my project, for example, which was now nearly a decade ago, I organized justice best trips bringing urban law student to rural California to serve legal clinics. And if I had failed the Bar exam, and had taken month or two after study, literally 100 of client wouldn't have been served, because I was the key factor in making sure those clinics were pulled together working in partnership with local legal aid organizations, but depending of course, on law students as our working power. So, I have talked with a lot of legal aid leaders around the state to see if they notice the difference with the 2016 Bar exam pass rate. And without fail, everyone I talked to noticed the difference. So, and everyone I talked to spoke of the impact on their clients. So, one large program in Los Angeles, for example, for the previous three years all of their fellows had passed. However, in the most recent year, 2016, both of their fellows failed. So, those projects are on hold. And another program where fellows also usually past in the past, four of the six fellows who took the Bar exams in 2016 failed. So, those are four people who should be attorneys, should be representing clients and are now taking a time off to study for the Bar exam. And again, they won't know until May if they pass this time and can represent their clients or not. Many fellowship projects are completely on hold, or they have changed substantially in recognition of the fact that the fellow cannot serve clients in the same way. So, I want to turn briefly to talk about diversity in the legal aid profession. Earlier this decade my organization produced a recruitment retention report and I can send the link for anyone who wants the data. The report focused on the ability of legal aid organizations to recruit and retain talented attorneys throughout the state. And what we found, of course, that this is particularly difficult to retain attorneys in rural parts of California. The competition for better paying work as a legal aid attorney is actually quite stiff. It is very easy to go to a large law firm or to government work when you're a smart attorney. So, legal aid organizations try to hire from the communities they serve. They actively seek out people who come from low income backgrounds, who come from immigrant families, can speak languages other than English, or people of color. And I am sure this Committee is not surprised to learn that the majority of the membership of the State Bar is actually white and largely male, but legal aid attorneys, by contrast, are not. In our recruitment retention report, which is actually about a decade old now for the data, we compare the diversity of the bar to legal aid organizations, and legal aid organizations are majority women, and we are about 50% people of color, and actually probably more now than we were at the time. And the reason why this is relevant, as you can see from the State Bar's statistics on their website, that especially on the 2016 Bar exam, the Bar passage rate for women dropped considerably and the Bar passage rate for people of color dropped considerably as well. And so, that is why legal aid noticed the difference. That is why they saw the differences, because they hire so many women and people of color. So, one program that actually serves Assemblymember Reyes' district shared that they all ready struggling to recruit attorneys to work for legal aid in the rural area. The low Bar passage rate effectively shrinks their applicant pool, and makes it even harder. So, I'm very concerned about the weakening of the safety net, and especially the safety net in rural California. So, I just want to thank you for the opportunity to share how the low Bar passage rate affects low income Californians, and I'm happy to answer questions after everyone else.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 137, 'end': 141, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 251, 'end': 255, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7155, 'end': 7160, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mitchel Winick: Thank you, Mister Chair. And thank you to the members and to the staff for having this hearing. I've enjoyed and Learned much today. One of the best things about batting cleanup is I don't have very many things I need to reiterate. I have very little I could add to the works of, the words and the data from Mr Bolus, Mr Currier, Mr Chang, and my other colleagues here. I would like to put a little more meat on the bones of the question that you asked this panel which, what is the impact on consumers and the public interest? My law schools, I am Mitchel Winick with Monterey College of Law, I am the Dean of Monterey College of Law, San Luis Obispo College of Law, and will be opening Kern County College of Law this summer in July. So, two of the members here are my Assembly Members. So, I know it is a friendly group, they know the communities I am about to talk about. But when Dean Furlow talked about the policy question, I think it's very easy to forget that one of the policies that the State Bar and this body have established for years is, how are we going to deal with the justice gap in the world of counties? And it is easy to focus on the counties where I have law schools, and say, well, those are coastal communities of great wealth. Except all of those counties, Monterey, Santa Cruz, San Luis Obispo, San Benito, and Kern County are rural counties. The population of those counties is growing to be Hispanic, minority-majority counties. As much of California is going. The population of attorneys per 1,000 of population in California is approximately 4.3. So that's 4.3 attorneys per 1,000 citizens. In Kern County, it's 0.9. In Monterey County, it's 1.9. In San Luis Obispo, 2.6. Santa Cruz County, 2.8, and San Bernardino County, 0.9. It's easy to sometimes look at the major cities and say there's plenty of lawyers and plenty of opportunity for representation, but as the Legal Aid Associations will tell you, it is just not true in the rural counties that we serve. Percent of Hispanic population in California is approximately 38.8%. The percent of Hispanic attorneys in California is 4.2%. 38% of population, 4% of the attorneys. Comments were made that I heartily agree with, that if you bring individuals out of the communities where they have lived, where they have families, where they work, educate them in the law, the odds are the vast majority of them will go back to serve those communities. That  is what our law schools, and most of the California credited law schools do. This cut score is a lot of discussion about math. But lets talk a little about the result. And a number have talked about that. Let me focus on this at-risk population that we serve, the growing Hispanic population in our rural counties. The first time pass rate with a 144 score in 2014 was 75% for white applicants and 59% for Hispanic. In 2015, 65% for white applicants, 51% for Hispanic. The numbers make a difference. I do not have the answers, but let me leave you with a question which is, who's failing between 133 and 144? Now many of us have ideas, but the State Bar actually has that data. And I would ask you to ask for that data and share it to all of us, because I believe you're going to find that the results of that study will show that it directly addresses the representation of the communities that where our law schools are. Let me finish with one thing, particularly for Mr. Kiley, you showed some great concern about the relationship between the LSAT score and bar pass rate. Let me ask you to consider one other thing, as well. There is no doubt that standardized exams disproportionately affect nontraditional students. I have great concern for my communities, that if we look for a shiny bright line using a standardized test like the LSAT, and say you should limit access to legal education by this one exam, you will add to the challenge of our communities. So it is, I applaud you for looking for relationships but those numbers do have additional impact. Our data shows, because we take a broad range of individuals with LSAT scores, that the LSAT score for students with scores much lower than any of the ABA schools would ever take, is that it is not an effective predictor. It certainly should not be a barrier for giving them the opportunity to succeed in law school, because what our scores also show is when those students succeed in law school. They pass the bar at or higher rates than the others. So, it becomes a bit of a chicken and the egg. I do not have the answer. I will just leave you with that thought. Please be very cautious about looking at single numbers, without looking at the broader scope of the effect that will have. Thank you.
[{'start': 311, 'end': 316, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 321, 'end': 328, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 333, 'end': 338, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 549, 'end': 563, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 885, 'end': 896, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3409, 'end': 3414, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Karen Goodman: hi, so, my name's karen roger goodman. i'm chair of the committee of bar examiners and i'm a native of sacramento as well. i apologize for being late this morning. i had a little bit of a meeting that ran longer in roseville. so, i think the main point for the committee to remind themselves is the mission of the state bar is pubic protection. and that's really the core of which we operate in and the core upon which this committee of bar examiners has to examine the issues that are before you and certainly the question of the exam has to test the minimum competence for lawyers at the entry level. it certainly doesn't at this point deal with an issue near and dear to my heart, which is making lawyers practice ready. if the question is what do we need to test? i certainly would advocate a closer look of requiring whether we consider a provisional exam. or we move to a direction of having a situation where law students have to have certain units in the practice field. because that's what, as i am a person who is employed law students, lawyers, etc., for 32 years. i'm also a lawyer that does this work for a living. i defend lawyers, i also prosecute lawyers in terms of the malpractice area. so when people say, competence isn't an issue? competence is an issue. this is our first and for many cases, the only opportunity that the bar has to actually test lawyers. in a reason that you say that, is while we're in an era of specialization, you will look around there is not that many lawyers in the state that a state bar certified specialist. that does require an exam and that is in contrast to the medical field where you will look most of the doctors become certified in a particular specialty. this is our only exam. so we need to make sure it is rigorous. we need to make sure it covers a wide variety of subjects. and a couple i want to note cal evidence, cal civil procedure and business associations. you don't have to be a trial lawyer to know that in the course of your career, you will have issues that concern evidence. because if you're going to go out into the inner cities or the rural communities, you need to frankly be a generalist and being able to issue spot. so even if you never set foot, i'm a trial lawyer, never set foot in a courtroom. you need to understand basics of evidence. you need to understand basics of california civil procedure and you need to understand business associations. frankly, that has changed dramatically since i graduated from law school in 1984. i'm not even sure we had a limited liability company at that point. so my point is i do think we need a rigorous exam, i do think that we need to work closely with all the law schools to determine how we can meet the needs of the consumers and meet the needs of the law students as they come into our practice area. and i do think certainly that as we've done in the bar, looked to a pipeline of developing people who are knowledgeable in civics, who care about the justice system, that become the people that end up applying for law school. so, i am concerned about the decline in the admissions for the california state bar. that's why we actually went out this year in december and moved to immediately look at what are the causes? what can we do about it? and i think we do need to take a close look at the cut line which is frankly what we're doing right now. and in so, with that i think i really, frankly, i'm grateful that this committee is interested in something that seems to be only nerds would be interested in. and i look forward to the opportunity to working with you, answering any of the questions that you have even now and after this committee meetings. so thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erica Moeser: I'll just speak briefly to mention that or to bring you home to the fact that a bar exam, and I'm Erica Moeser with the National Conference of Bar Examiners, you're handing out a general license to practice law. You're distinguishing yourselves from the doctors who have a staged examination program which ultimately takes people into specialties. You're also dealing with a population that is going to graduate from law school. Many of whom do not have jobs, do not know where they will work. You may have your upper crust who have it all figured out after their summer of their second year. But many lawyers don't know where they going to land and at least the research information I have seen is that a number of lawyers, new lawyers, find themselves moving from job to job in that first five to seven years. So even where they landed in the first place isn't where they end up. So, bearing in mind, we're interested in a general license and we're dealing with some harsh realities. One of them is the need to efficiently and fairly determine how much is enough and what do you need to know. And that is the result of a collective judgement. And I find myself flattered to be in this good company, the 9th Circuit to have a so-called validity study. Our validity study which was conducted by an external organization produce some information. And indeed if the state bar does one, you may very well elicit other responses. It's just important to go on the quest for knowledge and do the best you can when you have it. But ultimately, multiple choice testing, which it is very difficult to find anybody who was born a fan of that, allows us to efficiently learn what people know and the multiple choice questions that you may write in the privacy of your own home are very different from the multiple choice questions that we develop and edit, and edit, and edit and ultimately pretest before they show up on our examinations. They are designed to go at knowledge, but also reasoning and analysis. And to the extent that one sweeps aside the value of a 175 item test, that's also giving candidates a 175 chances to show what they know. And if you give an essay exam, you may give them six or seven chances to show that they know it. It gets much closer to Russian roulette. The broader you can sample, the better. Obviously, there are time constraints. Many, it comes down to dollars and cents for a lot of jurisdictions on how many days of testing can they afford to do. And also, if you will, the reliability of using other formats for testing. There's a great deal of appeal in the medical profession for the standardized patient exam. Where actors act out being sick and would-be candidates get to figure out what's the matter with them. But we also know that that is a very, very expensive test to deliver and it has fairly low reliability because it ultimately is subjectively graded. So any time you decide to adjust what you test or how you test. You really have to make a judgement over whether it's fair, whether it's practical, whether from both a delivery standpoint and a financing standpoint. It's not easy and I hope nobody asserts that it is. As far as the value of the LSAT, the LSAT correlates quite well with the performance on the test, it's difficult to say one should ignore it. But actually, in state after state, it's taken a look at what is most predictable of bar passage. Inevitably, it seems to come down to rank in class in law school. That is the single element that seems to be most predictive, which always raises the question of how the needs of those who are not in the top of the class are being met. And for those of you in the room who do not understand that there's a tremendous variation in quality of law schools, they are not all alike. There are indeed tuition mills that operate because federal loans were available and students are exploited. And that's the reason the ABA has standards and in fact, is attempting to adjust those standards to recognize that law students are consumers too. And just as the bar exam is intended to protect ultimate consumers of legal services, the ABA standards were intended to protect the consumer who's going to law school and that's, I think, a worthy objective, so that's out there.
[{'start': 98, 'end': 110, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Elizabeth Parker: Well, thank you very much, I'm Elizabeth Parker, and I'm the Executive Director of the State Bar of California. But today, I really have two hats, and that is as a former Dean at a law school, McGeorge, where I served for 10 years. I am, however, not an academic because I came from three years, actually, of practice to McGeorge in a wide variety of areas. And I must say beginning as someone doing civil rights in the deep south, moving on to legal services, and a number of other points in between, the State of our legal system concerns me greatly. It should concern all of us, particularly, as we see the national scene developing in ways that are troubling. and a number of other points in between, the State of our legal system concerns me greatly. It should concern all of us, particularly, as we see the national scene developing in ways that are troubling. And so we need to have a robust and a healthy legal system, no question about that. And so we need to have a robust and a healthy legal system, no question about that. And the producers of this legal system, if you will, are our law schools. And we want them to be healthy and effective too. But let's be frank about the national context, we have a crisis. Now the crisis I speak of is a dramatic drop in the number of applicants to law schools. Law schools that are struggling in many cases because they are all, all Yale on down, tuition dependent. And this kind of a drop in applications is obviously a very serious matter. At the same time, looking broadly, both at California and nationally, we have inadequate legal services. We do not, as you've heard today, have enough representation. When you look at the courts in California, and you say 85% are not represented, you must ask yourself how do we solve the problem? And so I congratulate this Committee for putting your hand on something that is vitally important. And the studies I think that the state bar will be undertaking have been informed by this hearing today. As to the cut score, let me share with you, I am not a member of the California Bar. I dare say I would have flunked, as Cathleen Sullivan did. It's a tough exam, we all know that. For many years, it was seen as a point of pride that it was such a rigorous exam. But perhaps it's time now to look again. Is it doing what we want? Is it a fair exam? It is effectively set at the cut score it is? When you ask why is it set at 144, I'm embarrassed to tell you, there's no good answer. Well, it's always been that way. And when we went to the MBE, we calibrated that against what we had done previously, it was 70%. Well, why was it 70%? Because that was a passing grade in law school. I'd suggest that may not be an adequate answer. But there's a further question I think that arises. And that goes to the context here in California. And Jim, I really thought your remarks were excellent. We have a uniquely open system for preparing to practice law. So unlike any other state, we have not only our ABA schools, 21 in number. We have 20 California Bar approved schools, and we have some that are not accredited at all. So the aperture for moving into preparation to take the bar is very wide. The question I would ask is, was that high cut score set in recognition of that? Since everybody could participate and become, what shall we say, ready to take the bar, was the barrier then at how high a level of performance we expected? I don't know the answer to the question. I will say to you, however, that you are absolutely right. This must be studied, it will be studied, and it will be studied in short order. There will be other studies as well and in particular, the validity of the test, I think, is something we have to look at. And you've raised a number of other issues as well, for which I thank you and hope that this conversation will not just be a one time exchange of information. This is a vitally important topic, it's something that the bar does embrace and we'll be back to you with the work that we do on it.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 193, 'end': 201, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2117, 'end': 2134, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2832, 'end': 2835, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dean Barbieri: good morning. my name's dean and i'm the dean of the law school at john f kennedy university as well as the university provost. but i'm not here in my capacity as dean of the law school and provost, rather in my capacity as a former bar grader and former director for examinations with the state bar of california. in 1982, i started grading the california bar exam and graded every bar exam in the first-year law student's examination from 1982 to 2000. and at that point, don't laugh, but it's probably around 40 to 45,000 essay and performance test answers that i graded over that period of time. in 2001, i had the good fortune of being named the director for examinations with the sate bar of california, where my duties included the development, administration, and grading of the california bar examination, as well as the oversight and regulation of the 17 cal bar accredited law schools. i'm here today to, a couple of things were brought up that i thought deserved some additional information. one of the things that has been the subject of a lot of discussion is the need to re-examine the minimum cut score. i have no doubt that that needs to be done and needs to be done quickly, unfortunately a number of times and a number of speakers have said we need to study this. in my experience with the state bar means studying means 2 and 3 years and doing cut score analysis, task forces. and oftentimes those results send the equivalent of a punt. and i don't think it's appropriate, and i don't think the schools of the state of california have the ability to withstand two to three more years of declining enrollment and issues associated with accreditation. so i would encourage you and your colleagues to really study this in a rapid fashion. and, thank you, and to consider having an emergency lessening while the study gets done. i know the aba schools put forth a proposal for 133, mine would be different. mine would be 139 or 1390, because 1390's what is currently used to get into a second read. those people in phase grading that achieve a score of 1390 and less than 1440 go into a second read. and if they are over 1440 after the first read, they pass, if they're below 1440, they fail. my understanding and belief, and dr. bolus would have the information, is a vast, vast number of those people who fall within 1390 and less than 1440 either pass on second read, or pass on a subsequent administration of the examination. why? it's not because they're more competent. they haven't learned anything more. they've learned how to better take the test. they've learned from their mistakes. and in the meantime what that's cost is time, and money, and they've been out of the workforce and it's impacting the communities and i know i'm short on time. one thing to keep in mind is, already we are admitting people to practice law in california that do not meet the 1440. we have multi-jurisdictional practice, and under that, in-house attorneys, as well as legal services attorneys from other states come in, and can practice law in california, with limits. but they're not under the disciplinary system. they haven't been a problem. so someone can be from alabama at 128, come in. we don't look at what their score is. they are here practicing and in the capacities associated with the in house and multi jurisdictional practice. so thank you very much for your consideration of this very important topic, and of course if anyone has any questions i'd be very pleased to respond.
[{'start': 2246, 'end': 2251, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Shirley Weber: Good afternoon, why don't we begin on time so that hopefully we can make good use of our time and respect for the members' times as well. I'm Assembly Member Shirley Weber, chair of Sub 5, the Budget Committee dealing with public safety. And this is our first and probably we've had another informational hearing but one that's really pertaining to the budget and hopefully we'll be addressing some important issues that will drive us as we consider the budget itself. We don't have to have a Corum but we will call the roll, and I'll have the secretary call the roll.
[{'start': 158, 'end': 171, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Drew Soderborg: Madam Chair, Members, Drew Soderborg, Legislative Analysts Office. So today we'll be doing a presentation to give you a sense of different types of law enforcement oversight processes. The sergeant should have passed out a handout that is in front of you right now. If you turn to page one of the handout, you'll see a summary of the topics that we'll be covering today. There's four different examples of law enforcement oversight processes that we've put together information on. It is important to note that there are other forms out there, but these are a few we wanted to highlight. These include internal investigations, local civilian review boards, external auditors, as well as oversight provided by the California Department of Justice. It's also important to note that, in many in cases, a single agency will use more that one oversight process. So for example, San Francisco uses Multiple of the oversight processes that I just talked about. So if you turn to page two, you'll see a description of the internal investigation that's done by many state and local law enforcement agencies. Agencies that use this oversight process use their own internal staff to investigate allegations of officer misconduct. For example in use of force incidents the officer involved could be reviewed by multiple levels of supervisors. If the investigation revealed that the use of force was unnecessary or excessive, then an Internal Affairs division could perform an investigation. These investigations generally involve interviews of the relevant parties as well as witnesses. Depending on the law enforcement agency, the responsibility for disciplining an officer might rest with a single entity, such as with the agency itself, or a City Council, or it could be spread among multiple agencies, such as the agency itself and its city manager, for example. If the officer is found to have violated agency policy, he or she could be disciplined, to such as being suspended and or terminated. Officers could also be found to simply be in need of additional training to prevent future incidents. So if you turn to page three of the handout, you'll see a description of local civilian review boards. So some local governments use a group of civilians, typically appointed by city councils or county boards of supervisors, to review use of force incidents and other complaints. In some cases these boards review a law enforcement agency's internal investigation to determine whether it was conducted appropriately or if further investigation is necessary. In other cases however, these boards will use professional investigators of their own to investigate cases. Some local civilian boards do not review all use of force incidences or complaints, and instead they only review more high level ones or ones that represent a greater public interest. In cases where civilian review boards investigate specific incidents, these boards can hold an officer accountable by administering the punishment themselves or just by recommending that some form of discipline be administered. In cases where civilian review boards do not investigate specific incidences, these boards can make recommendations for the agency to resolve the problems that are identified by other investigators such as the internal investigators I mentioned before. So, if you turn to page four of the handout, youll see a description of how some agencies use external auditors and the oversight process. When an agency uses external auditors, they will typically use the external Auditor to conduct an actual investigation or to review an investigation already completed to identify any inconsistencies with agency policies. Some external auditors report the results of their investigations to additional entities such as the City Council, county Board of Supervisors or a civilian review board. External auditors who investigate individual cases can review incidents to determine whether the officer's actions followed agency policy and recommend whether disciplinary action is necessary. External auditors who review already completed internal investigations are typically used to confirm the results of the investigation. In either case, however, these external auditors will make recommendations to local law enforcement agencies to change processes that they've identified to be deficient. So if you turn to page five of the handout you'll see discussion of the reviews done by the California Department of Justice. So the California Attorney General has a constitutional authority over all state and local law enforcement agencies. As a result, DOJ can decide to investigate a law enforcement agency regardless of agencies' internal oversight policies. More frequently however, law enforcement agencies ask DOJ to perform investigations on their behalf. This might happen in cases where there are multiple agencies involved in a single incident. At any point DOJ can also launch an investigation to police misconduct or take over such an investigation from a law enforcement agency. If DOJ finds evidence of criminal misconduct the officers involved can face prosecution. So, that concludes my presentation. And as I said to begin with, these are just a handful of examples of the oversight that law enforcement agencies are subject to. And I'd be happy to answer any questions now or after the others have presented.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Song Richardson: thank you, madame weber and members. i'm song jonah richardson, i'm senior associate dean for academic affairs, and professor of law at the university of california, irvine school of law. i'm here today to discuss very briefly police community relations and more, specifically racial disparities in policing. typically, when this issue is discussed, the conversation often focuses either on accusing officers of racism or of saying that community members have acted in objectively suspicious or threatening ways. what i want to suggest and talk about a little bit today is something that most have not heard of, and this is something called racial anxiety. and i want to speak about this psychological process because it's very important to police community relations and it's something that's often ignored in these conversations rather as i mentioned the focus is on officers or community members or unconscious racial biases. so let me talk a little bit about racial anxiety and why it's important. racial anxiety is meant to have us think about how anxious people feel when they engage in interracial interactions. and what social psychologists have found is that these interactions between white and black community members for instance, can cause great anxiety. and these anxieties work like this. for people who are in dominant groups like police officers, social psychologists have found that those officers who are most afraid of being interpreted or perceived as being racist, so officers who are most concerned with being evaluated as being racist by members of the community, have been found both in the lab and in real life, to have used force more often against young black man than man of other racial groups. i'll just say that one more time because it's counter-intuitive. officers who are most concerned with being judged to be racist are actually more often the same officers who use force against young black men in the community. this has been shown by social psychologists. there is absolutely no relationship between conscious racial bias, and this concern, this racial anxiety, this worry about being judged to be a racist by a member of the community. so the question is why is it that an officer who may be consciously egalitarian but who worries about being viewed as racist, would use force more often against young black men? so let me talk about why police community relations are so important, and why some form of community policing is important. this is why. officers are often trained to rely on their authority, their moral authority as officers, to control a potentially threatening situation. however, if an officer is dealing with a member of a community who the officer believes does not give the officer any legitimacy because the community member believes that the officer is a racist that officer views that situation as being more dangerous. and as a result of viewing that situation as being more dangerous, that officer is more likely to rely on his training which tells that officer that in a potentially dangerous situation. you should enact command presence. you should take control of this situation. to deescalate, right? to make sure that it doesn't end in danger, in a shooting. the problem with that is from the community member's perspective, that community member is also suffering from racial anxiety. that community member is concerned that the officer is actually a racist. and so the community member is demonstrating both cognitively and physically the manifestations of anxieties, such as fidgeting, lack of eye contact, being unable to really listen to the orders that the officer is yelling and ordering him or her to do. and so when both the citizen and the officer are suffering from this racial anxiety and the officer is enacting command presence, and the citizen is worried that the officer is about to treat him in a racially, discriminatory way. when those two things, when two people are suffering from this anxiety that situation is much more likely to end in the use of force even when the officer is consciously egalitarian and the citizen is not engaged in criminal activity. so the anxieties on both sides of an interaction can lead to violence. the reason why then community policing the right type of community policing and i can talk more about that in the q&a. the reason why that is so important, is because building trust and building understanding and building legitimacy between communities and the police is one demonstrated way of reducing anxiety on both sides of this police citizen interaction. so the right type of community policing and police accountability is a second important piece because if members of the community continue to see officers in their communities. those few officers who are engaged in problematic policing practices that prevents the building of trust between members of the community and members of the police. so that i think i'm out of time. so that's all that i will say for now but i'm happy to take questions. thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 23, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 41, 'end': 62, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eric Jones: good afternoon chair and committee members, i'm eric song jones, chief of police for the city of stockton. thank you for inviting me here to discuss this important issue of community relations today. from the police chief's perspective, this issue has never been more critical. and we also know that reducing crime is very important, that's one of our report cards. but we also know that actually us confidence within their police department is not tied to that. it's actually tied to how well they're trusted within those communities. and so the relation as well between violent crimes especially in our communities of color, and levels of trust within the police departments are directly related. and so we know, especially right now, tensions in our neighborhoods across the state, across the country, are very high. we know this is based on historical events of american policing. we also know there are more recent issues and events across the state, across the country. and they're also tied to traditional blanket law enforcement tactics which we as an industry have moved away from to be more data driven. and those blanket enforcement tactics did reduce crime, we know now. but for a very short time, not sustainable and also at great peril to the community trust, it eroded it. so the good news is we have common bonds put between police and community. we can all agree on two things. we want safer communities and we want to reduce the amount of negative police interactions and, how do we get there? it's through what we believe is through policy, leadership and culture, accountability, transparency, training and outreach. and i'll talk a little bit about some training that we've been working with with the state attorney general's office, as well as post, peace officer of standards and training, on something called principled policing, which has elements of what you've heard today. but certainly there is the procedural justice component which has four pillars. fairness, giving a voice, transparency, and impartiality. and the research shows that the end result of a police encounter does not matter to the individual as much as the process that they went through, how well they were treated. that actually matters more than whether they got a citation or whether they got arrested. and that's what procedural justice is, the process they took, which then leads to, police legitimacy, which is whether the community views their law enforcement department as a credible authority. and whether they do or do not often relates to the type of interaction that's going to go on. again, very much tied to what you heard from the professor today. and we work on implicit bias training. we've worked with tracey meares out of yale. dr. eberhardt out of stanford as well as dr. guff out of ucla. to design some implicit bias training specific to law enforcement and what we've done new is bring community members into the very same discussions. so they're actually having training together and they could talk about a lot of these issues. one thing that comes up is what types of programs and agency culture contribute to strong police community relations. there are a variety of programs, a lot of programs that are very helpful, from community relations units, outreach teams, that have proven very successful. but, just like community policing, it can't be a program. it has to be much more than that. if it's just a program, you're not actually department wide philosophically making change within your department. it must be in my opinion, institutionalized and operationalized on a regular basis. a couple examples, just with the stockton police department, if we put in to our strategic plan, is everything rests upon two pillars of which we do. one is intelligence led policing, smarter policing that's being data driven in what we do, and that's how we do our job. the other pillar is why we do our job and what we stand for, and that is the principle policing pillar. that equates to the procedural justice and police legitimacy training. that also regards the community outreach. my point here is that it has to be an umbrella for everything that relates to our values. and the culture of the department. so that's the principle releasing as driving from our most senior officer to our rookie officer out there. why they do the job in the reason they sign up for it and the reason they wear the badge. we're fusing this into our training, but also into our policies. and we've been working with the center for policing equity, as well as the urban institute to, again, put that into our policies and procedures to ensure it's being institutionalized. there are also cross collaboration with other city departments and community organizations that can help us maintain strong police community relations. when it comes to policing and the relations with the community. it's important that have other city departments working with the p.d, police departments have to take lead because we carry the burden. the badge carries the burden of. some of the injustices we've seen, the historical piece of law enforcement. so we instituted what we call the four layers of getting community input. one is public forums, everybody's doing them and everybody has to do them, they're very important. drilling down a little bit more into neighborhood based meetings, then into listening sessions. and we've actually been working with the national initiative on building community trust and justice. stockton is one of six pilot sites across the country, doing this work. actually also doing racial reconciliation in our communities within stockton and in the other pilot sites as well. and also a listening tour with the city manager and myself. point being, is the city manager showing a city wide commitment? so this is the police department taking lead but the city is committed as a whole. other groups that we've worked with we've designed a community advisory board, 24 members cross section of our community. will have the mission statement of improving community relations and have driven what are known as courageous conversations which are talking about race relations head on now in communities between police officers and the community members. so these are just a few of the examples of the collaborations going on, we have since some early results. from investing and improving police community relations as we all know trust is not just something that happens overnight. but we have seen increased trust through increased information, willingness to talk, tips on, for us to help solve crime, that's gone up. so we're beginning to see some results. both anecdotally and as well as based on the metrics we're using. we now use trust as an actual metric. the old compstat model relied just on amount of arrests, amount of citations. we now use trust and trust building as a metric for our police department and where we want to go. so in conclusion, i would just say community trust is not for a police warrant, it's not a destination where you get there, and you say, we've done it. it's something that's on-going and always will be ongoing. and it's something that has to be institutionalized at all levels within the police department. so i'd like to again thank the committee for the opportunity for me to speak today, and i'll be available for questions after.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 63, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2717, 'end': 2730, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2748, 'end': 2757, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2789, 'end': 2793, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kim McGill: Good afternoon, my name's Kim McGill, I'm with the Youth Justice Coalition. I'm honored to be here today, and really encouraged that you're having this conversation The youth justice coalition is led by people who have been directly impacted by the system. We have been detained, incarcerated and we've worked with numbers of families whose loved ones have been killed due to use of force. So our first initial work in this issue came because of direct experience. But as we worked with families we realized that we didn't No one in LA on that, and we're from Los Angeles, had a real clear picture of how many people this was impacting, of how many people it was impacting based on a commitment to policies that were in place such as a very strong LAPD Commission. But where those policies weren't being enacted, and where we stood in comparison to other cities in the state and across the nation. So we first attempted through public record act request to get lists of how many people were getting killed in LA County through the sheriff's department, and LA City through the Police Department. We have 57 law enforcement agencies in LA County which is overwhelming, and so we picked those two agencies first. And we weren't able to get any data. They ignored this public record request. We eventually took the families that we were working with and started to collect their stories and looked at other stories that were happening in the community and then compared the data we were collecting to with the coroners office and got a complete list from the coroners office. So now we have what you have in your packets the most exhaustive list Of people that have been impacted by use of force homicides from 2000 through 2015. And soon we'll be able to give you all the way up until the present moment. Some very alarming things resulted as a result of getting that data. And I'll explain some of those results in a minute. The other thing we wanted to see then was what was happening with investigations. because our district attorneys going all the way back to 2000, both DA Cooley and now Jackie Lacey hadn't prosecuted a single case. So we were alarmed by that. And the community had been consistently alarmed, and families very angry by that fact. So we put in a public record request to District Attorney Jackie Lacey. And got all the reports from the DA's office regarding use of force from 2009 to 2015. So my comments are also based on the data we got there. The community volunteers and family members who loved ones had been killed coded all of that data. Read through all of those reports and you have one of those reports in your packet, which is Michael Nina's case. As well as the memorandum of understanding between the District Attorney's office and all law enforcement agencies in LA County which I'll speak to in a minute because that's one of the things we found particularly problematic. These are some of the things we found in our research as well as our investigation on the cases we worked with directly but now has been proven through the larger research. And since 2000 through March 2015, which is the data you have, at least 666 people have been killed in LA County by use of force. This dwarfs all other cities in the nation even when you compare for population, in addition 98% of the victims were male. 9% of LA County is African-American but 28% of the victims were black. Majority of the victims. Over half were under the age of 30. It looks like, although we don't haven't got all of this data subsequently through our research so far, but it looks like that about 40% had mental conditions. The vast majority were not armed. And even in the cases were people were armed, that armed was including. People that had a tree branch, people that had a pipe, people that has screwdrivers. Some people that had knives and running a community center. And taking knives away from people on regular. We could not understand why it always result in a shooting in our county it looks like it does. The DA's reports from 2009 to 2015 also revealed in Michael Midas example, you have it, it's highlighted for you in yellow highlighter. That every single report from the DA's office had the same paragraph. That they're entire analysis was based on the information they got from the law enforcement agency that was responsible for the use of force. It proved to us which we had had in conversations with the DA's office, that no real investigation is happening, and that most of these cases are cold by the time the DA gets the files. They usually get the files from the law enforcement agency between six months and 18 months later. They do send a team out to the scene on the night or the day of the incident. But past that, they don't open any investigation or engage in any investigation until long after the incident has happened. We think that that memorandum of understanding as it exists in other counties and cities should not exist and it means that our local district attorneys are unaccountable or unable to really do any investigations in these cases. We also think it's unrealistic for local Das who have to make all their cases with local law enforcement, to be objective in these cases. And so one of our recommendations to this State. Is that we, and we urged Kamala Harris to do this when she was the Attorney-General, is that the Attorney-General's Office needs to investigate and have a whole team that's really active on the ground as independent investigators and prosecutors on these cases. The other thing that we found that was particularly troubling is that nearly all of the killings, and you'll see on the data that we gave you, the top page, that the majority of the use of force was with A weapon with a gun. Out of more than 300 that we just looked at through a period of time, not all 666, the vast majority all but four were shot. Most of these shootings are happening also under 30 minutes of when the police arrive. This is the other thing in our findings that we were particularly disturbed by. It means that whole incident is not being slowed down. The deescalation is not occurring. And that none of the backup that's available in our county and our cities is being called. So with 40% of incidents, it looks like having mental conditions, but we couldn't find a single case out of the 300 cases that we looked at so far where a mental health team was called out. Even though we have funding and those teams are on place in our communities. Lastly, we assumed like many people across the nation that this was in part or at least in large part an issue of race. And that one of the things that was being called for across the nation was the larger recruitment and hiring of people of color and women onto the force. So we looked at LAPD and LA County Sheriffs regarding that too. In comparison to other cities and counties, LAPD and LA County Sheriffs have some of the most integrated departments in the nation. They're fast approaching 50% people of color and also women being very large contingent. And yet their use of force is the highest in the nation. So I think the assumption that people of color will better know how to interact on the streets. And that people of color that are experiencing interactions with people other than their own race is also something that we have to look out for. We have many Latinos, for example, killing or shooting African Americans. And we'll have soon the data for you on how it plays out racially. Because now, looking at the DA's data, we can tell you what the race is in some cases of the officers. So these are our recommendations moving forward, and we've tried very hard. We fought for a robust Sheriff's Oversight Commission, which just had its second meeting. We are now fighting for a Probation Oversight Commission, and we've gone regularly to the LA Police Commission to try to make it as important as possible. So this comes also out of that work. There's three areas we want to urge your leadership on. And if I run out of time, you just stop me. A minute. The first is oversight of local enforcement, and we think there's several components that have to be a part of it in order for it to be strong oversight. One is that civilian oversight bodies have to made up of civilians, of people who aren't former or current law enforcement. Second that they have policy oversight, that they can direct, change, incorporate, and write new policy for departments. Third, that they oversee the complaint process. The complaint processes that we looked at, whether it was in custody or on the street were mostly non-existent. Where they did exist, there wasn't any real investigation. They weren't taken seriously. In the case of LAPD, there have been hundreds of complaints. Not a one substantiated for racial profiling. So the complaint process we feel has to be a part of, being both created and overseen by a civilian complaint, a review board, or a oversight board. That an Inspector General, if there is one, we agree there should be one, reports to the Commission and not to the Department. And that they work on behalf of that Department. I mean, of the Commission, sorry. That the Commission have subpoena power, and can call witnesses, and that they can enter into investigations. And one of the things that I really appreciated on Mr. Soderberg's presentation, there are four typical models of civilian oversight or community oversight. But one that has never been employed is a fifth model that we'd like the state to look at which is elected fully elected community oversight.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2074, 'end': 2083, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2092, 'end': 2104, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2311, 'end': 2323, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2660, 'end': 2674, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4073, 'end': 4086, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5297, 'end': 5310, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8732, 'end': 8736, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 9348, 'end': 9357, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Caitlin O'Neil: Thank you, Caitlin O'Neil, Legislative Analyst's Office. Good afternoon, Madam Chair and members. You should have a handout called overview of felony sentencing in California. I'm going to provide an overview of the different types of felony sentences. Discuss some alternatives to felony sentences and explain how felony cases are typically resolved. On page one, I'll start with an overview of the three categories of felony sentences. The first category includes death and life without the possibility of parole. Reserved for offenders convicted of the most serious offenses. The second category is what this called indeterminate sentences. And individuals who are convicted, who are sentence and determinitently receive a minimum term with no specific maximum term, such as 25 years to life. After they served the minimum term they will appear before Board of Parole hearings, who will consider whether they're ready to be released from prison. The third category of felony sentence is called the determinate sentence. And individuals first sentence determinately receive fixed terms and are released after serving these terms. And based on their offense and their previous offenses, these individuals may serve that term in prison or a county jail. On page two, I'm going to discuss factors that affect the lengths of determinate sentences. And the first thing that's important to know is that for each offense, statute specifies low, medium, and high terms of incarceration. This is known as the triad. And to determine which of these three lengths of time is applied to the sentence, factors surrounding the crime and factors relating to the defendant are considered. Now offenders can often be convicted of multiple crimes at once and in this case they would receive a term for each offense. And they may be required to serve these terms consecutively. Meaning each term would stack up back to back to create the full length of the sentence or they would maybe allowed to serve the terms concurrently. If they're required to serve these terms consecutively, they would serve an amount of time equal to one of the triad terms for the offense that would yield the longest term in addition to one third the middle triad term for each other offense in general. And sentence length can be increased by what are called enhancements. These are specified in statute and in general there are two types of enhancements. Conduct enhancements, which are imposed of certain circumstances occur during the commission of the crime and status enhancements, which are imposed based on offenders criminal history. And on page three, I'll discuss two alternatives to felony sentences. The first alternative is felony probation. And unless prohibited by law, felony offenders may be placed on probation in lieu of serving a felony sentence. The offender may be required to spend up to five years on probation and up to one of those years in county jail. Offenders must agree to certain terms and if they fail to follow these terms of probation, they may be required to serve a felony sentence. The second alternative I'll discuss briefly is called collaborative court. And offenders maybe be referred to collaborative court programs under certain circumstances. Again, they must meet certain requirements. And if they fail to meet these requirements, they may be required to serve a felony sentence. On page four, I'll provide a brief overview of how felony cases are resolved. The first step toward resolution is often plea bargaining. And in a plea bargain the prosecution and defense negotiate over the charges that the prosecutor will bring, and the sentence or alternative to sentence as I mentioned earlier that the prosecutor will seek. And if they come to an agreement, the judge must approve the bargain. If the defense and prosecution do not come to an agreement or can not come to an agreement, the judge may inform the parties of what he or she would give the defendant if the case came to his or her courtroom. This is called an indicated sentence. At this point, the defendant can plead guilty to the charges and receive the indicated sentence offered by the judge, or return to plea bargaining. If the case is not resolved by guilty plea it would proceed to trial, where the prosecution determines what charges are brought against the defendant. A jury typically determines if the defendant is guilty of those charges and the judge determines the sentence. On page five, you'll see a pie chart, which shows how felony cases were resolved in 2014-15. As you can see from the largest slice, the dark gray slice, that about 80% of all felony cases were resolved through the offender pleading guilty prior to trial. While only about 2% of cases were resolved through a trial. And this concludes my prepared comments I'd be happy to take questions at the appropriate time. Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Johnathan Simon: I'm I next? Yes. Johnathan Simon, UC Berkeley. Thank you so much for having me up here today and for taking on this difficult, difficult question. First thing I want to say is you're not alone. We have a surge of students at Cal right now that are just engaged with this issue, and they're ready to work in your offices this summer and do other things to help. This generation really gets that this is a big issue, and they want to participate in solving it. What I think about, is the history of penal ideas and penal policies, and kind of the big long view. So let me take that for a moment, and we can answer questions about the details maybe in Q and A. When you look at the history of penal ideas, it is a history big ideas. John Howard came up with the idea the cellular prison in 1789 because he thought it would cure jail disease and crime and it's still with us almost 300 years later. Solitary confinement invented by the Quakers at the beginning of the 19th century has had an up and down career in penal trends. We've seen other sort of penal ideas that come and then go and maybe disappear forever. Penal treatment was the big idea of the World War II era and Governor Warren was a huge proponent of it. And I could talk about how much it transformed California's landscape, but the indeterminate sentence, the adult authority, all these things. That lasted for about 40 years and then it was replaced by what I would call the penal incapacitation model. And this is the idea that the way that prison can prevent crime is not by rehabilitating prisoners, but by simply holding them in a place where they can't commit crimes in the community. It's in a way a very despairing model of crime prevention, but it is a model and I want to talk more about it in a moment. I associate this with Governor Deukmejian's reign, but the point is that these are bipartisan ideas. Once they're in place, they pretty much capture every Legislator's right ideas, or legislative ideas, within that broad paradigm. Prosecutors, as well, they have more leeway, but they're basically working within the tools that are established by these big patterns. Again, we could talk about what this incapacitation model meant in terms of legislation, but you just heard it from her. Lot of options for creating very long sentence patterns, mass incarceration, overcrowding. Again, it lasted about 30 or 40 years from roughly the determinate sentencing law to Brown vs Plata sort of shock treatment to the system. Second thing I want to say in addition to you're not alone is I envy you. You're in a position to legislate at a moment where we're in one of those big idea changing moment. It doesn't mean that you'll be happy. I think Governor Brown regrets the big ideas he embraced in the 70s to some extent around this. And we never know how these things are going to play out. But let me just briefly talk about two issues. One, why is penal incapacitation long sentences for felony crime an idea whose time has come and gone? And secondly, what's next? I mean, what's the next big idea? I'd like to know that, too. So why did it seem like a good idea to expand the prison system largely in order to hold more people for longer periods of time beginning roughly in the 1970s. Although it didn't become codified until the 80s and then the 90s added on all the enhancement structure. Few reasons, first of all high crime, California experienced basically 20 years of escalated crime by the 70s. And often it was punctuated by horrific, high publicity crime. For those of us in the Bay Area the murder of Mayor Moscone and Supervisor Milk was an example, in LA the Tate-La Bianca murders, etc. These were what I called in my book, the 70s were years of feared with days of horrors sort of stuck in between and it certainly created the demand to do something about crime. Secondly, the leading penological theory of crime in that era was the we had a high population of high rate offenders not just in California, but in the country as a whole. For reasons that sociologist and others came up with theories for which we can talk about, but don't have time for right now. The other thing that's very important is our major tools of sort of mid-20th century social control look to not be working. We had used social science to study rehabilitation and we said, nothing worked. Now that was misstatement of even the evidence of the time, but we can talk about the details of that. We have done research on policing. I mean, the idea that police patrols could reduce crime was one of the signature ideas of the fifties from people like Chief Parker. But by the 70s, all kind of research just didn't work. Again, social science can be a bad thing. Sometimes it really hard to show in a fact where we aim to show the null hypothesis, to show that we can't prove an effect. So it's really, really hard to show that something works. Therefore, it's easy to conclude wrongly that it doesn't work. That may have been true with both policing and rehabilitation. We got rid of the public mental health system in this period, another tool gone. And looking around, we had a relatively small prison population. Our prison population was at a historic low, especially compared to the crime rate. So, the idea that we could actually take a bite out of crime by expanding the prison population and modestly at least increasing prison lengths was not a crazy idea. James Q Wilson advocated it in thinking about crime and a lot of other experts too. I think there's a lot of little evidence that it did work. I mean, crime is much lower today than it was in the 90s, but there's been careful efforts to estimate how much of it is due to long sentences or incarceration generally the high estimate is 25%. The low estimate is like 5% or 6%. We could talk in Q&A about how to think about that, but there's little evidence that it tracks. For instance, a state like New York which started reducing long sentences in the 90s had a much steeper crime decline than California which continued to invest in that strategy throughout the beginning of this century. So, why didn't it work? First of all, it got too big. I mean, at the beginning when you had a relatively tiny prison population and a lot of crime, the next prisoner is a pretty high rate offender probably. By the time you've blown up the prison population by 150% and doubled that again in a few years, you're starting to deal with pretty low rate people who are not going to give you a lot of bang for the buck when you lock them up. Secondly, we got too greedy. It's like everything else. If you think a year of treatment is good, how about five years of treatment? It's gotta be better. Isn't always the case, especially when you take, keep in mind that you're talking about people and people change and that's the big problem with the penal incapacitation theory. It basically assumes that people stay the same, but the person who's doing 10 burglaries a month at 20 is doing 10 burglaries at 30, 40, 50. And of course, they expect Simon to write 10 articles a year now and I don't feel like it and they have incentives to make me do it. That's how it gets done, but people, otherwise, begin to level off over time. So finally, what's the next big idea? I think the most important next big idea really pivots directly off of this which is that we've gotta look beyond the inside of the brain of the person who quote, commits the crime. Not that they're not responsible or unimportant, but criminologists today don't think that it's really the big explanation for crime patterns. We're much more interested in things like hotspots that explain patterns of prime that happened over and over. So it cant just be going on the head of the person, because it Putting on a monthly, weekly basis that we can track statistic with. We're much more interested in the potential to explain crime based on people's social networks that they're involved with, based on their routine activities. Those are all things that we can intervene in without long sentences. So, I think I'll stop there.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 730, 'end': 741, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1182, 'end': 1188, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1809, 'end': 1819, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2442, 'end': 2447, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2725, 'end': 2730, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3593, 'end': 3600, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3616, 'end': 3620, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4619, 'end': 4625, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5428, 'end': 5442, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7054, 'end': 7059, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dan McAlare: my turn i am dan eric mcalare. i'm the executive director for the center on juvenile and criminal justice and i have been around this field for 30 years now. with my agency i'm one of the founders of it in san francisco and we have been following the sentencing issues for that entire period. and i won't repeat what jonathan just laid out. the issue of sentencing in california has been huge. we've gone through a 30-year bubble. if you go back to 1852 and you look at the incarceration rates when our first prison opened, san quentin, and roughly up until the 1980s the incarceration rate did not change. it was about 150 per 100,000 some ups, some downs, but really remained relatively flat. i passed around a graph showing that. it was really in the late 1980s that suddenly everything changed. and partly because of the change in philosophy that johnathan laid out incapacitation theory. the determined sentencing act of 1977 which essentially eliminated rehabilitation as a sentencing goal. and from that point on all judges had to look at was the actual crime and little consideration for the individual. and from that point on the incarceration rates sky rocketed. and i've been through all the different public committees, the study groups, throughout the late 1980s, 1990s, into the 2000s, all the policy discussions, and for a long time there were no solutions. that the normal solutions evaded the normal political processes. but i'm happy to say that as a result of supreme court decrees, lawsuits, and the actions of this legislature and the governor, and voter initiatives as well, that that has changed. and we started to make headway. moving the sentencing practices, at least the rate at which we incarcerate, kind of back to historic levels. we are not there yet. we have a long way to go and there are multiple issues that we could talk about today, multiple issues i could talk about and most of the people around this table. so what i'm going to do, what i thought i would do is take just this opportunity to focus on one. when we talk about sentencing practices in the state of california, there's a tendency to think of it as kind of monolithic. the state, you folks write the laws. and then it's then incumbent upon the courts to enforce them. or in this case the counties, to interpret the laws, and then enforce it. what is i find astounding in california, is we have 58 counties. the differences in sentencing practices between the 58 counties, is it's different as alabama and massachusetts. you've got, in some cases, what i would call third-world incarceration rates in some of our counties. and we have failed to look at it through that lens, because there are differences. in other words, uniformity in sentencing is a basic principle which our sentencing systems are based. we do not have that in california. what we have are county-based sentencing practices. and even though they all operate under the same laws the act that will get you committed to prison in one county will not get you sentenced there in another county. and it is the way it is. it is due to a lot of things, politics, economics, culture, established practice, whatever it may be. but it's real. and you'll never institute long-term, meaningful sentencing reform, certainly one that adopts uniformity in sentencing, if we continue to allow these kinds of disparities to exist. so, on that small point, what i would recommend. what i came here to recommend is a number of things. and it's, over the years we've recommended sentencing commissions. and i've certainly, i think that's not a bad idea. but, i think that we have to start collecting information about county sentencing practices. we do it at my agency, we have a, on our website, we have a map of california where we outline every county in the state and their sentencing practices and a variety of metrics, you can go there. i think this has to be a state function. and i think this might be something that the leg analyst could take up or perhaps the board of state and community corrections, but a state body to begin looking at the sentencing disparities between counties. i think that one solution you could take, a legislative solution could be, is look at the statewide incarceration rate, and it's about 300 per a 100,000 right now. there's about 20 counties that sentence above that level. legislation could take into account looking at that average and impose some type of monetary penalty. if you sentence above, if you over-rely on incarceration or state sentence, state prison commitments. then, charge the counties that do it. because when counties overrely on prison commitments, other counties pick up the costs. so, san francisco, for example, where i work out of, i live in oakland. we have a hundred, we, san fransisco has an incarceration rate, state prison commitment rate of 150 per 100,000. it's the lowest in the state. kings county, i don't want to pick on kings county they have a thousand per 100,000. that's a rate that i think saddam hussein would cringe at. it's a third-world rate. so i think we have to look at it. and i think what we might want to consider is that is some type of monetary, i don't want to call it a penalty, but that maybe that's what we call it, if you charge over that average, if you commit to state prison over that average then counties should be charged. we've had success with this type of practice at the juvenile level. back in 96 the legislature passed charge-back legislation which certain counties were over relying on the state youth prison system. that drove down the incarceration rates very quickly. and moved us closer to at least some degree of uniformity, but i think we need to go that route, i think we're going to get any kind of a sensible sentencing system in california. and as i said, there's a lot of other issues. i'm looking at this one right now. i think we need to take some legislative approach. the last one i would suggest is, just going back to, we are localizing sentencing now through realignment and i want to applaud the legislature for taking us down that path. it was long overdue. going back to governor duke masion's 1990 blue-ribbon commission report where they first recommended it, so we finally got there. but i also would like to see rehabilitation reestablished as a real goal of sentencing, and maybe a primary goal in sentencing in california.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 317, 'end': 325, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 851, 'end': 860, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5022, 'end': 5036, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6163, 'end': 6174, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Robin Lipetzky: thank you. is this on? yes. my name is robin dan lipetzky. i'm the chief public defender in contra costa county. i've been a public defender for 27 years now, and it's really interesting to hear the history of how the pendulum has swung back and forth with our sentencing laws in california which has resulted as we all know in these very high prison rates that we have, not only in california but across the country. but, just to follow up on something nancy o'malley was just talking about, which is that the focus on the individual and we've been trying to get back to that, i think. i'm starting with realignment, prop 47, some of these other propositions that have been trying to focus more on what can we do to keep a person out of that revolving door. keep them out of the system. focus on the criminogenic needs that are driving their behavior and really improving public safety that way by looking at what's happening to the individual. so, i wanted to actually focus sort of concretely on a few specific areas to felony sentencing reform that i think can help us address some of those issues that we've moved so far away from. one of them is the issue of mandatory sentencing enhancements. now, we heard about the sentencing enhancements. we know the triad is the system that we have in place now where the crime, the judge has the option of sentencing to a low term, a midterm or a high term. they're supposed to look at the circumstances of the individual, the circumstances of the crime. all of that is well and good, that brought us away from the indeterminant sentencing on every case where the concern was, well, the judges, one judge is robbery is to 10 years and the next court judge is to six months. so, we're going to have some boundaries. well, what happened since that time is an explosion of enhancements that not only add multiple years onto that triad. in many cases, you have enhancements that a judge cannot strike that you get to the point where you've gone through a jury trial and the offender is sitting before a judge and the judge says, i cannot sentence this person to the sentence that i believe is fair, because my hands are tied. that's an area where i think we really need to focus our attention. it will cost us nothing. it will save us a great deal of money if we just give the discretion and i'm not saying, do away with these enhancements. there are some i'd love to do away with, but that's not what i'm saying here. what i'm saying is that there are enhancements that we should turn the discretion back to the judge where it belongs. what happens in these situations and i'm sure nancy o'malley will agree with me is that you, well, maybe she won't, but anyway. you have a situation where you have the district attorney offices having the leverage and the discretion, essentially to decide on sentences. a purview that really should be a judicial purview. because when you have an enhancement that's charged and you have some of them, for example, the use of a gun enhancement can add 10 years, 20 years or 25 to life onto an underlying offense that the mitigated term might be 2 years or 3 years. and what that does is it gives the district attorney the ability to say, you go to trial. the judge is going to have to give you 25 to life if you go down, but i'll offer you whatever it is. 15 years, 20 years. now that may be a sentence that the defense attorney, that the society in general that you all might thing is too long, a sentence for that offense. but that person has little option, but to accept a plea negotiation that may be out of proportion to the crime, because of the risk of the consequences that they may face at the end of that trial if they end up going to trial. so, what i'm saying is that we need to turn the discretion back over to the judges and take it away from the district attorneys. they have charging decisions discretion which they should have, but sentencing should be for judges and we have moved so far away from the situation where the judges make those decisions. some basic examples, i gave the 10, 20 life example for use of a weapon. five-year enhancements. someone's charged with a serious felony offense and they have a prior serious felony offense. five-year enhancement cannot be stricken by the judge for every prior serious felony offense. now, we can argue about well, we want those additional terms to continue to be committing offenses. but again, i would say, let the judge make that decision based on the individual in front of him or her and based on that person's situation. we have probation ineligibility clauses that cannot be stricken by a judge. a judge may be looking at somebody, they've heard all the evidence in the case. they've heard the trial. judge thinks this person can be successful on probation. they should have that opportunity. there are many situations where the judge just does not have that option. sex offense enhancement is another area where that the sentencing has just, all of the discretion has been taken away from judges. i want to give you a very brief example, a case that was reversed by the court of appeal out of our county just two weeks ago. a young woman was 19 years old. her father was having a party for his birthday. two assailants came to the party, attacked her father in front of her, in front of some other people. beat him up pretty badly. as they got in their truck, there's some discrepancy about what was going on, but her boyfriend gave her a gun, she shot into the truck. they were threatening, continuing to threaten. she injured one of the assailants in the spine. he had a permanent spinal cord injury. that case went to trial, it was charged as attempted murder and also with a mayhem charge. the jury found her not guilty of attempted murder said, it was involuntary manslaughter, attempted involuntary manslaughter. that carried a term of two years. they also convicted her of mayhem, because the facts fit that crime. that mayhem charge required the judge to give her an additional sentence of 25 years to life for this 19-year old woman. the court of appeal reversed that. and in doing so, they said that the legislature had provided only one punishment scheme for the use of a firearm and that that tied the judge's hands. and in that particular circumstance, the judge who wanted to have another option should have had another option. so that's just one of many, many cases that one happened to be so egregious that the court appeal found it violated the constitution as cruel and unusual punishment, bur many, many cases end up with these very, very lengthy sentences. that aren't going to get reversed on appeal, because they don't necessarily rise to that level. could you sum up please? i can, sex offender registration is another area that i think we need to return discretion to the judges. right now, sex offender registration is mandatory for almost every sex offense from the most minor misdemeanor, indecent exposure to forcible child rape. they're all painted with the same brush. judge does not have the discretion to lower that to a lower term or to impose, or not impose as the circumstances may be. i have other suggestions for to improve felony sentencing, but i'll hold off
[{'start': 39, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 454, 'end': 468, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2625, 'end': 2639, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sandra Johnson: Hi, my name is Sandra Johnson and I'm from Oakland too. So, I'm just hoping that the lawmakers will see that these enhancements don't stop crime. They don't stop
[{'start': 15, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anita Lee: great. anita with the legislative analyst's office. today, we will be providing you with an overview of the state's criminal fine and fee system, the key problems we identified with the system, as well as our recommendations for addressing those problems. the sergeants, i believe, have distributed a handout to you that we'll be using as a guide for our comments today. she's getting it. it's coming, okay. and so the state's criminal fine and fee system really has three stages, the assessment, collection, and then the distribution of criminal fines and fees. if you turn to page one of your handout, we're first going to take a look at assessment. and today, our comments are really going to focus on assessment and distribution.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jake Chatters: thank you, madame chair and members. the opportunity to talk to you today and provide some information about traffic fines and fees, and a little bit about the process that one goes through when interacting with the traffic court. i'm jake robin chatters, the court executive officer for the placer county superior court. i'm also currently the chair of the court executive advisory committee to the judicial counsel of california. ms. leese provided you with an overview of the complexity of the criminal fines and fees, how they're calculated, roughly, and how they're used to fund a large number of programs and core government services. those complexities to extend to traffic cases, although they do vary some, and the chart that was provided to you that shows the 37 distributions goes into that in some detail. i will say for a speeding ticket, for example, there are roughly 20 separate buckets of funding that a regular speeding ticket will be deposited into. but rather than duplicate ms. lee's comments for traffic fines and fees, i'd like to provide a very brief background for you on how the traffic court process works, and then specifically how it operates in my court, and then offer a few thoughts of what we, as three branches of government, will need to address as we work through solving the traffic fine and fee problem. i do want to hang on that point for a moment. we do have a traffic fine and fee problem. the complicated statutory makeup of fines and fees and assessments is hard to explain, and it makes even a reasonable base fine seem and perhaps be insurmountable to many. ultimately, we need to address the fundamental elements of the issue for the benefit of all californians. before i get to some items to consider, let me walk through a traffic case. so hopefully this doesn't happen to you. but if you happen to pick up a traffic case in placer county, you'll receive three notices from law enforcement and the court before you're ultimately considered delinquent. you'll receive a citation in the field indicating your date to appear or pay, depending on your preference. the court will send you a courtesy notice outlining your amount of your fines, fees and assessments. outline your options to contest the citation. pay in full, go to traffic school or establish a payment plan. if you fail to appear based on that notice, we will send you a failure of your appear notice which is now the third. informing you of your failure to appear and what you need to do to avoid referral as a delinquent case. all told, that process before we refer you and if you never make contact with us to continue your date or to set up a payment plan, it takes about 120 days or four months. at that point, if you haven't contacted us in any way, we will refer you to the revenue services department, which in our county, the county performs the delinquent debt collection. they will send you an additional four notices, spaced out over 90 days or another three months before referring you to additional collection practices. during that step of the process if you can contact them, you can pay in full. you can set up a payment plan or you can make a request to see the judge without making any necessary, making any payment what's so ever before seeing the judge. if after those 7 notices and about 210 days, individual still has not contacted with the court or revenue services. they will be referred to additional collection activity like the franchise task force, quarterly depth program or task center set program. i offer that overview to you only, so that it helps you in evaluating whether additional noticing is the answer to our traffic fine and fee problem and to clarify that enforcement actions are taken by the court only after considerable effort and attempts at communication. that process while lengthy doesn't address the actual cost of the traffic ticket, however, and explaining that final amount can be very difficult. if you come to placer county and you want to sit through our traffic calendar on monday and tuesday, you're welcome to come. you'll hear the commissioner as he goes through those cases indicate just as ms. lee laid out, your baseline is $35, and then he'll say to people, but don't be surprised. when you walk out of the clerk's office and talk to the clerk, the clerk will calculate your total fine and don't be shocked when it comes out to be about $240 and overall, the additional penalties and assessments add between 7 and 8 times of the base fine to the ultimate charge and that can be confusing. it becomes confusing for individuals who are trying to determine what has the court ordered versus what is simply the operation of law. and while those are confusing, they do fund multiple government programs and core operations as pointed out by ms. lee and in your materials, but i also want to address a second issue, and that is in addition to being confusing when you go to pay your traffic ticket, the fact that these revenues funded the court inserts both the perception of and the potential for a conflict of interest that complicates the judicial branch's role in policy level discussions. now as you discuss tools used for enforcement or you consider changes in the fine. and fees structure, the judicial branch desires to an active participant in that discussion of policy to provide our perspectives on possible impacts. too often right now, however, we are pointing out that these decisions may reduce revenue, but that doesn't mean we are not taking a stand on the policy itself, but instead, we are trying to call attention to the eroding budget of the courts and it reflects our fear that there'll be further erosion of our ability to provide access to justice in our community. and as one of the largest social service coordinators in california, we want to assure we continue to help the neglected and abused children in dependency court, to provide an avenue for those seeking protection from domestic violence, to continue to triage and direct those suffering from their illness, addiction and homelessness to resources, and as the judicial branch, we should be able to have a policy level discussion of what is right without having to call attention to the impact of that policy on our ability to provide access to all californians, but the current revenue structure in my opinion unnecessarily complicates that dialog. so as you consider alternatives to current traffic fine and fee structure, i just offer a few things to consider. first, reducing the overall costs of the traffic ticket, perhaps by reducing the added penalties and assessments that stack onto that baseline. you may wish to consider ways to swap funding sources as mentioned by the legislative analyst office to avoid the perception or the potential for conflict of interest that complicates the judicial branch's participation and policy discussions. the first place to start maybe civil assessment revenue and you may wish to consider alternative ways to encourage participation and accountability for those that ignore all communication during our court process. that may not be having the course request that dmv place a hold on someone's license and if it isn't, what is the appropriate replacement if any? so, i'd like to thank you for your time. certainly, happy to answer questions later and at least be able to provide you some ideas on how we need to look forward to working together on fixing our traffic problems. thank you.
[{'start': 235, 'end': 254, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 436, 'end': 441, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 999, 'end': 1002, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4166, 'end': 4169, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4814, 'end': 4817, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mike Herald: thank you, madam chair. mike jake herald with the western center on law and poverty. i'm joined today with brandon green from the east bay community law center. i will give a little bit of context about some of the challenges and the issues that have resulted out of the fines and fees issues that have come through this building in recent years and mr. green will be able to i think provide the perspective of what clients go through when they go through the traffic court system, and the experiences that they faced. so just very briefly as most of you know, this is not my day job. i'm a public benefits advocate at western center. i do a lot of budget committee work. my specialty area is cohorts and one day i was talking to a legal services attorney who was telling me about one of his clients who'd been had his cohort grant sanctioned which meant they get a cash reduction, because they didn't meet their work requirement. i innocently asked, why do they get sanctioned? he said, well, they lost their job, because they got their license suspended, because they couldn't pay their tickets and then they couldn't get to work and so they lost their job and they couldn't meet the work requirement, and then they got sanctioned. and i again innocently, why'd they lose their license? and he said, well, they couldn't pay a ticket, because it was really expensive and then once they got the suspension the amount of money, the only way they could pay it all off. it stays suspended until you pay all the money off and that sort of started this whole process of research and analysis, and why it was this was happening to our clients, and the reality is that under current law with amnesty notwithstanding which i'll get to in a moment. under current law, in general, there is an inability for people to get their license back once its been suspended for lack of payment. there is no real legal remedy, certainly not one that the average person can do without representation and we don't have enough brandon green's in the world to help all the people who are in this situation. so, what we found is that we essentially had two systems of justice. we had one for people like me who could pay their fines and walk out not get our license suspended or if we made a mistake and forgot to pay a fine and got suspended, i can get my license back, because i can write a check. we had another system of justice for our clients and that system of justice basically kept people in poverty for years and years and years, because what we've learned as we did the research was that people lost their jobs when they lost their driver's license. and when they lost their driver's license, they had great difficulty in getting another job after that. so, the result is people can't pay the fines off. they can't get their license back and essentially, they were stuck. now at one point, i actually appeared before this committee when mr. jones-sawyer was the chair of it and we requested information about the number of people would have their driver's license suspended. it turned out that there were over 600,000 californians who had their license suspended for a failure to appear or failure to pay. worse than that, we found that there were over 4 million californians who had gotten an fta as we call failure to appear or an ftp a failure to pay since 2006. over 4 million such situations, so i had sort of innocently stumbled on to gigantic problem, is what i had done. now, we issued a report in 2015 called not just a ferguson problem, which outlined all of these issues. it also, i agree completely with lao. these level of fines, i think, kind of snuck up on the legislature. we had a lot of bad budget years. it was easier to kind of assess these bad people who were doing things out in the community. so we kept kind of ratcheting up costs, it was a simple way to not hit the general fund, and i think this goes to the suggestions by the courts. you know this is a way that we got around, found ways to pay for things when we didn't have the general fund money to do it, but eventually those costs got so high that it really just outstripped the ability of literally millions of californians to deal with this problem. in 2015, when the governor heard, he saw a report, saw the data, he came out at the may revise and he proposed an amnesty program. this amnesty program went into effect in october of 2015. to date, it has helped about 135,000 people get their driver's license back. but it ends at the end of march this year. we'll probably get over 150,000 people their driver's license back and it's been a good thing, but when that proposal, when that amnesty goes away in april, on april 1, our clients are back in the exact same legal status as when we began this process three years ago. they will not have an adequate or any real useful legal remedy that they can use to get out of these fines and fees and i don't have to tell you that when we mapped this data last year on a second report that we did, it showed that disproportionately, these were impacting african-american. and latino communities hugely, especially communities of deep poverty, and worse than that, thousands of people in california got arrested for driving on a suspended license only because they couldn't make a payment on their traffic ticket cost just because they were too poor. so people were getting arrested and getting a criminal record just because of the way that we've set up these penalties. so the ripple effects of this policy are really profound, and they're creating problems for people throughout their lives. now as i said on, april 1 amnesty will end. senator hertzberg has a bill, sp185, to create a permanent remedy that largely mimics what the amnesty program does, so our recommendations are the following three high level points. one, is eliminate the use of license suspensions for failures to pay. as the data shows about employment and the inability to get jobs afterwards, that licensed suspension actually creates this cascading effect of poverty that people can't get out of, and there's little evidence that it actually works to help produce revenue. in fact, it might actually produce the opposite effect. it might actually be making it less likely that people can pay. second, we would propose a significant reduction in fees, fines, and assessments for people on public assistance. now, if the legislature can find the wherewithal to reduce those fees and fines, the civil assessments which haven't really been discussed here, which are another issue. they are $300 on top of the costs that you see put forth by the lao. you start to deal with those costs, that will be fine. probably the more practical solution is that we simply do an across the board reduction in those amounts for people who are unlikely to be able to ever pay those amounts. if people are getting a $500 bill for paying a ticket when the fail to pay, that's almost 75% of a grant. they're just not going to be able to make those payments. and then three, require that the remaining payment for those amounts be based on a real ability to pay. so, a person's on general assistance and getting $220 a month, and you've reduced the ticket. realistically, if you start to take $50 out of their check to pay back that remaining amount, you're going to make them homeless. those amounts have to be zero or five bucks at the most, and we just have to be realistic that folks have, we don't want to drive people into abject poverty. we want to be allowed to let them get clear with the law but at the same time, understand that their income and their poverty levels are such that we have to keep those payments reasonable. and we must require that all counties and all courts follow that ability to pay standard and with that i'll let mr. green talk.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 107, 'end': 120, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 354, 'end': 359, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2003, 'end': 2016, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2926, 'end': 2938, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3601, 'end': 3604, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5661, 'end': 5670, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7819, 'end': 7824, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brandon Green: my name is brandon mike green, i'm an attorney at the east bay community law center. i'm glad that this issue is being discussed within the broader context of criminal justice because i do see this as a criminal justice and racial justice issue. i'm glad to see my former boss, robin, was here to testify. i'm also happy that mr. jatter spoke about a potential reduction of funds and fees broadly, which i think is something that would make a lot of sense. just for context, at the east bay community law center, i started a traffic clinic where on wednesdays, people with traffic issues can walk in. those people include people who have moving violations as well as parking tickets. which we're not discussing here, but the same population of people impacted by the inability to pay to moving violations also can't pay $500 parking tickets. we then started a in-court clinic at the end of the month in alameda county where we basically take a public defender approach to traffic citations and represent people there. just to give a couple of quick client stories, i have currently a client who i've been working with for over six months, who at the time she came to us, had several moving violations and had been having her wages garnished and her taxes intercepted for over five years. now, this is important because she had applied for amnesty. but because courts were so far behind in processing amnesty applications, her application wasn't processed in a timely manner. and what ended up happening was is, she was being garnished for two tickets alameda county was reporting as paid, but the private collections company, alliance one, was still trying to take wages from her. so that resulted in us doing a information practices act request to the franchise tax board. what we found is, is she had been over-garnished by approximately $1000. now, as a regular person, it's almost virtually impossible to get information from say, alliance one, because when you ask to speak to a manager, typically, they say that, that person's in a meeting. similarly with the franchise tax board, it's very hard to get information from them unless you represented by an attorney, because most people can't navigate through their process, but even once you get that information, each one of those entities will take it that you have to follow up with the court. so in this case, i have to send the entirety of the information i got from each one of these to alameda county to say that my client had been garnished $4,000 more than she owed. and even then, when they did the analysis, they couldn't figure out what it is that she owed. so when you see that chart about the various ways money moves. it's important to understand that when you look at that chart there's real people behind that and in this case, it was only because we are currently engaged in conversations with alameda county or we're able to have meetings with the court executive officer etc, that i was able to get or start getting resolution for my client. similarly, when we talk about civil assessment, under the statute, the civil assessment can be up to $300, but in fact, what often times happens is, it's almost always blanket $300, which means that judges aren't using any discretion at all. they're not considering the totality of somebody's circumstances which they're supposed to do. they're not considering somebody's ability to pay which they are supposed to do and so then people end up getting these civil assessments that everybody knows that they can't pay, that the county is not confident that they're going to be able to collect on, and it just adds to more and more debt, and the legislature has the ability to be make decisions about how that kind of thing happens. so with the amnesty program, there was a decision made where if you owed victim restitution, you couldn't apply for the amnesty program. well the practical effect to that means that people who owe victim restitution can't get their license back which means that may or may not be able to be employed, which means that they may or may not be able to pay the restitution that they owe. so all of this is sort of a hyper-economic issue, but it's also a racial justice issue because we know that the communities that are over-policed are also the communities that have the highest proportion of suspended licenses. that recreates a sort of effect where people would never able to get from underneath that and it has ripple effects has already been discussed that, again, we're not discussing here but some of the things like having a misdemeanor conviction for a drug on a suspended license could make it, so that when somebody tries to apply say, through the department of insurance, to be able to sell insurance, they can't, because the department of insurance finds that misdemeanor conviction to be something that they see as disqualifying for a person, and that kind of individual, again without legal representation likely will not be able to get a job, because we now live in a sort of era where there's an expansion of professional licensing requirements. and i saw this directly when i worked in the public defender's office, where we had various clients who had driving on a suspended license, were too poor to pay. so every time you get a driver on a suspended license 14601 is about $1100. so if you get multiple of those at makes it harder and harder for you to overcome that. that enforces you deeper and deeper in to the criminal justice system where it results in mandatory jail time. it's almost impossible to get from underneath that and there because i didn't necessarily know better at the time we would say, well let's kick this case for six months for somebody to get their license back because if they got their license back from the da would offer them a 12500, unlicensed driver, which does not carry mandatory jail time and is less financial burden on people. but the practical impact of that is that most people could not get their license back within six months, which directly impacted what they ultimately were convicted of and had these various ripple effects, which it is that i've been speaking about. so i do think it's important to look at overall over haul of the fines and fees, and why they have expanded in the way that they have when we know that people can't pay. i also think that it's really important to take a real good look at the civil assessments and how they're being allocated. i've requested through public records act, requests and what not to see what it is that i believe, that everybody gets a $300 civil assessment, which doesn't make a whole lot of economic sense. and then, finally, because i know i'm coming close to my time, in the broader construct of the criminal justice system in the fines and fees, i think it's also important to take a look at making sure that the ability to pay exists everywhere, because there are certain fines and fees, even in the misdemeanor context, that when somebody who's indigent, they will need to go through the ability pay process and there's a couple of fines and fees that are not currently subject to that.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 278, 'end': 283, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 330, 'end': 336, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lizzie Bukin: Thank you, good evening. Excuse me my name is Lizzie Bukin with the ACLU California. Want to thank all of the panel members and the Committee for bringing this together. My comments regarding the first panel on police community relations. Just wanted to highlight that one of the biggest impediments to improving police community relations is the lack of transparency of for policing. California is one of the most secretive states in the nation when it comes to public access to investigations of police misconduct, violations of serious cases of violations of fundamental human rights are shrouded in secrecy including racial profiling, sexual assault, excessive use of force including deadly force. This is a very unbalanced system where the police have extraordinary power and there is no accountability for the public in to how police use that power, or abuse that power, and so, it's important to shift that balance, and that starts with increased transparency. So, I'm hopeful that we can work with the legislature this year and into the future to increase transparency of law enforcement. Thank you.
[{'start': 46, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dawn Koepke: good afternoon madam chair members dawn brandon koepke with koepke and associates on behalf of crime victims united of california. appreciate the opportunities just to make a couple brief comments and with echo and the comments made by the prior panel da with regard to victims. the need for support for victims. these are often victims who are starting to feel very lost in the era of very significant policy reforms in this space. really just want the opportunity to have them considered as part of these discussions and understand that often times these are individuals who have not by their own actions brought this victimization upon them. but just being in the wrong place at the wrong time in many circumstances. additionally, as part of that, we just really urge the committee to consider victims as you move forward in your deliberations this year, and how adjustments in the budget process may affect the victims of crime. one example, with regard to the state penalty fund is regarding the governor's budget, which proposes to decrease victim witness assistance grants. these are grants provided to das across the state to provide for comprehensive wrap around services for victims of crime in counseling and otherwise. so that's just one example of some of the things we'd love to work with the committee on to review, understanding the concerns as part of this last panel around the ability to pay. we just hope that we might work together to ensure the victims do have access to the services that are often provided by das throughout the state. thank you.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 60, 'end': 66, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 206, 'end': 210, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1110, 'end': 1113, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1533, 'end': 1536, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Joe Rodriguez: yes, good afternoon, mr. chair, committee members. i'm joe. i'm the california state long term care ombudsman. we were very involved, as well as dr. wood was, in this event last fall and we are in strong support of this bill which will give us additional tools that we can use to help better prepare and assess residents with transfer trauma should their home be closed. thank you.
[{'start': 55, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 149, 'end': 153, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sergio Londeros: good afternoon. sergio, certified long term care ombudsman and i'm support of this bill.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tracy Rhine: good afternoon, tracy, rural county representatives of california in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Lange: Karen Lange, on behalf of the Humboldt County Board of Supervisors, in support of their Assemblyman trying to solve a very real problem locally, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Josh Asherman: Thank you, Chair and members. I'll make this brief. My name is Josh Asherman and I work as a licensed marriage and family therapist at an inpatient psychiatric health facility. Over the years I've observed that after a physician completes the primary signature to extend a patients hospitalization, treatment teams sometimes have great difficulty in locating approved healthcare professionals, to proved the required secondary signature, because there are no social workers, or psychologists on our treatment teams. This scenario creates an exigency, in locating an approved secondary signer, so that timely notifications can be made to the patient, the patient's rights advocate, and the hearing officer. In addition to myself, I have worked with several licensed marriage and family therapists, who are the most involved, and possess the greatest therapeutic rapport with these patients, but are unable to provide secondary signature on certification forms. This increase is confusion on the part of the patient on, why their primary connection with the treatment team did not sign their certification form. It can cause the patient to lose trust in the treatment process, and exacerbate symptoms for patients already in severe crisis. If passed AB 191 would help remove these treatment obstacles for patients and help treatment teams insure timely notifications to patients, their advocates, and hearing officers. The addition of licensed marriage and family therapists and licensed professional clinical counselors as secondary signers will give facilities the flexibility to efficiently utilize their provider care teams while maintaining patient safety and rights. Thank you and I respectfully ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 63, 'end': 76, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gv Airs: Yes, my name is GV Airs. I represent the California Association for Licensed Professional Clinical Counselors. We'd like to associate with the remarks of Doctor Epstine or the marriage and family therapist and thank Doctor Wood for the introduction of this bill. We concur with this and ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 223, 'end': 227, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rick Hodkins: Finally, Rick Hodkins, disability rights advocate, disability rights activist, and disability rights extremist, in strong support. I would just point out that people with developmental disabilities we'll need these supports too and probably the position should be cross trained in psychology and neurology in order to help our individuals, thank you.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Theo Peyos: peyos with tenet hospitals, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amanda Levy: Good afternoon members. Amanda Levy on behalf of the California Psychological Association and we are here today in opposition to this bill. The provisions of the LPS Act require specific training and certification and the bill does not speak to how do adequate, relevant and appropriate training standards are met by the MFT's and LPSC's to be added as a second signatory. After a brief survey that, CPA did of graduate programs in California that offer both MFT and PhD are society programs. We found that the MFT courses focused on more specifically the areas of foundations of counseling, family systems, individual and human development. With a strong emphasis on building consoling skills. We have also found that some, but not all offered at most one course in assessment and diagnosis. A clear distinction across the degrees is that the PhD, or society programs greater emphasis in the amount and depth of course work that focuses on assessment, diagnosis, and psychopathology. These are the advanced skills we believe are critical for proper assessment and identification of clinical symptoms and behaviors that would warrant an extension beyond the 72 hour hold, and we ask for your no vote at this time.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Will Sanford: will jonah sanford with futures explored. we support 700 adults with developmental disabilities across alameda through sacramento county, and represent basically 300,000 people across the state with developmental disabilities. oral health is one of the major challenges our folks face. the ability to access and get dental care is a huge issue for our folks. i passed out four brief stories that our folks have written about their challenges with that, including most frequently, their treatment is not in the dental office, but in an er. often in the case of having tooth extractions, relieve pain, prevent behaviors, etc. so our real goal is that we want this to increase access for our folks to really make it affordable and accessible for them and really reduce their long term health care. they already have significant challenges with communication. and so often they're only means to say that they're in pain is to punch or hit or throw things. this is not the best way to communicate when things could be prevented. so denti-cal is a major source of their dental services, and it's something that we support and urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 18, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
David Thompson: hi, david will thompson with the dental surgery center coalition. and if you'll see in one of the handouts, the color photo there of all the teeth, that is something that our centers treat after children have not received proper dental care. there are over 20 centers now in california that treat children with extreme needs like this. this is seen in routine basis in our dental surgery centers. in 1999, there were two centers, and now there's over 20. the increase in need for our centers and treatment for dental decay that is this severe is increasing every year. it's something that is staggering, it's alarming, and it's sheerly because these kids are not getting preventive care. in other words, this is preventable. we do not have to have teeth and mouth that look like this, and we dont need to treat people in this manner. we strongly support this bill because one of the major reasons they're not getting care is because of the underfunded program. and if you don't fund a program, you really don't have a program. and if you don't have providers in your network, you don't have a network. and if you have an insurance card that you can't use, you don't really have an insurance card. these are things that we've been discussing for a long period of time now. we're excited to see this bill because this actually does something about it. it takes tax-payer dollars, and this is a great use of tax-payer dollars, and it applies them directly to a program that is under funded, proven by research, little hoover commission, another article that i provided in there. if we increase the rates, you will see an increase in utilization and hopefully decrease in mouths that look like this. thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1515, 'end': 1521, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Carol D'Elia: sure. my name is carol david d'elia. little hoover commission. support.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Nguy: linda carol nguy with western center on law and poverty, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Kando-Kaiser: Danielle Kando-Kaiser with Common Sense Kids Action. We awarded this bill our star rating, strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brenda Diaz: Brenda Diaz with California Coverage and Health Initiatives, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Fred Main: Fred Main on behalf of CalPACE, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Judy Darnell: Judy Darnell on behalf of United Ways of California, in strong support. I'm also speaking for the Children's Defense Fund of California, who is in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Tannehill: tannehill with the california dental hygienist association, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Delilah Clay: delilah linda clay on behalf of western dental. we support ab 15 in concept. western dental happens to be sponsoring other legislation to provide targeted incentives. but of course, we support any measures that would help to increase access to these really important care services. thank you.
[]
Leah Barros: Leah Barros on behalf of the California Dental Association. We also have a support in concept position. We support the goals of AB 15, and appreciate Assembly Member Maienschein's attention and efforts to address the ongoing Denti-Cal funding issue. We believe that prioritizing and increasing Denti-Cal provider rates using Prop 56 funds as intended by the voters is part of this solution, and we look forward to working with the Legislature on this. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 166, 'end': 177, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jeremy Pearson: Jeremy Pearson with Hapy Bear Surgery Center, strong in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Lange: karen delilah lange on behalf of the humboldt county board of supervisors, in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rick Hodgkins: Okay, here we go again. I should, being a Denti-Cal patient myself, I should have been called on as a witness. But anyway, Rick Hodgkins, disability rights advocate, disability rights activist, and disability rights extremist, in support. I just wanted to say briefly, Dr. Wood, that I had to go all the way to Vacaville to get five impacted wisdom teeth pulled out, and we only have one, to the best of my knowledge, only one oral surgeon in all of Sacramento County that takes Medi-Cal. That's Dr. Kevin Bang at Smile Care Dental. This is ridiculous. I mean, I don't, I want to be able to see my dentist every six months, not just once a year and have root canals on my back teeth, should I need them. I shouldn't have to pay out of pocket or go to my Regional Center for this because they're on my case about asking for them for help, thank you.
[{'start': 123, 'end': 136, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 273, 'end': 277, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 500, 'end': 510, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Trent Smith: good afternoon, mr. chair and members. trent karen smith representing quest diagnostics in support of the bill. as your analysis points out, in addition to the fee issue highlighted by the auditor there were some other suggestions that the auditor made with regards to duplicative regulations between the state and federal government. so in addition to supporting the bill, we'd like to work with the author and the department of public health and maybe expand the bill to address some of those other suggestions found in the auditor's report. thank you.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bob Ackerman: Mr. Chair and members, Bob Ackerman with the California Society of Pathologists in support. Would echo the comments of the previous speaker about the need for additional reform, but very supportive of this legislation.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Elizabeth Espinosa: Good afternoon, Mr. Chair, members, please excuse my voice. Perhaps appropriate in the Health Committee, I'm suffering from a bit of a cold. I am Elizabeth Espinosa, here today on behalf of Alkermes, in support of Assemblymember Waldron's HOPE Act. Just for your information, Alkermes is a biopharmaceutical company that's committed to developing innovative medicines to address unmet needs and challenges of those living with diseases including opioid dependence. It is the manufacturer of extended release injectable naltrexone, which is indicated for the prevention of relapse to opioid dependence following detox as well as alcohol dependence for those who are not actively drinking. Just to add a bit to the stark and sobering statistics the Committee has also discussed and that Assemblymember Waldron has mentioned, the US Department of Health and Human Services indicates that on any given day in the US, 3,900 people initiate non-medical use of prescription opioids for the first time. 580 people use heroin for the first time, and 78 people die from opioid-related overdose. Alkermes as a company supports AB 182. It's broad and thoughtful. It approaches a public education effort for heroin use and opioid abuse from a variety of vantage points, reaching out to those who are at risk or who are currently using, but also to their families and other community members that can help steer a person toward pathways to treatment and recovery opportunities, but also to be able to flag signs. Alkermes is committed to good public policy solutions and discussions around substance use disorder. There certainly would be improved public health and safety outcomes that would result from AB 182, including, we believe, a reduction in overdose deaths and improved community reintegration for those who are following detention. The Committee certainly is aware that a person's involvement in the court system often is tied to their addiction. I have sat through the discussion on Assemblymember Eggman's bill, so I know that the issue of heroin use and opioid abuse is something that you have spent time thinking about, and appreciate your time and attention to the topic. There certainly was an example last year in our own backyard. There was a fentanyl outbreak in Sacramento County, resulting in more than two dozen deaths. I heard a presentation by the public health director in Sacramento County, who said one of the things they relied on, and that they understood very clearly, is a strong, robust public education campaign was absolutely critical in bringing that crisis to an end. And we think that AB 182, at a statewide level, could also address this crisis that's going on in our communities. And it's for those reasons that's we're supporting AB 182. And I thank the Committee for its time and attention.
[{'start': 146, 'end': 164, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 229, 'end': 236, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 800, 'end': 807, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1996, 'end': 2002, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Gary Jeffrey: thank you. others in support, please? jeffrey, representing california chronic care coalition, in support. thank you very much.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Greg Herner: greg trent herner, on behalf of the california life sciences association, in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Faith Lane: faith with california advocates, on behalf of the california association of joint power authorities, in support.
[]
Lydia Bourne: Thank you. Lydia Bourne, representing American Academy of Pediatrics, the California Division, in strong support. Great, thanks.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maureen Higgins: Maureen Higgins, representing Biocom, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Winger: Great, thank you. John Winger, on behalf of Gatekeeper Innovation, also in support. Great, thanks. Anyone in opposition?
[{'start': 18, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Leah Burnley: good afternoon, my name is leah greg burnley appearing on behalf of californians for safety and justice. csj for short, aims to promote effective criminal justice strategies to stop the cycle of crime and build healthy communities with a focus on restorative justice. a common saying in restorative justice is that hurt people hurt people. indeed, children who experience trauma are more likely to repeat violence, engage in crime and are more likely to be arrested as juveniles and as adults. the outcome too often being incarceration. in fact decades of research have solidified the connection between childhood trauma and the likelihood of criminal behavior. before coming to csj i was an attorney practicing prisoner litigation. while doing so, i became intimately familiar with the mental health records and criminal histories of countless incarcerated individuals. these prisoners were some of the most heinous in cdcr. their atrocities, unimaginable. one of the common threads that ran through the majority of these offenders, was that they had all suffered childhood trauma. and i would often think to myself "what if someone had caught this earlier? what if someone cared?" perhaps society would not have to experience the wounds inflicted upon it by the individual and perhaps that individual could have become a productive member of society. and screening is key. screening is key to prevention, not just for illnesses, but for jail time too. and though we're looking at trauma screening from a public health standpoint. we know for a fact that if we're screening for trauma, and doing effective intervention, justice outcomes will be impacted as well. now, we know that there is a powerful connection between childhood trauma and crime. and consequently, we know that we are failing our children when we fail to detect trauma early and properly respond to it. and that is a great injustice. not only to our children, but to all californians who bear the cost in consequences of crime and incarceration. ultimately, detecting and addressing a child's trauma through the public health system before the child becomes involved in the justice system promotes the well-being of the child, and is a crucial first step in ending the cycle of crime and violence. for these reasons i urge an aye vote on ab 340.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Frank Mecca: thank you, mr. chair. frank, executive director of the county welfare directors association. our members administer on your behalf the full array of public human services programs. and our members see the effect of undiagnosed and untreated trauma every day victims of child abuse and neglect that are in the foster care system that we are trying to help. but even in families in the calworks program who are experiencing significant economic stress, the cost of undiagnosed and untreated trauma are extreme. not just the human effects on those children, but also the economic cause and the lost human potential as the author in the first witness really explained very well in your analysis also indicates, this bill is completely consistent with federal guidance and how we can modernize the way we screen for trauma, so that we can inhibit the negative effects that we are suffering right now and for those reasons we urge your support for this bill.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Chen: Kimberly Chen with the California Pan-Ethnic Health Network and strong support want to thank the author and sponsor for bringing this issue back.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brenda Diaz: brenda leah diaz with california coverage and health initiative cchi, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Judy Darnell: darnell, from united ways of california in strong support. and also representing the remainder of the childrens health coverage coalition, children's defense fund, children now, and the children's partnership, all in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Nguy: linda brenda nguy with the western center on law and poverty in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Valdez: Mary Valdez, with Health Access in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Kando-Kaiser: danielle linda kando-kaiser, on behalf of common sense kids action in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Gibbons: michelle, at the county health executives association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kat DeBurgh: kat danielle deburgh, with the health officers association of, california, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maria Ramiu: maria kat ramiu, with the youth law center, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rick Hodgkins: Rick Hodgkins, disability rights advocate, disability rights activist and disability rights extremist, in strong support. As a former student of the School for the Blind, I've had traumatic experiences leaving there. And had a visit from the CHP at my house eight years ago, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sherry Daley: thank you, members, sherry maria daley with the california consortium of addiction programs and professionals, representing over 12,000 professionals in the field, 500 agencies and sober livings, and 300 schools throughout the state. we are supportive of the bill. we started this committee hearing today talking about one end of the continuum, which is someone who is not likely to be entering treatment, or may not know about treatment or its benefits, and now we're talking about the opposite end of the spectrum where somebody has successfully completed treatment, or is seeking a place to live a clean and sober lifestyle. our issue with these bills in the past has been that they tend to run afoul of the fair housing and americans with disability acts. this is a unique and progressive approach to the situation. allowing quality sober living homes who wish to be recognized to come forward, meet a agreed upon list of standards that is approved by the national authority in this area. to register with an organization approved by the state department of healthcare services, and to provide some minimal training to those who both own and operate and at least one person who lives in the sober living. the costs associated are low. $195.00 a year to register and that covers the expense of going out and doing an interview, looking at the facility. make sure it meets the requirements, responding to complaints, coordinating with the department of healthcare services. so it's a very affordable measure for both people who participate and also for the state of california. it's really important that sober living be available in our communities and that we reduce the conflict between sober living and our local governments. sober living allows people to have a better chance of not relapsing. it reunites families and it makes communities safer. i would urge you for a aye vote.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tom Gilmore: Good afternoon, my name's Tom Gilmore, a private individual living in Lafayette, California. Recently retired engineer and dual national city citizen of Ireland in the last 15, 17 years. A very proud citizen of the United States. My son Daniel Gilmore, my only son, final year economic student at the University of Oregon passed away on this very day March 21st, 2013. Four days earlier Daniel had completed a 30 day residential rehab program that he had entered voluntarily in Santa Cruz. My wife and I were delighted to pick him up following his graduation, and bring an outwardly, physically healthy young man to a beautiful sober living house, an a SLE in Redwood City, to continue his path to recovery. This SLE had been recommended by the rehab facility. Daniel was in fragile recovery and we were well aware that he would be extremely vulnerable to intense cravings in the first months of leaving the rehab center. We spoke at length to the manager of the Sober Living house of this vulnerability. And were heartened to learn of the rules inside the facility and of their frequent searches for drugs and random testing of all the residents. We said our goodbye's on Sunday night March 17th. On Monday we were shocked to hear that the manager had okayed a trip into San Francisco for Daniel and his new friends on March 20th, Daniel's 23rd birthday. Don't worry we were told, we'll watch him very carefully. The rules are in place, but the protocols were not followed. That evening no search was conducted and no drug testing was performed after Daniel and his friends returned from their high risk visit to the city. Early the following morning, the manager left the SLE without checking on the residents. Daniel was later found in a bathroom. He had passed away from an opioid overdose from drugs obtained from unknown sources. One day after his birthday. The path to recovery is a long one that can be likened to a chain with many links. Every link has to be strong and every handover between facilities has to be seamless. The certification of sober living residences is but one link in the recovery chain, and must require verifiable adherence to robust policies and procedures designed to protect the resident during recovery. AB-285 is the first step to making this link strong. I support the Bill AB 285.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 237, 'end': 251, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 387, 'end': 393, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 761, 'end': 767, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1290, 'end': 1296, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1332, 'end': 1338, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1552, 'end': 1558, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1713, 'end': 1719, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Allen Johnson: allen sherry johnson, about-face domestic violence intervention project, i support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Graham Sargent: graham allen sargent, wellspace health, i support. thank you. odell patton, npi treatment services, summit hospital, i support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 62, 'end': 74, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Reinech Paige: reinech graham paige, i'm an individual, and i support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eugene Hay: Eugene Hay with Father Alfred Center and Marin Detox, I support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 23, 'end': 36, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
David Hoster: David Hoster, Hooper, California, Camel Behavioral Health, I support the bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Harris: Hi, Rebecca Harris, Cedar Point Recovery, and I'm in support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rose Wheeler: Hello, Rose Wheeler, Benchmarks Transitions in Redlands, California, I support.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christina Padiaz: christina, sacramento, c-cap, i support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Norman Tomlin: Norman Tomlin, Sewers Pleasures, I support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Daniel Chagolla: Daniel Chagolla, Cedar House Life Change Center, San Bernardino, County, I support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Deborah Snyder: Deborah Snyder, Mental Health System, San Diego, County, I support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lupe Stoneburner: stoneburner, soroptimist house of hope, riverside county, i support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melody Lewis: Melody Lewis, Kern County Mental Health, Bakersfield, I support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nathan Rait: Nathan Rait, Community Recovery Resources, I support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Judy Franks: hi, judy, from copperopolis the lakes treatment and diagnosis center, i support. thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Castro: Paul Castro, The Lakes Treatment Center, Dual Diagnosis Center, I support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Greg Smith: Greg Smith, Azure Acres, Sebastopol, California, I support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Carvalho: carvalho, skyway house treatment services, in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laurie Newman: laurie reinech newman, community social model advocate, merced county, in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Warren Daniels: Warren Daniels, Community Recovery Resources, Nevada and Placer counties, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sylvia Gonzalez: sylvia laurie gonzalez, guardian family care provider, primavera, san jose. i support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Donna Stanley: Donna Stanley, Substance Abuse Counselor and owner of New View Sober Living for Women. I support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Valerie Schaffer: valerie sylvia schaffer, madeira county behavioral health, i support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gaspar Lopez: Gaspar Lopez, Henry Ohlhoff House, San Francisco, I support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eva Ley: eva valerie ley, los angeles re-entry services, i support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christina Harrison: christina eva harrison, northern valley indian health in chico, i support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Barnes: michael, social moderate recovery systems, los angeles, pico union area, i support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carlos Moreno: carlos christina moreno, the fellowship center in escondido, california, and i support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Daniel Longoria: daniel carlos longoria of visalia, california, i support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vanessa Cardoza: Vanessa Cardoza, Newport Beach Recovery Center, Newport Beach, I support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Perrigen: hi, linda daniel perrigen, community recovery services, placer county, and i support. thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Peas: michelle linda peas, central valley recovery services to larry county, i support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Clarence McDonald: Clarence McDonald, Madeira County, I support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pat Buffalo: Pat Buffalo, Fresno County, private practice, I support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Yolanda Calbert: calbert, integrity substance abuse services, solano county, i support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carla Melendez: Carla Melendez, individual, I support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Diana Coronado: diana michelle coronado with the association of california cities, orange county, we're in strong support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Reverend Vanbeek: reverend from tulare county and i support. thank you.
[]
Jason Ryan: jason diana ryan, leed, california city, is in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Leif Jenson: Hi, Leif Jenson, Alcerito, California, retired counselor, I support. Thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ruben Marquez: Ruben Marquez, Century Center, Salinas, I support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Bocambis: john jason bocambis, director of recovery services, sun street center, salinas, california, and i'm in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Martha: Melissa Martha, Polina Del Mar Sentry Centers, Marina, California, I support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Guillermo Rodriguez: guillermo john rodriguez, salinas, california, sentry centers men's residential recovery, i support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Devin Waite: Devin Waite, Northbound Treatment Services in Newport Beach, California and I support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joel Edwards: joel guillermo edwards, morningside recovery in garden grove in irvine, we support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessie Garca: Jessie Garca, Recovery Point Center, Santa Maria, and I support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ian Levingston: ian joel levingston, community recovery resources in grass valley, and i support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Scott Harrison: scott ian harrison, telecare soar, sacramento county, mental health service provider and i support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carol Smith: carol scott smith, calaveras county behavioral health services, substance abuse programs, angels camp, california, i support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Glenda Smith: glenda carol smith, retired counselor, i support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Allison: Jason Allison, San Diego, California, a private practitioner, in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dan Manson: manson, elevate addiction services, in santa cruz county, el dorado county, and i support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nathan Tediham: Nathan Tediham, Elevate Addiction Services, in support. Thank you. Ashley Garizini, Elevate Addiction Services, in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 67, 'end': 82, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Coleman: Michael Coleman, Napa, California, CCAP, I support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Thompson Hamilton: Thompson Hamilton, Mountain Vista Farm in Glen Ellen, California, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gregory Morris: Gregory Morris, residential treatment, Santa Rosa, California, I support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jerry Johnson: jerry, director of today's a new day recovery home, i support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Terry Taylor: Terry Taylor, Salvation Army Adobe Rehabilitation Center, Sacramento, I support. Thank you Flaca Melendez, individual, and I support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 91, 'end': 105, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jenny Lewis: lewis as an individual, i support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cameron McLaren: mclaren, community recovery resources, grass valley, i support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessie White: white, national alliance on mental illness, otherwise a mom in sacramento, 27 years, cleaning silver, i support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Reid Edwards: reid glenda edwards, lafayette california, neighbor of tom gilmore's, i support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 55, 'end': 68, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Curt Child: Mr. Chair, members, Curt Child, Disability Rights, California. We appreciate the stated intent of the author and the sponsors of this legislation, but unfortunately, we think there's still some major problems with this approach. First is note in the analysis, it appears that this is both an effort to improve residents and improve programs for use of residents, but also noted, programs that wouldn't and couldn't be certified as Browning Communities, and from my perspective and what we have seen for many years on these bills that come forward, is after an effort and MB effort to eliminate what is important housing for those individuals who are leaving treatment programs. And who can move in to individual programs within the community individual residences and we think this has the same effect as previous efforts in eliminating or at least significantly reducing the housing that's available for those individuals. Second, I think is and as noted in the staff analysis there are. Still we believe some significant problems both with federal and state law in the application of this provision. I know there is an effort here to try and have this be an optional program and the problem is that the option will have the effect, as many of these restrictions get out applied in these attempts to limit. The option is to squeeze out these individual facilities, these individual homes where individuals can live, and so to the extent that it is eliminating the number of those facilities. I think your staff analysis squarely pointed to the case law that's appropriate and we think that this would run afoul of that case law, as well. The other thing that the bill does is makes these homes residential uses. That's unnecessary. That's what it is now. We think the impact of that classification will have the effect of redefining what are effectively now what would be non-certified homes. Finally this is creating really a massive program for the Department of Health Services to administer. We're quite fearful now with the many effects that could be coming down from the Federal Government. That this would be distracting to the department in administering a new program now where we will have bigger issues. So for that reason, we're in opposition and urge a no vote.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Carol: Mr. Chair, I'm Mike Carol with the Western Center on Law and Poverty. We too must state our opposition on the record. I concur with all of the points of my colleague from Disability Rights California. The one additional fact that I would note, what gives us a pause for concern with this bill, is the restriction at the end of the bill that says, that people who are being released from Institutions of care from jail, county jail, state prisons and who need a sober living facility as a part of their release, can only be released to a certified, an agency certified under this bill. The problem with that is that, that's going to push all of those folks into those facilities and limit. And essentially cause economic pressures on the smaller facilities which will not have anyone going to them. They don't have it, it will essentially restrict supply and availability of housing. As the intent language in the bill states, we need to expand supply at this time not restrict it. For those reasons, in addition to the one stated earlier, we oppose the bill.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Victor Esposito: good afternoon. i'm victor reid esposito. i'm a business owner. i have a couple restaurants in san francisco and a salsa company in fairfield. dear lawmakers, my son was born with an accent. even before he could speak, my son's accent represented his culture, his heritage, and his family. i'm, of course, not talking about an accent in his speech, but an accent mark on his name, a simple diacritical mark that indeed symbolizes my son's ethnicity and our family's history. the fact that my son's name is in spanish and requires an accent has nothing to do with english being the official language of california or the united states. i'm not asking for a birth certificate in spanish. i'm asking for the opportunity to have my son's actual and true name appear as it should in the official document that will determine how his actual name will appear on every lawful, legal and legitimate document issued in this state, in this country, and throughout his life. i'm asking for my son's name to be spelled correctly and not intentionally misspelled due to some archaic, outdated, unjustified reason. i suppose an option would be to translate the original name from spanish to english, jose to joseph. however, i don't think it's fair that in order for, to appear on a california birth certificate, my son's name should be translated or modified. and if my son wishes for his name to make sense, because it doesn't make sense without the accent, and be spelled correctly, why should he be put in a situation where he must forego his culture. people of every culture should have the opportunity to have their name appear on their birth, marriage, and death certificates, as it is intended to appear. without translations, adaptations, or modifications. please give my son the opportunity to celebrate his culture, and honor, his heritage by spelling his name correctly on his california birth certificate. my son was born with an accent, please allow him to keep it. if i may, i'd like to share a brief quote, this is, if i find it, here it is. this is from jane elliot we do not need a melting pot in this country, folks, we need a salad bowl. in a salad bowl you put in the different things you want. the vegetables, the lettuce, the cucumbers, the onions, the green peppers, to maintain their identity. you appreciate differences and that's jane elliott. thank you for your time.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1185, 'end': 1189, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1193, 'end': 1199, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2056, 'end': 2067, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2342, 'end': 2354, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jose Skovelo: Hello my name is Jose Skovelo. I'm 12 years old, I'm in the seventh grade at Miguel Wilson in the City of Fairfield. I'm in the dual immersion program, and before I was born, after thinking of all the possible names for their first born son, my parent's decided to name me Jose. On April 5th, 2004, I was born and given a birth certificate. However, the birth certificate did not display the name my parents had given me. No, it did not read Jose, it simply read Jose. My family comes from Mexican ancestors and many Jose's before me. Legally with the accent taken off my name, it becomes seemingly non-existent. No longer containing all the meaning my parents and my ancestors before me had intended it to have. I find it to be very unfair that I am not able to keep the accent on my E. The name I was given is not only the name I respond to, it's the name that represents my Mexican heritage. However, as I stated before, taking the accent off my E is the equivalent to taking part of the meaning of my name away. Also, it changes the pronunciation of my name. Taking away the emphasis that should be given when actually saying Jose. In conclusion, I believe the law in California is unfair and should be changed. Names should be able to keep their accents. I'm here on the behalf of all Joses and people with accents on their name, including my younger cousin, Tomas. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 273, 'end': 277, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 442, 'end': 446, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 463, 'end': 467, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 517, 'end': 521, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1130, 'end': 1134, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1290, 'end': 1295, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1364, 'end': 1369, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nancy Espinosa: Thank you, Mr. Chair and members. Nancy Espinosa here on behalf of Nicholas Augustine Espinosa Chatus, who was the inspiration for this bill. I won't repeat anything that was said, but as a parent it's very important to have freedom to be able to choose a name for a child and it expresses not just our origins and our culture, but to me it's very important that it expresses our culture as Californians. We stand for freedom, we stand for choice, and I urge you to support this bill.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 67, 'end': 101, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mateos Cuevo: Hi, my name is Mateos Cuevo, I'm here to support this bill, so people could keep their accent on their name. Thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Charlotte Hernandez: i'm charlotte victor hernandez and i'm here to support the bill. thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joe Hernandez: My name is Joe Hernandez and I'm here for my grandson Jose Skovelo and I support the bill. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 54, 'end': 66, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nancy Fletcher: My name's Nancy Fletcher and I'm in support of this bill.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matthew Siverling: Mr. Chair and members, Matthew Siverlingon behalf of the California Association of Clerks and Election Officials. We are here reluctantly opposed unless amended to this bill. On many levels county clerks are the customer service branch of local governments. We want to give people what they want, what they came in for and generally, we like to make our customers happy. That's why this is so difficult because we don't have an issue with diacritical marks per se. We have no problem with accents or tildes, with people wanting their name to appear the way that they were given to them at birth. We're taking a piecemeal approach, as this bill suggests, to try to only affect vital records, only address vital records. It's going to cause problems for county clerks to actually administer and implement this new change. I just have three issues I'd like to address specifically. Again, this bill only affects vital records. Without a concurrent policy change at the state level, we'd be creating separate documents that don't match any other state or federal documents, which would be a problem going down the line. Number two, clerks will also be in a position to add or create names without any corroborating documentation. To actually determine whether or not that the mark is appropriate, that is where it goes on the name or that it matches other types of records. This bill does not affect the DMV, their won't be drivers licenses with marks on them. Identification cards, military service or military dependant ID cards, naturalization certificates, passports, or green cards, which also do not contain these marks. Also the Secretary of State records and Federal Social Security documents also do not contain these marks. Lastly and this is more probably for the next stop for this bill, our county indexes don't read, recognize, store or search. By these diacritical marks currently and aren't capable of doing so without major overhauls. We have put out bids to try to determine what it would cost to actually upgrade systems to conform with this bill. And it ranges into the hundreds of thousands of dollars statewide per county. In closing, we would just request that prior to moving forward with this. The Legislature can consider these impacts, the uniformity problems, and help us address this if we're being asked to implement this at only the local level, thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 42, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sharon Rapport: good afternoon, sharon charlotte rapport with the corporation for supportive housing. for the last six years, my organization has administered a program we call the 10th decile project. it's really looking at the top 10% of highest-cost hospital users in los angeles county. we partner with 15 hospitals, 7 clinics, and 7 homeless services providers in this program. and the intent is to really, for those who are homeless and extremely high-cost hospital users, to give those individuals rental assistance and intensive services to help them reduce their hospital costs. based on our hospital data, our program participants were incurring about $63,000 a year in hospital costs, two-thirds of which were born from inpatient hospitalization. they were all on medi-cal. these individuals were not going to the emergency room because they wanted a warm place to sleep, they were going because they suffered from very acute healthcare conditions. over 88% had more than one chronic medical condition that brought them to the hospital. within one year of moving these individuals into supportive housing, they were able to reduce their inpatient admissions from seven inpatient admissions per year, to one. they were able to reduce their inpatient days from 25 to 5. after the participants moved into housing with these intensive services, they were able to reduce their hospital costs by 79%. when taking into consideration the costs, the rental assistance, and the services, that translated into $40,000 reduction in costs to medi-cal. our 10th decile project is not unique, we see from the last 25 years, study after study. published in journals like jama and health affairs that supportive housing reduces health care cost significantly. because of these data we now have the whole person care pilot in 18 counties. we're going to be receiving whole person, i'm sorry, health home program next year in almost 30 counties. and those two programs will pay for the services homeless people need to get housed and stay stably housed. but we know services alone, no matter how intensive or quality these services are, don't allow anyone experiencing chronic homelessness to reduce their hospital costs, or get healthier. for these individuals housing is scarce. we greatly appreciate assembly members choose leadership on this bill and i thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tom Renphrey: tom with the county behavioral health directors association, pleased to support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tiffany Fan: fan on behalf of bridge housing in support.
[]
Jason Rhine: Jason Rhine, League of California Cities in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rick Hodgkins: dr wood, nice to see you again. and for those of you i haven't met, like miss lemone, good to finally meet you. rick sharon hodgkins, disability rights advocate, disability rights activist and disability rights extremist in support, because people with disabilities are also at risk for becoming homeless through no fault of their own. thank you.
[{'start': 3, 'end': 7, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 78, 'end': 84, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 112, 'end': 132, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Martha Guerra: guerra representing the los angeles county board of supervisors in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alex Krell: good afternoon, my name is krell and i'm an epidemiologist, a phd in epidemiology. i've been conducting research around drug use in california for the last 24 years. mostly, around ethnological studies but also looking at many of the types of interventions that will help people inject drugs in this city and in the state. i've been before this group before. i did a lot of research on syringe exchange programs, that then ended up used in this committee, on pharmacy access to needles, on naloxone and overdose as well. so for me this particular invention is ... for those same types interventions. over the last eight years i've been studying the concept of these supervised consumption services, in san francisco specifically, both doing feasibility studies, doing stakeholder studies, and acceptability studies. i'm probably the main person in the us at this point who is doing research on this particular topic. i'm quite familiar with the topics, in terms of all the international research as well. as you mentioned there are nearly 100 of these programs across 66 cities in the world. the us still does not have them but i think it's something that's being brought the attention of many cities and states now around the country, boston, seattle, baltimore. there are many similar types of cities, are now talking about it, in san francisco as well. what we find is that with the research has been done and the best research where it was done in vancouver with the program there. it's been now, in effect there for over a decade. it reduces overdoses. in fact, out of the hundred programs around the world over these decades of doing this, no one's ever died in one of these facilities. so, that's pretty amazing, given that currently we're seeing 40,000 people dying a year in the us around overdoses. no one's ever died in one of these facilities because they're monitored, they're supervised, just making sure there's a safe space for them. they reduce hiv, they reduce hepatitis c. they are great ways to get people into methadone and other types of treatment and up in vancouver, over 300 people a year are being funneled right into treatment because they're through here. and so, the last piece is the research shows pretty clearly that crime in those areas go down as well. so you're helping the community, and you're helping these folks stay alive and make sure they don't get these kinds of diseases. thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Con: hello i'm doctor david rick con, i'm an addiction psychiatrist and i represent the california society of addiction medicine. csam for short is a group of over 400 physicians in california dedicated to being the voice for treatment. i wanted to make the point today that csam has co-sponsored this bill for a number of reasons. as addiction medicine specialists we want to represent to the continuum of care. many people are ready for treatment, many people are ready for abstinence. however, abstinence is a form of harm reduction and before people are ready to make the decision to get into treatment we need to keep them alive first. i had the opportunity to visit the insight clinic in vancouver, which is a safe injection facility, a month and a half ago. there i saw a clean clinic that reminded me of my own opioid treatment program that i worked at at the san francisco va for 11 years. the participants were grateful, they appreciated the services available to them, and when they finally made the decision that they wanted to get into treatment, treatment was rapidly available, which was built into this bill. in vancouver, they see, they have over 600 visits per day, and they're reversing six to eight overdoses per day. it represents an opportunity to save lives and to connect people with treatment. one of the things that we know about the process of addiction is that not everybody's ready and we need to be able to align the availability of treatment services with somebody's readiness. and in creating a safe consumption service, essentially what you're doing is giving people who've been traditionally stigmatized an opportunity to have a different experience with the healthcare system. people who care about them and also reduce costs in so far as reducing costly overdoses which result in emergency room stays, intensive care units stays and more over it reduces the rates of hiv, hepatitis c infection, as well as crime. there is no conflict between safe consumption services and treatment. it is part of the spectrum and as a physician who has dedicated my career to addiction medicine, i would very much love to see you consider this bill and vote aye on it, thank you.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Glenn Backes: Glenn Backes, for Ella Baker Center for Human Rights, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Thomas: Laura Thomas, Drug Policy Alliance, one of the cosponsors in support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Emily Heerio: is this on, can you hear me? hi, i'm heerio from project inform. we're one of the cosponsors obviously in support and i'm also the chair of the california hepatitis alliance, which is also in support.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sharon Rapport: sharon david rapport with the corporation for supportive housing, in support.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 20, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Joe Boniwell: joe sharon boniwell with housing california, in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lizzie Buko: lizzie with the aclu of california, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Morgan Humphrey: Thank you. Morgan Humphrey with the Los Angeles Overdose Task Force, in support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Cross: Kevin Cross, Pasadena Council on Alcoholism and Drug Addiction, affiliated with the National Council on Alcoholism and Drug Dependence, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Thompson Hamilton: thompson joe hamilton, representing mountain vista pharma treatment center in glen ellen, in support
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 9, 'end': 21, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ingrid Brostrom: Again, Ingrid Brostrom, Center on Race, Poverty and the Environment. DTSC continues to struggle with the high number of expired permits, though they have made some improvements recently. Case in point, Fibertech Inc continues to operate on a permit that expired in the mid 1990s. So clearly, a problem remains. Though the backlog is expected to go down in the upcoming years, it is also expected to spike again in the years thereafter. DTSC itself has set a goal of making decisions within two years of receiving an application. However, under current law, the DTSC receives the permit applications only six months before the permit is expired. Therefore, even under DTSC's own goal, DTSC will allow a facility to operate one and a half years without a permit. In order to mirror and codify DTSC's own stated goals of a two year permit process, this bill is important to allow DTSC to have the full information required to make a permit decision. For these reasons, we support the bill, thank you.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Prieto: my name is jessica jonah prieto with the east yard communities for environmental justice. as previously mentioned, of the 120 facilities that treat and dispose hazardous waste, half of those permits have expired. and also as a resident of a community that has been impacted by a facility that ran on a temporary permit and was unchecked by dtsc for 30 years, we are in support of ab 248. by ensuring facilities submit complete permit renewal applications before they expire, we can prevent current and future facilities from operating unchecked for decades with temporary permits. and most importantly, dtsc can finally be held accountable to a timeline. so for these reasons we are in support of this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Diana Vazquez: Hi, this is Diana Vazquez again with the California Environmental Justice Alliance and also the California League of Conservation Voters in support of the bill.
[{'start': 12, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dylan Sherman: Dylan Sherman on behalf of Sierra Club California and NRDC in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Magavern: magavern, coalition for clean air in support.
[]
Bill Alio: Bill Alio, Environmental Working Group in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gene Urban: urban, thank you. this is a matter of some importance. and it's a little bit nuanced, but it's extremely important. there's a big difference between submitting an application and submitting a completed application. and we need to resolve that matter today. i believe that the part a is almost always done while the part b is an iterative process that sometimes involves 2 and 3 nods, notices of deficiency, which compels the applicant to submit additional information, sometimes extremely complex information, hydrology, toxicology, epidemiology, whatever it may be, engineering and it goes on and on. the department has recently issued a study on its nod process, notice of deficiency process, and acknowledged the deficiencies in that. but if you compel a completed application two years in advance, you will have to submit it four, 5 and 6 years in advance of the expiration to be guaranteed that it will be deemed complete two years before expiration. and the bill creates the implication that if you have not submitted a completed application two years in advance, you're out of luck. you can no longer operate if your permit expires. it says if it's completed two years in advance, you can continue to operate after expiration. but if you submit it a month late and it's deemed completed 23 months before the expiration date, but you do not yet have final approval on the expiration date, you're out of business, which i don't think is the intended outcome. but the way i read the bill, that's the clear, clear implication, and would be litigated. so we need to distinguish between how soon one submits in good faith a reasonably complete part a and part b, knowing, given the history of the department, that it will be determined to be incomplete. and that's a good thing in a sense you want the iterative process, you want more information submitted. but you can't penalize the applicant fairly. you could penalize them unfairly because my experience is you submit, you wait a prolonged period of time. you're given 30 days to respond. you submit, and then it goes silent for another eight months. so you're penalizing the applicant who in good faith is trying to submit a completed part b. and if they don't make it by the expiration date or in this case two years before the expiration date, they're foreclosed from operating as the expiration date approaches. it's not a good outcome. it's not a fair outcome. but it's a common outcome until we reform the department.
[]
Chris Maurer: again, chris jessica maurer on behalf of clean harbors and safety clean. again i concur with mr. urban's comments. and also not to belabor the point, but as you recall, mr. chair, you participated in the senate joint hearing on dtsc and their operations in which mr. kracov, gideon kracov, the chair of the irp. we've been raising, everybody's been mentioning irp in all the presentations. and if you recall, you had a question in which you asked mr. kracov about the situation that has been bedeviling us all with regards to dtsc's management handling of a permitting process. and we all agree this has been a problem for a long time. this goes beyond this current adminstration. it's been going on for quite some time and everybody's been frustrated in it. and if you recall, mr. kracov mentioned the fact that from his perspective, and they've done a lot of deep diving on this thing, that 80 to 85% of the facilities out there of the, what, 118 facilities that are permitted in california are working well. they're good. they're generally doing the right thing. and again, it's the 10 to 15% of the facilities that quote unquote are causing the headaches. and so again, with all due respect to the author, this is again, we think, another one size fits all solution that's going to create a lot of problems and unintended consequences. if you recall, in fact, mr. kracov characterized this with regards to the tail wagging the dog. and he specifically asked the members that were at the hearing this consideration for folks to ponder. do you focus on the 10 to 15% out of the bad actors, or the ones that are really really problematic, the really difficult permitees? are your passed legislation is going to affect the other 80-85% of those permits are out there? they're operating reasonably well and doing all things they should be doing, so for those reasons we urge a no vote on this bill.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 97, 'end': 102, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 267, 'end': 273, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 275, 'end': 288, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 451, 'end': 457, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 782, 'end': 788, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1368, 'end': 1374, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Vinnie McHuff: vinnie chris mchuff on poverty in the environment. we're supportive of this bill because we recognize that dtsc must communicate early and often with impacted communities. right now, currently impacted residents only get the chance to weigh in on a facility permit at the end of the process, when no true genuine flexibility remains, and we also want to note that the uc davis report for dtsc identified this as an important step in increasing the ability of the department to act on communities concerns at the earliest possible time. for the financial assurance piece, we know that when facilities do not have adequate financial assurances to cover the costs of any corrective action, that liability falls to the taxpayers and to the public, and this is not a risk that the public should bear. it's imperative that every facility have enough finances to cover any cost of the consequences of their operations, and in fact that these financial assurances should be collected as early as possible to ensure that these costs don't get passed off to members of the public, and for those reasons, we support this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Prieto: my name is jessica vinnie prieto with east yard communities for environmental justice. as a community that was figuratively left for dead as a result of exide filing bankruptcy and refusing to take full financial responsibility for the public health damage they have caused, we are in support of ab 245. with ab 245, we can ensure that future facilities don't run away from the responsibility to clean up the damage they have caused. significant financial assurances can ensure this doesn't occur again. we can also ensure that these facilities are further held accountable during the permitting process by the community through this public meetings.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vivian Erickson: Vivian Erickson on behalf of Breast Cancer Prevention Partners in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Allayaud: bill, environmental working group, support in concept, getting there, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Maurer: Again, Chris Maurer in behalf of Clean Harbors Environmental Services and Safety Clean. Completely concur with Mr. Urban's remarks, I look forward to seeing the further refinements made to provide some additional clarification as to what the terms adequate and inadequate mean.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 115, 'end': 120, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ingrid Brostrom: Ingrid Brostrom with center on race, poverty and the environment. Very quickly, childhood lead poisoning continues to be a major concern. We know that damage can occur at very low levels of exposure, and we know that that damage is irreversible. And, finally, we know that children in neighborhoods with old housing stock and in industrial neighborhoods are at the highest risk of lead poisoning. And these tend to be low-income communities of color which are already over burdened and very vulnerable to environmental exposures. For this reason, we think it is very important that the state continue to look at how we can reduce this very dangerous lead exposure, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Prieto: Jessica Prieto with East Yard Communities for Environmental Justice, we have, as a result of Exide, we have been dealing with a lot of long term health effects, and there is no task force currently in the state that can mandate studies. That can mandate more stringent regulations for lead blood levels, and also for current lead levels in indoor, indoor level or water lead level. These are all on the federal mandated regulations. So are in support of this bill because this is a great opportunity for California to have the most stringent regulations for lead levels that have been impacting our communities for all these decades. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
James Henton: james jessica henton on behalf of californians for alternatives to toxics in support, and we want to encourage you to look at the telephone companies that own toxic lead sheath cable, and encourage them to start removing that cable, especially in napa county, where i live.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vivian Erickson: Vivian Erickson on behalf of the Breast Cancer Prevention Partners, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Allayaud: bill james allayaud, environmental working group again catching up, support in concept, thank you, it's an important bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Magavern: Bill Magavern, Coalition for Clean Air in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cindy Tuck: I'm in between. Cindy Tuck with the Association of California Water Agencies. We took a position last Friday, we think this is a good bill. We have a support if amended position. The amendments we would suggest are because the task force is going to look at the state's drinking water program. We suggest adding a representative from a public water system. And then the other one is we'd suggest adding a representative from the Department of Public Health. Thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Pieto: my name is jessica bill pieto and i am an east los angeles resident. my family and i live within the dtsc designated exide impact zone. i am also a member and staff member east yard communities for environmental justice. our membership lives amongst the worst polluting hazardous waste facilities and the most frequent violators of population regulations and that is specifically the excite technology facility. we are in support of ab 246. with this bill, we can insure facilities like exide and the paramount chromium facility continue to be monitored for toxic metal emissions, something that if done at any time in the past 33 years could have stopped the irreparable public health damage caused from long term lead exposure from exide. we also need to ensure that as we monitor these facilities, we also have a standard we can hold them accountable to.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vivian Erickson: vivian on behalf of the breast cancer prevention partners in support.
[]
Gene Urban: I appreciate it, Mr. Chairman, and I want to apologize to Mr. Santiago, but I have some general remarks to make, which I think are applicable to several of the bills that you're hearing today. I'm Gene Urban. I represent Exide Technologies. I also represent waste management, which operates the Kettleman Hills facility. Couple months ago, Director Lee at DTSC told me she spends 90% of her time on three facilities. Kettleman, Exide, and Santa Susana, so I have the honor of working on two of those three.
[{'start': 62, 'end': 70, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 197, 'end': 207, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 349, 'end': 352, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 439, 'end': 451, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Kent: great. so mr. chair and members, kent representative department of healthcare services. i wanted to say, thank you very much for inviting us. and certainly appreciate the opportunity to talk a little bit about our program. both on the fee for service and on the managed care side. so just for background the department is covering approximately 14 million low income californians in the state today, 11 million of which are in our managed care plans, approximately two and a half to 3 million individuals are in fee for service. a lot of those members in fee for service are what i like to say, are on the highway to managed care from the standpoint that they have been found eligible for managed care or for medical. they are in their choice period. they are making a plan selection. and are about ready to be defaulted. then there's a remaining population in the fee for service program that are composed of dual eligible members so people that are eligible for both medicare and medicaid. small populations that are not mandatorily enrolled into managed care such as foster kids and then individuals with limited scope coverage and are not eligible for full scope benefits. so as you rightly noted, the governor's budget allocates approximately $3.7 billion in the fee for service program for pharmacy. it does not include spending on the managed care side. we estimate that in managed care there will be approximately $7.3 billion in pharmacy cost associated with our manage care plans when we set decapitated rates for our manage care plans. they provide to us utilization information cost data and other types of factors in which we take all of that data from the plans. we work with our actuarial firm and our internal rates and financing staff and we developed projected rates of costs in the out years. and so pharmacy is obviously one of the drivers and the costs that we have accounting for in the manage care program. but we take a lot of careful steps to make sure that we're counting for it properly and so we have what's know as efficiency factors on our manage care rates in which we're encouraging our manage care plans to do as good a job as possible in terms of driving utilization towards cheaper, lower cost items such as generics as much as possible. in addition to there being federal rebates, the federal law requires that manufacturers provide us as a state medicaid program and then as a federal purchaser with federal rebates. so there's both federal rebates, state rebates. and then we in california have a state supplemental rebate program of which is approximately $200 million in general fund. that comes in every year just from the supplemental rebates that we negotiate on our own. the total that we collect off of manufacturer's combined state and federal is approximately $4 billion. i would also indicate, and i provided a couple of copies to the committee, we had been asked to provide with the committee prior to the heroine sampling of drugs that have seen steep pricing increases over the last four years. and so, what you have in front of you and we're happy to make this available electronically afterwards, are samples of 15 drugs that had increases from 2011 to 2015. they're not necessarily the highest increases, they're not necessarily all in one categories, so, what we try to do is just give you a flavor of what we have seen. i would point out that for purposes of this chart, the highest drug percentage change increases 49,000%. it is a drug that is not new and it went from approximately 5 cents uphill to $23. so those are some of the indicators and when you go down this chart that is with the drug name and what the indication is i would also just point out far context is this is not the cost to the department, this is the average wholesale price. so this is a publicly known, publicly available price and so we just pulled the average wholesale price of those drugs, we looked at it from 2011 to 2015 and that's the price differential in increase. so i just want to make sure that you understand the context in which we're giving you this information. but you can see that 49,000% increase in change. but then the lowest cost change is the drug in which there has been a lot of media attention, that 239%. so i would also say, i'm happy to take questions within the governor's budget and within the entire allocation that we believe we will be spending on pharmacy this year. in particular $1.3 billion has been set aside for what we anticipate to be cost just on hepatitis c drugs. so when several of the new generation drugs that are being offered in the market for the treatment of individuals with hepatitis c occurred a few years ago. obviously the cost were quite significant. the way in which we set plan rates, which i just briefly described to you had such a lag. and the cost implications for the plans, several of which had numerous individuals receiving over $100,000 worth of drugs in a 12 week period. we developed what's known as a supplemental payment for the plan so that when an individual with hep c is identified within the plan and starts treatment, they are sending us data and invoice to us to indicate that they have an individual that's receiving such a drug. and we're paying them a supplemental payment that has been developed separately and apart by our actuaries. and that's inclusive of all hep c pharmacy cost. and so, that is a very unusual circumstance but one in which the high cost and the high expected utilization of that drug really necessitated that kind of step that we took as a department. there will be some conversation i would imagine, from either the committee or from others about formularies. so i would also like to just clarify that medicaid does not have a formulary, we have a contract drug list. if there is a drug that is authorized and approved by the food and drug administration. and it's medically necessary for one of our beneficiaries, we will provide it and so that is sometimes a misnomer people like to say that we have a formulary, implying that there are drugs that people can not get access to and that's simply not the case. we do make some drugs that are not on our contract drug list subject to treatment authorization request which in our cases away in which we can either deny that request or we can push back on the provider and say we have four other drugs that would meet the patient's need or the criteria for what you're prescribing. and so our contract drug list is really a way in which we negotiate with manufacturers. we look at the clinical appropriateness of the drug for the safety, the ability the drug to be misused or diverted. and then what we do is we negotiate a rebate with that manufacturer and that is really how drugs are put into our contract drug list. those manufacturers have agreed to us supplemental rebate which that is how they're placed on but should not ever be interpreted or implied that there are drugs that if they're not on the drug list, that they're not able to be used by a beneficiary. so with that, i will stop and i'm happy to take questions or wait until the conclusion of the panel.
[]
Ben Johnson: hi, good afternoon to the committee. my name is ben jonah johnson, i am from the legislative analyst office. i'm here to talk about department of general services, general efforts to procure drugs for various state departments and their efforts to reduce the state's drug expenditures. so dgs, which exists under the california general government operations agency, conducts various procurement activities, manages the state's real estate and vehicle fleets, and has other activities. but it also executes pharmaceutical contracts on behalf of multiple state departments. dgs itself does not purchase any prescription drugs, instead it carries out procurement activities for departments that are either required or voluntarily choose to participate in the dgs drug contracting process. and i have a list of the major departments that participate in dgss procurement efforts. the major ones are department of corrections and rehabilitation, department of state hospitals, department of developmental services and csu, california state university. so, department of general services primarily contracts for direct purchases of pharmaceuticals rather than for pharmacy reimbursement of prescription drugs as is done at medical in calpers primarily. and accordingly, they use a wholesaler rather than pbm to do these purchases where the wholesaler is the entity through which they contract, negotiate at least some of the front end prices. and then the wholesaler also delivers the drugs to the state run facilities such as the state prisons and developmental centers where these drugs are ultimately utilized. so dgs puts out a request for proposal and they currently use the wholesaler amerisource bergen drug corporation. one of only three wholesalers nationwide with really the capacity to serve california states needs in terms of drug purchasing and delivery. the wholesaler is the entity that primarily negotiates prices from drug manufactures and acquires the drugs and does that distribution. and so they really ultimately [unknown] just has ultimately limited use of a pbm. now state cost for drugs purchased through department of general services contracts have increased pretty considerably in the last few years. averaging about 20% annual increases over the last few fiscal years for which we have data. by comparison, i looked at the calpers numbers, and those were closer to about 10% annually. so you do have significant ink price increases on this side. it might be due, for example, to the different mixes of drugs that are utilized by participating state departments under ggs contracts. for example, hepatitis c is pretty prevalent among state prison populations and so they have, well pretty high purchases of those drugs. overall though, i'd say that state purchases under dgs contracts do account for a relatively small portion of total state spending for pharmaceuticals, medical, well over. $7 billion calpers, a couple more $1 billion were as total expenditures under dts contracts is about $300 million per year. there are just like with these other programs, there are small number of drugs that tend to be most expensive for dgs. this include single source drugs such as harvoni hepatitis c drug, which alone accounts for about 15% of dgs expenditures that occur under dgs contracts. so let me turn to dgs's strategies for reducing drug expenditures. the main reason that dgs carries out these activities is to really harness the state's buying power. and to try to get the greatest discounts that we can on the state's drug purchases. so, there's required departmental participation but it also tries to solicit participation from other departments. and if they all purchase through the common dgs vehicle, we can ultimately obtain lower prices. now obviously here the dgs success depends on getting more state departments with potentially higher purchasing power under their per view. and so including their additional ones could help reduce the state's drug expenditures. however, because dgs purchases drugs, or procures drugs for purchase as oppose to reimbursing pharmacies, it might not have the opportunity to get departments like calpers or medi-cal to be as involved in those contracts as otherwise would be. the second major strategy that the dgs utilizes is a common drug formula. that the multiple state departments that purchase through dgs use. the common drug formula is use by the department of state hospitals. department of general services and the division of juvenile justice at the department of corrections and rehabilitations. and this is used to ultimately limit the availability of certain drugs and thereby induce manufacturers and so on. to endure they give price concessions on the drugs that are ultimately made available. and so this is another prominent strategy that dgs utilized to lower prices. and then the final one that i'll speak on today is that dgs rather than only relying on the discounts that are available through their wholesaler. goes out and solicits and negotiates with drug manufacturers directly, they have 17 total contracts with drug manufacturers but give them these lower discounts. and they have six direct contracts for the drugs that are among the top 25 most expensive drugs in terms of dgs's contract of expenditures. finally, i'll just touch briefly on another effort that dgs does have. so dgs, they oversee and help administer what's known as the california pharmaceutical collaborative. which is a work group that has the participation of medical of calpers and of many other state departments and some local organizations. where this departments get together and discuss issues related to the pricing and procurement of drugs. and really try to work out strategies for achieving the best values in terms of our pharmaceutical expenditures. recently,they have broaden its mission to focus more than just direct procurement but to talk about pricing as well. and they've added new organizations such as the department of finance to help sort of coordinate the state's efforts in regard. and then finally in terms of trying, attempting to bolster the state's collective purchasing power. department of general services is soliciting the participation of local government entities. to operate through the dgs contracting process and ultimately help to stay the achieved lower prices. so that concludes my prepared remarks and i'm happy to take any questions, thanks.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 65, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ambrose Carrejo: mr. chairman, assemblymembers and staff, thank you to have me here. i'm very excited to share with you some of the kaiser's story. and special thank you for getting my slides,this would have been horrible without slides. so, kaiser permanente california represents about 8 million lives. and a little bit in over 5 billion in pharmaceutical purchases for 2016. at its simplest core here we, at its simplest is we have an alignment between the permanente medical groups, the health plan, and the hospitals. one mission, one overlying mission to provide high quality, affordable healthcare for our members in the communities we serve. it's that simple concept when you have all people pulling in the same direction that it allows kaiser to deliver like it does. it is the epitome of the aco. it is the aco to live up to, so we're very proud of that. this integrated model, grouping all those folks together. the physicians, the pharmacists, the hospitals, all together, really serves the pharmacy supply chain and purchasing models. physician and pharmacist making decisions on therapy based on the evidence, no other factor. we have the evidence culled by a group of specialists, pharmacists, presented to not only physicians but specialists in that therapeutic category. so, if we're talking blood pressure medication, it's the cardiologists that decide on that products inclusion or exclusion from formulary and so on. you know, also there's a state of the art electronic medical record that provides decisions support to all the prescribers. so, once those decisions are made, that information can be presented to each physician at the time of prescription, a decision support if you will. you know, one aspect of this approach that introduces risk to the overall plan, as the kp budgets have to be set far in advance. actuarials have to be able to take that budget guidance and figure out what we're going to charge for the plan. and then when we're into a budget here, and we see some of these pricing actions that are now famous on the wall street journal or at senate hearings. a few of those can really drive the overall spend far beyond what was forecasted in a budget. that introduces a great deal of risk and we do take a great deal of disciplined effort to mitigate those surprises when they do occur. now, i talked a little bit about the formulary already but it's collaboration again between the medical group and pharmacy. a high compliance of few, if any, draconian measures that force that compliance. it's developed by physicians and it's evidence-based. it's quite a model and i think we've heard similar models described here today by others. but physicians reviewing the evidence, selecting products that will go on formulary and high degree of compliance with that formulary selection is the secret. you know, and it's a small number of physicians that actually decide, yet we have a great deal of prescribers and physicians that uses formulary. and when they understand that process, there's a great deal of comfort associated with the products that are on that. and it's a great starting point for your patients. you know that it was the best product, it wasn't ambrose ben carrejo that got a great discount on a product and that's why it's on the formula. it was specialist that selected those products based on the evidence okay, so once a product is selected for formulary, that's where it gets exciting. because if there's therapeutically similar products in a category, we're able to bid those products out with their key manufacturers. and when we get the pricing back, not only the pricing, there's a few other factors that go into it, what we're really solving for is value. we're able to present that information back to our physicians to decide which product will be the primary preferred contracted formulary alternative for kaiser. that decision sends a pull through that hasn't been seen before. and were able to drive utilization very, very directly. we converted from neupogen to zarzio. zarzio is the first biosimilar in the us. we reached a 98% conversion in just a little over than 12 weeks. just dramatic pull-through, we're very excited about that. so these contracts that we secure directly with the manufacturer and we either buy them through the wholesaler, but oftentimes we'll warehouse those products. purchased directly from a manufacturer into our own operated warehousing facilities. and we do that for a couple of reasons. it's strategic, it's not a distributive function. we're able to procure those products at a great discount and we're able to build supply in case there is a shortage. as we see the number of manufacturers producing a generic product where you can see those numbers decline over time and you're able to take a defensive strategy. not every product goes short. but when you're sitting on a six months supply, you're able to ride out a budget year by limiting the use of that medication appropriately and they enable to make budget throughout the year. so, some of these outrageous prices we see when manufacturers, generic manufacturers, find themself in a monopoly position, were able to insulate from those. and if products go short, we're able for a time to tighten over our utilization, while our physicians figure out what a good alternative would be to the product that went short. so, cost-insulation as well as supply insulation by warehousing products. not to beat a dead horse, if you will. some of this products have already been mentioned today. and those discounts 5456%,you know, 525 % on very old products because they can. that product goes into monopoly state once again, they're free to take price. a few of these summed up can really ruined ones budget here. where the attendant consequences that could produce for an organization. but, you know, this just a part of the story. because really, what's equally troublesome is the usual and customary price increases that we see on branded products. when your spend on a given product is in the hundreds of millions of dollars, and a 9% price increase is taking, seemingly a small percentage price increase. that's a dramatic increase in cost. and what's associated with that increase? is there any new value? is there innovation to the molecule? it's the same product just at a new price. the last component of this is the introductory price of these new and innovative products. they're on an upward trend. products it seemed leapfrogged the last product can come in at a higher price. so what plans are seen are sometimes egregious pricing actions in the generic market. usual in customary price increases year over year in existing products. in the introduction of new products, at astronomical price is sometimes, that combination is leading a trend that's not sustainable. this is how kaiser tries to mitigate some of that rise. we do contract for product, but it's the unit cost. and for the most part, we're exposed to a floating discount. so if the wac on the product rises, the wholesale acquisition cost rises, so does our overall price, the discount stays the same. this process, admirable, again, it's evidence based, and contingent upon a robust collaboration and cooperation of the medical groups. so, once that formula is developed again, you'll see contract above that. and the pyramid is a good way to highlight that, because i do want to drive home the fact that the contract negotiations have nothing to do with the formulary exclusion, reinclusion of a product. it's after that decision that we're able to bring in the economics and position that product appropriately. and that's what leads to the top a value for kp. so appropriate, evidence-based products, at a deep concession provides value and allows us to deliver a pull-through that manufacturers will reward us for. mr. chairman, i want to compliment you and your staff for the background article that you prepared. on the first page you stole all my thunder. right, you know this part. 10% or so of overall cost are pharmaceutical. in itself not that bad. that seems reasonable 10% but statistically speaking there's lies, there's damn lies, and there's statistics, right? and this percentage can be misleading because it's a percentage of a very large number. over $5 billion in california alone for kaiser. so when we see that percentage increasing that means it's outstripping the cost of everything else that goes into the healthcare dollar. so this trend, again, is not sustainable
[{'start': 3185, 'end': 3204, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mario Yedidia: Much obliged, thanks. Chairman Wood, honorable members, my name is Mario Yedidia and I work as a research analyst with Unite Here International Union. Unite here represents 270,000 workers in the hospitality industry across the United States and Canada, that is hotels, gaming and food service. Our members, our significant pairs of healthcare, through our collective bargaining agreements with employers, we also have 17 health and welfare trust funds that are jointly governed by representatives of the union and management. What's more? Our members and funds are among the most sophisticated pairs of health care in the country. Including innovations and chronic care, primary care and pharmacy services. Despite our innovations in health care delivery, our experience today demonstrates that without significant legislative action to mitigate the market power of pharmaceutical companies, PBMs and providers. There is just no amount of smart shopping pilot programs or experimental initiatives on the part of workers and their unions, that will do much to decisively bend the health care cost curve. In our work, we have concluded that the basic problem in health care is prices, not utilization. In this country it is the price of doctors, hospitals and prescription drugs that is driving the cost of health care. It is not an aging population. The use of technology or some of the other factors to which other's point. It is plain and simple, Americans pay more for health care than other countries. In other words, workers are doing our part to be as effective, efficient and innovative as we possibly can, but prices are killing us and there have to be some reasonable controls. 13 days ago on the first of February this year, a ground swell of over 1,300 people to send it on a California State building in San Francisco for a public meeting of the Department of managed healthcare regarding annual costs and employers sponsors insurance. 59 speakers provided public testimony. Among them former state Senator Mark Leno who authored Senate Bill 546 which was passed in 2015 and authored by the California Labor Federation, Unite Here, and the Teamsters. Senate Bill 546 required that public hearing that night. The bill also requires health insurers and health care service plans to disclose aggregate pricing information for their large group market products. My colleague from the Association health plans mentioned some of this data. At that hearing colleagues from the California Works Foundation SCIU 1021 in our union released a report analyzing the findings of the first year of large group market disclosures that were made pursuant to SB546. Our report, which I brought for the Committee today and I'd like to submit into the public record, I understand you might already have it. Our report shows that pharmaceuticals were indeed the fastest category of spending among all medical benefit areas when it comes to the construction of large group market rates for the top seven insurers and HMO's in the state. The filings demonstrate prescription drug costs were generally expected to rise at a greater rate than overall medical costs in 2016. So while overall costs were expected to increase between 2.2 and 11.7%, prescription drug costs were expected to increase from between 8.1 to 18.1%. Again for the 2017 rates the disclosure indicate that the top seven companies project greater cost increases for prescription drugs relative to overall medical cost. To be clear, that data in the large group market covering 8 million covered lives, demonstrates that price not utilization is the problem. The stories we heard on February 1st about the human cost of prescription drug prices were excruciating and I'll just share three of them. Ms. Gomez has worked as a server at the San Francisco International Airport since 1980 and her daughter requires access to an EpiPen as a life or death matter to cope with potentially fail allergic reactions. Ms. Gomez brought the EpiPen to the hearing two Wednesdays ago. EpiPen cost of course have shot up by hundreds of dollars from around $100 for a two pack in 2009, to over $600 last year, while the manufacturer racked up $1.2 billion in profit on that product alone last year. Mister Youssef is a banquet server at the Fairmont Hotel, and he's a diabetic. On the months he doesn't get enough work to qualify for healthcare benefits through our local two health and law fair Taft-Hartley Fund, he must ask his church to buy him life saving insulin. A 95 year old drug that inexplicably remains under exclusive marketing by three brand name prescription drug companies. This is the gold standard gema article that I'd urge you to all check out, whose price per patient has risen from $209 per year to $736 a year between 2009 and 2013. Finally there was Ms. Garcia from the Four Seasons hotel in San Francisco who spoke on behalf of her 266 brothers and sisters at the hotel. She and her coworkers struggle greatly to survive in the Bay Area and some of them turned to loan sharks and that 10% predatory weekly interest. This is the human toll that prescription drug price inflation has on our member's lives. Prescription drug companies may say that they provide payment assistance coupons, tell people pay for out-of-pocket costs of drugs, but that masks the real problem. Our trust funds pay for the full cost of these drugs, using money collected from employers and ours worked by our members. Drug prices drive premium increases. Every dollar spent on healthcare and prescription drugs is a dollar not going to our members in the form of wages and other benefits. In the past decade or so, our health and welfare trust funds and local union affiliates have garnered some national media attention. About the innovations in the health care delivery system that I mentioned earlier especially with respect to pharmacy costs. A January 2011 article in The New Yorker describes the advent of our unique ambulatory intensive care unit in Atlantic City, which was the brain child of our largest heart healthy fund unite your health and our local in Atlantic City, Unite Here Local 54. The Special Care Center as it's known provides no cost access to physicians and prescription drugs to the approximately one third of the members of our fund who have chronic health conditions such as diabetes, hypertension and so on. And who also incur the bulk of our local health care cost. That 2011 magazine article notes that in the first year, the special care center cost for those patients by about a quarter, 25%. However, the reality of market power, seven years into our experiment in Atlantic City and the punishingly high cost of prescription drugs have made providing, excuse me, sustaining long-term savings. It's made that very elusive. In Las Vegas, our union is the third biggest spender on healthcare among the top three: Medicare and Medicaid, and then our union. The culinary pharmacy is another product of United Care Health. It sits on the Las Vegas strip. It's open on Saturdays to better serve our members and it provides all medications dispensed at that pharmacy for no cost. On a number of metrics, cost per script, cost per member, per month and so forth, savings are somewhat promising. Also in June of 2016, Unite Here Health launched our in house pharmacy benefit manager, Hospitality RX. We chose to bring our PBM function in house after witnessing pharmacy spending consistently creeping upwards as a share of total medical costs and after assessing that the existing pharmacy benefit manager just didn't provide enough value for our fund. Preliminary data is also promising. However, the culinary pharmacy and the Atlantic City Special Care Center cannot control all costs, particularly when pharmaceutical companies have patent granted monopolies. Costs are continuing to climb. In closing the experience of Unite Here demonstrates that workers, their unions and health and welfare funds have been reducing costs by employing best practices, and exploring health care delivery innovations. All the while foregoing raises. While consumer costs and medical costs continue to climb at dramatic rates far above inflation, but this is not enough. Price not utilization is the problem. Workers are doing our part. Now, we need reasonable legislative measures to control the prices of prescription drug companies, PBNs and providers. We ask that the State Legislator act without delay. Thank you.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 35, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 67, 'end': 80, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2019, 'end': 2028, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3758, 'end': 3763, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3967, 'end': 3972, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4246, 'end': 4253, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4818, 'end': 4824, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark Herbert: Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman, members of Committee. It's a pleasure to be here this afternoon to offer the perspective of small businesses and what they are going through as it relates to prescription drug cost. My name is Mark Herbert, I am California Director for small business majority. We are an education and advocacy organization, and we do two things. One is we believe in entrepreneurs and small employers are essential building blocks to healthy sustainable healthy economies, therefore they deserve all the tools and resources that they need to be successful and we do research, because we believe that there's an authentic voice of small business that exists, that we seek to bring to public policy. So, today, we'll walk through some of our research, the highlights of a scientific opinion poll, that we recently released regarding small business and their perceptions of the challenges facing prescription drug costs. So this little snapshot of small businesses here in California. They are about three and a half little bit more and three and a half million small businesses here in California. They employ roughly half of the state work force. About 800,000 of those small businesses have employees. About two thirds of all new jobs are created by small businesses since the recession and most of those jobs are coming from small businesses that have between 1 and 4 employees. Small businesses comprise around 98, 99% of all businesses in the state and the vast majority, about 75%, of those have fewer than 10 employees. So, the vast majority are small business and those are the ones that are creating the jobs in the economy. So, we ask small business owners about costs when it comes to prescription drugs. Nearly nine out of 10 small business owners think that prescription drug prices here in the U.S. are way too high and they believe these prices of specialty or life saving drugs are also high, about 84%. We do a lot of pulling of small business owners, they're not a monolithic group. They have a lot of diverse opinions and, appalling, it gets about nine out of 10 small business owners is a significant number and clearly there's a challenge that they are identifying in their business. When we ask, well, who do you think is responsible for that challenge that you're facing as a small business owner and those high costs? 72% of small business owners believe that pharmaceutical companies bear the responsibility for addressing this challenge. About 20% I believe, are health insurance companies, and 8% aren't quite sure. So, clearly small business owners understand that there is a challenge. They clearly identify folks who they believe bear responsibility for addressing the challenge. About 72% of the small business owner population provide their employees with some kind of prescription drug coverage. So, it's clearly something that they are very cognizant of and thinking of when they provide benefits for their employees. And specifically when it comes to prescription drugs, 52% of employers consider prescription jug prices when choosing the best plan for their business. So, over half small business owners are specifically thinking about the cost of prescription drugs. When it comes to what they're going to offer their employees, not just for themselves and their family, but also for their employees that they work with. More than 80% of small business owners say that their prescription drug copays have increased in recent years. Their primary strategies for managing those increasing drug copay costs are. So about 39% of small business owners end up shifting that cost to their employees. That's not something that they can absorb therefore, they're asking their employees to pay more out of their pocket for those prescription drugs. About 30% tried to absorb that cost as a business. So, they tried to take on that responsibility and obviously any cost to a small business is challenging, but they understand that they want to try to provide the best covers they can for their employees so they are willing to absorb that cost. 15% of small business owners actually end up reducing the coverage, the prescription drug coverage that they're giving to their employees simply because it's not sustainable for them and 10% actually end up reducing the actual overall health benefits to their employees. So, they reduce the number of employees who receive health benefits. And so, you have a range of strategies that business owners are struggling with as they seek to absorb those increasing costs, everything from shifting their employees to dropping coverage completely. So we ask, what do you think should be the strategies to address this challenge? And these are just top four and there were others, but again, the responses were significant in terms of agreement. Everything, it was mentioned earlier, regarding the pay for delay strategy. Nine in 10 small business owners think that should absolutely be illegal and laws should be in placed to make sure that's not happening. Nine out of 10 small business owners believe that any prescription drug that's developed with taxpayer funds. So, oftentimes or sometimes NH will do a lot of research that then is utilized for prescription companies who then go and take that drug to market. Nine out of 10 small business owners say, well, if that's the case, if our tax dollars are going to this research, then that should be something that should be made affordable to Americans and 85% of small business owners think that there should be the ability to purchase drugs across borders in Canada and 85% of small business owners believe the federal government should be able to negotiate with drug companies to get a lower prices on Medicare. There are a number of other strategies that pulled similar as high. These are the top four that we asked, what do you as a small business owner believe would be the most effective strategies? These are the four that they chose, but the other ones that also pulled significantly well are limiting the length of the pattern increasing transparency, creating justification for R&D the drug companies deal Creasing ACA like rules that requires X dollars of stand on research and development versus emissary cost and also pay for value and again all these are pulled really well and I think the real takeaway here is that with all these strategies there's significant support from this small business community and even when we asked would you be willing to get engaged and get involved and sign a letter of support or be involved to try to address this issue. I think we had over 70% of the folks said yeah, I'd be happy to sign something. I'd be happy to get involved because this is affecting my business. This is a scientific opinion poll, so this is not a poll of our members. We hired a polling company to poll a statistically relevant sample of small business owners. It came out about 35% Republican, about 35% Independent, about 25, 26% Democrat. So, it's a bi-partisan poll. The real focus here is, what are the challenges facing small business owners? What are their concerns? What are the strategies to address this? With that, I'll conclude my testimony. I appreciate the opportunity to be here.
[{'start': 223, 'end': 235, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Seth Kerstein: Thank you, Mr. Chair. Seth Kerstein with the Legislative Analysts Office. I'll give a very brief overview of cannabis legalization in California. And then I'll discuss some of the tax related challenges facing the state and the industry. My colleague Shawn Martin will cover the Department of food and agriculture track and trace program and summarize some of the state's key upcoming deadlines related to cannabis legalization. So the path that California has followed to cannabis being illegal under state law to becoming legal has occurred in 4 big steps. The first one was Proposition 215 which voters passed in 1996. Prop 215 legalized the use of marijuana for medical purposes. The second was SB420 of 2003, which legalized nonprofit cooperatives that grow medical marijuana and provided to their members. For many years after this first two laws were passed, the state didn't play much of a role in licensing or regulating medical marijuana. That really just happened at the local level. Then the third major change came along when the Legislature passed some laws in 2015 known collectively as the Medical Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act, or MCRSA. In line with its name, MCRSA required state agencies to regulate several different aspects of the medical marijuana industry. And most recently, we had the fourth major change in state cannabis laws when voters passed Proposition 64 this past November, which legalized adult use of cannabis for non-medical purposes. The next chapter in that story is the state's ongoing implementation of those last two changes, MCRS and Prop 64. And my colleague will touch on that briefly later in our presentation. But now that I've covered some of that general background I'd like to narrow the focus to the main topic of interest today, taxation of the cannabis industry. So Prop 64, which was passed in November, made several changes to the cannabis tax landscape. The first change was a change in the sales taxation of medical marijuana. Shortly after the election, the state implemented a full sales tax exemption for certain medical marijuana sales. The second change was that local governments can now tax both medical and nonmedical marijuana and voters have already approved local taxes in some areas. And the third change was the creation of some new state excise taxes on cannabis effective January 1st, 2018. The excise tax rates on growers are $9.25 per ounce of dried flowers and $2.75 per ounce of dried leaves. The excise tax on retail sales of cannabis products is 15%. The revenue from these taxes will go to a new special fund for purposes specified in Proposition 64. And although cannabis is now legal under state law and the state is developing a system for taxing and regulating it, it is still illegal, as you know, under federal law. And that has some major implications for the states implementation of and the industries compliance with the new excise taxes. In particular it means that the industry has very limited access to financial services. Banks have some very strong incentives not to serve clients who violate federal drug laws. So in most cases, businesses in the cannabis industry can get bank accounts and other financial services only as long as the banks providing those services remain unaware of what their clients are selling. As a result a lot of cannabis businesses are largely cash based, which not only makes it more costly and less secure for them to operate. But also makes it harder for them to pay taxes. And the state agency that administers those taxes, in particular, sales and excised taxes for the state, is the State Board of Equalization. Otherwise known as BOE. BOE is headed by a five member elected board. One of whom is the state controller who's elected on a state wide basis. And for who were elected from four districts, each of which contains about a quarter of the states population. BOEs default policy is not to accept payments in cash, which obviously poses some problems for the cannabis industry. However the no cash policy does allow district administrator in each of the four geographic BOE districts to make exceptions for taxpayers who can demonstrate that the no cash policy would pose a hardship. BOE's capacity to handle cash will need to expand quite a bit under Prop 64. Some components of the administration's 2017-18 budget request for BOE to implement Prop 64 are intended to help them build this capacity. And at a recent meeting, BOE staff presented several alternatives for the board members to consider that potentially further strengthen the agency's ability to take cash payments from tax payers. Of course, enabling cash payments is only one of the steps the state needs to take to implement the tax components of Prop 64. One of the other major challenges is getting the industry to comply with the new taxes. The first basic step in that effort is outreach and education to make sure that the industry is aware of the new excise taxes. There's some complementarity there, potentially with other agency's licensing efforts. Cannabis businesses will need to be registered with BOE, before they can obtain state licenses and both steps are part of the broader process. These businesses will need to go through to move out of the underground economy. Now the second step for those businesses who do not undergo that process and who remain part of the underground economy is to for the state to follow up with enforcement and BOE does have some existing programs in this area. In recent years BOE investigators have participated in several inter-agency task forces that address the underground economy broadly. Two of these task forces have focused specifically on criminal tax evasion. The Revenue Recovery and Collaborative Enforcement Team, which is headed by the Department of Industrial Relations, and the Tax Recovery and Criminal Enforcement Task Force. Thank you. We don't have precise estimates of the number of cannabis businesses in the state that are operating in the underground economy, but it's likely at least in the tens of thousands. Then the biggest piece of that in terms of number of businesses is on the cultivation side. Although growers certainly have income tax liability, they probably don't, in most cases, have much sales tax liability because most of their sales are for resale. The part of the supply chain that typically would owe sales tax on most of their product is the retailers or dispensaries. Right now we're in a short window of time when they'll be paying sales tax only on sort of a narrow piece of their cannabis sales. As I mentioned earlier, BOE has implemented a full sales tax exemption for certain medical marijuana sales. In particular, when the purchaser provides state issued medical marijuana ID cards, along with another form of government issued ID. So, for other medical marijuana sales, dispensaries will still need to remit some sales tax. So Prop 64 contains some language related to tax enforcement, some of which will be helpful for BOE's tax enforcement efforts, and some of which has turned out to be unnecessary. In particular, Prop 64 authorizes BOE to develop Tax Stamps but encoding information on a single physical stamp isn't very practical given the way cannabis changes as it moves through the supply chains. So, for the cannabis excise taxes, the Department of Food and Ag's track and trace system will play a role similar to what Tax Stamps play for cigarettes. My colleague, Shawn Martin, will give you some more information about track and trace.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 251, 'end': 263, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3669, 'end': 3672, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7483, 'end': 7495, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michele Pielsticker: Excuse me, thank you very much. Michele Pielsticker, State Board of Equalization. And thank you for providing me with the opportunity to do some background about BOE's current sales and use tax collection and compliance for medical cannabis dispensaries. As well as ongoing challenges resulting from the fact that the cannabis industry largely consists of many cash businesses without adequate access to banking. Under current law, all retailers engaged in business in California must pay sales tax on the tangible personal property they sell, absent an exemption or exclusion. Retail sales of medical cannabis were subject to the tax, to the same extent as any other retail sale of tangible personal property in this state, until November 9th when Prop 64 was enacted. Prop 64 provides an exemption for retail sales of medical cannabis products. When a qualified patient or their primary caregiver provides their medical marijuana ID card and a valid government issued ID card. Now, prior to October 2005, the BOE did not knowingly issue sellers permits to sellers of property that may be considered illegal, including medical cannabis. However, in October 2005, the board directed staff to issue sellers permits irrespective of the potential illegal nature of the product sold and the failure of the retailer to indicate the product sold and registering for a permit. The board's willingness to accept a retailer's registration without specifying the product sold stems from the fact that retailers have feared federal prosecution for selling medical cannabis. Which is considered a schedule one drug as you mentioned. In January 2016, the BOE provided an identification code for medical cannabis businesses when information in the public domain indicates that a business sells cannabis. And the BOE anticipates this will be helpful in more accurately tracking the amount of revenue derived from cannabis retailers. Until now, the BOE has cross-checked industry websites and public advertising with current sales and use tax registrants to identify businesses that don't hold a seller's permit in an effort to register them. Through June 30th, 2016, 1,185 publicly disclosed medical cannabis sellers registered with the BOE, filed returns, and remitted sales and use tax. In fiscal year '15, '16 medical cannabis businesses reported $69 million in sales and use tax. Based on cannabis consumption data, the BOE estimates it would've collected $112 million with 100% compliance rate. Applying those assumptions, the estimated actual compliance rate is approximately 61% on the sales and use tax side. And this percentage is similar to Colorado's stated compliance rate of 60%. Now, I issue the CAVEAT that the estimated $112 million that we might collect with 100% compliance rate is based on assumptions. And we're basing that on consumption data on the national level. So to the extent those assumptions are wrong, that number could be greater or less. This lower rate of compliance reflects an industry that has remained primarily underground due to fear of federal prosecution. To improve compliance, the BOE uses all of the compliance tools it applies to any other business. Audit collection and education. As part of its education program, BOE uses its statewide compliance and outreach teams or scope teams, we call them to find and register dispensaries as they visit various zip codes and that includes actually not just dispensaries, but all businesses. These teams travel to businesses, to make sure they are properly registered in complying with the sales and use tax law and that their feed programs were applicable. The BOE also works with industry groups to educate them about their sales and use tax applications. So, a few things have changed in the last couple of years as prior panels have indicated. In 2015, we had the MCRSA package of legislation that establishes the comprehensive regulatory framework for medical marijuana. And Prop 64, the Adult Use of Marijuana Act establishes a similar framework for adult use marijuana as well as a retail level excise tax and cultivation tax on the product. Prop 64 also expands the medical cannabis track and trace system to monitor all marijuana, and marijuana product movement from cultivation to sale, and this track, and trace system would help the BOE determine the amount of products sold and the amount of cultivation tax due which will be very helpful when taxpayers fail to keep adequate or accurate books, and records. The bureau is prepared to implement the taxes imposed by Proposition 64 when the time comes in January 2018. However, issues remain with respect to cash payments. Due to reduced access to banking, many cannabis businesses pay their taxes in cash as other panels have mentioned. Thank you. In early 2014, the BOE implemented no-cash policy. By statute, when a business has monthly tax liabilities averaging $10,000 or more, they are required to make their payment by EFT and that's for all businesses. Failure to remit the funds by EFT subjects taxpayers to specified penalties, unless the person's failure to pay using electronic funds transfer is due to reasonable cause and circumstances beyond his or her control. To obtain this relief, taxpayers do have to file a request for relief of penalty. Effective January 1, 2017, a new law provides relief from this penalty to medical cannabis dispensaries. However, to reduce costs and ensure employee safety, the BOE's district administrators are empowered to determine whether they will accept cash in their offices. A large cash deposit by one taxpayer alone can take numerous staff hours to count and the potential danger with large sums requires added security. In fiscal year 15, 16, the BOE accepted $22 million in cash from identified dispensaries. In the short-term to address the cash issue, the BOE is looking and working with banks to accept cash payments creating tax service centers at existing secure government buildings and that would include the local sheriff's department. Creating offsite cash acceptance facilities at strategic locations and installing cash acceptance systems at BOE offices. On a broader scale, the treasurer has established a working group to address the cash issue for all state agencies. And as Prop 64 is implemented, the need for this group will be enhanced. The cash issue is bigger than BOE alone and necessitates a longer term statewide approach. We look forward to being a part of those discussions. In conclusion, although the BOE has strived to improve sales and the tax compliance among cannabis businesses, there is more work to be done. The BOE is hopeful the new regulatory framework combined with a track and trace system will improve tax compliance. Additionally, we look forward to working with other state agencies to address the issue of cash, so that all state employees can remain safe and secure as we implement Prop 64. Thank you and I am happy to answer any questions.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 3841, 'end': 3846, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Barry Broad: barry jonah broad with the teamsters. so we're organizing workers all way from farm to just to dispensaries. the issues of conformity between the legislation and the initiative pale in comparison to this banking problem. it is a huge, huge drag in inefficiency in this system. we want to bring hiring halls for example to the agricultural area which is a traditional way of organizing work so that people who need seasonal workers don't have to hire them full time, don't have to buy the benefits. they pay into essentially a trust, and the trust pays the workers, etc. we can't do that if it appears that what we are doing is laundering drug money. so we have workers that are being paid partly in cash, partly in checks. we are the antithesis of the underground economy organized labor. we hate that. so we really want to fix that problem. so no one has discovered the local california fix or state fix. people have been talking about it. it doesn't seem to be emerging. therefore, recommendation number one, i think that the legislature needs to do what it can do. send resolutions, send letters to the congress, to the president saying fix this banking problem, it is now a ridiculous like holdover that makes no rational sense. we want to pay the payroll taxes to the federal government that are not being paid. and i think in this case, senator moorlach, you're a member of the minority party here. but it is the majority party in washington. those congressmen that represent california that are in the minority delegation here are in the majority delegation there. you can be in your caucus of enormous help in getting this done. second issue.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1351, 'end': 1359, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
James Hinton: Good afternoon Senators. Thank you for hanging with us. James Hinton, 3574 Hunter Circle Napa, California. There's two things I want you to consider about the taxes involved with the Proposition 64. One is the stems and the seeds. They need to be composted with paper products at a ratio of three to one returned to the earth. We don't want anybody raiding garbages, pulling out stems, smoking them without paying taxes to California. And the major one I'm here for today is a lot of the producers, like for edibles, they receive the products in these large bags and they dump the bags, they take the products out, and they reuse the bags over and over. But the bags are full of resin. There's a lot of THC that remains on the inside of these bags. Now when the bags are eventually broken, they'll throw them away. When they get torn, they throw them away. But they recycle them as much as they can. And when they go in the garbage, again this is the chance for somebody to steal the garbage, scrape the THC, and smoke it without paying taxes. And there is a machine out there that can help us. These large manufacturers take the bags, they put them in the machine, it will bring the THC out of it, preserve it, and allow it to come to the floor for market, in California, so you can collect the taxes. So it's a win, win. You can get the THC out of the plastic, get the plastic returned into the garbage where it goes and get that product on the sales floor so California can collect all it's revenue.
[{'start': 56, 'end': 68, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Edgar Cabral: good morning mr. chair and members. edgar jonah cabral of the legislative analyst's office. i was asked to provide kind of a very high level overview of the system to just provide you with some context before you hear from the other panelists and some of them are detailed work that's been going on. there's a lot of background, a lot of years of work in developing the system, so i think i'll do my best to just cover at a high level to help you understand some of the things that other panelists will be discussing. and we do have a handout that we developed that i would use on as the basis of this presentation, but i won't go through everything in specific detail. i wanted to be and by just talking about is starkly some of the state and federal changes and what's been going on, where we are now and then a few things for you to consider moving forward in terms of some things the legislature might want to think about. this change in the state accountability system really began in 2013 as part of the adoption of the lcff, the local control funding formula. attached to the legislation that created lcff was this whole new accountability framework that's been rolled out over the last several years. and some of the things that are part of that framework you may have heard about. we have now been talking for several years about eight state priority areas, that are in statute that specify kind of the key things that the state thinks are most important, and there are other things the state is using to kind of determine whether districts and schools are doing well. and then you have local control and accountability plans which is one of the ways where these priority areas kind of show up. the districts now for three years have been developing these plans that require them to set goals in these priority areas, to use some of the performance measures in statute to measure how they are going to improve in those priority areas, and specify the actions they're going to make that improvement. and we're now in the third year, for the 16/17 year was the third that districts have had to adopt an lcap and they have to go out and get feedback from their communities, from stakeholders and they have to ultimately get their lcaps adopted and approved by the county office of education. so those are the things i think now, have been around and been going on for a couple years. on page two we talk a little bit more about the detail of what is called the evaluation rubrics. i think ultimately the valuation rubrics will show up for most people in this dashboard that i think the board stuff is sort of expected to be available for the public in the spring of 2017. and the board developed this and adopted the rubrics in september of 2016. what the initial legislation said is that these rubrics are intended to be used to identify districts that might need assistance and to also be a tool for districts to use to identify their own strengths and weaknesses. these rubrics were to be based on these eight priority areas on the things that the state have said are important. and the board, in developing them, they've developed a set of 10 state performance indicators that are used at the district-level and in some cases, can be used for subgroups and individual schools. they kind of split it up into two different kinds of indicators depending on what data we have available. so they are what the board's calling the state performance indicators where we have statewide data that's collected across the state for schools, for school districts, for individual student subgroups. and for that data which i think is a lot about what the conversations have been about in terms of what will be up on the dashboard, that's data that will be, the board has set these performance categories that are color-coded, going from red, which is the lowest performing, to blue, which is the highest performing. and you'll be able to see for all of these, state performance indicators for a school district, how they're doing, for a individual subgroup within the school district. and then for a school and then for subgroups within that school. so the idea there is that this is going to be a tool for districts for the public to be able to use to kind of look at how a district is doing, how schools are doing, how individuals or groups are doing. those performance categories are based on two things. one is how overall is a district performing in that area and the second thing is what's the improvement or growth over time or potentially change over time. so in general districts who might have be in a red category or districts that have an absolute low performance on that particular indicator and also are not seeing much growth. and then on the other side, the districts with the blue category would be districts with high performance and likely high growth as well. so that's part of what will be when the dashboards are available to the public. you'll be able to see that information and there will be, i know there's been a lot of discussions of the functionality of the tool, but from what we've heard from the state board of education, that'd be the ability to drill down and look at, for example, individual student groups', subgroups' scores, scores at the district level or at the school level. it's a little bit different for these other performance indicators, what are called the local performance indicators. and these are areas where the state does not have a uniform consistency state-wide data that i can use to categorize performance based on these different categories. so for example, one example is parent engagement. there is no state-wide measurement for how we're engaging parents. and so what the board is going to be requiring as part of the rubrics is for districts to develop their own local measure of parent engagement, and so they would, at the local level, develop what it is they're going to use to determine that. to measure progress, and to see how they are improving over time and to provide some information in a narrative form that will be uploaded into a dashboard for the public to be able to see. and in this case, as long as districts are developing a local indicator, describing how their performance is changing. and submitting that information will be considered to have, to be meeting that specific standard. so, that's kind of the general framework of what's going on with those rubrics. and we will be available on that dashboard. then that information then, it can be used and is required to be used by county offices of education to identify which districts need to receive technical assistance. and the state board has specified based on the rubrics how you would define whether a district needs to receive additional assistance, that's tied to some of the language that was in the initial legislation. for districts to receive assistance, generally what we require to receive assistance, if you have any student subgroup that is in that lowest performance category for more than one of the priority areas. so for example, if you have a student sub-group that based on their graduation rates and their student test scores are in that red category, that would reflect that that district needs to receive technical assistance, to get support for improving outcomes for that student sub-group. there's also another more intensive level of intervention. if you have a district where three or more sub-groups are in that lowest performance category for two or more priority areas, in three out of four the consecutive years. so, we're talking about now, multiple students subgroups struggling over multiple years in a number of areas. so, we don't expect that there'll be as many districts who will be in that category. but that is one of the possibilities. so moving on to page 4, that's a very quick summary of what the rubrics or the dashboard is expected to look like. i wanted to highlight a couple of other key things that are now associated with that. first is the california collaborative for educational excellence, which is a state entity that was created in 2013, specifically with the idea that they would be a statewide expert that would help in providing assistance to schools and districts. the idea is that it would be a small entity that would be able to contract out with experts, but also that they might be one of the key entities in helping provide support to some of those school districts, who are persistently under performing for many years. the state has provided two different sources of one-time funding for the collaborative. first, an initial $10 million to get the agency up and running. and then last year in the budget, additional funding for specific activities, one was to conduct statewide professional development or training for anybody actually, anybody in the general public, but also teachers, administrators, parents, to learn about the rubrics and how they can be used. and then also funding to develop a pilot program to work with some school districts who are struggling to improve outcomes with the idea that this pilot program would help inform what the collaborative would do moving forward. as it works to assist some school districts who are struggling to improve outcomes. so those are the key things in the state system. i wanted to briefly talk about the federal changes. so the state has started doing it in 2013, in december 2015 the federal government passed the every student succeeds act,  which essentially got rid of the no child left behind assistant which was a very prescriptive federal system and it meant that we had a state and federal accountability system. two systems at the same time that often told districts conflicting things. and now the federal law essentially says, states you can have your own accountability model. it has to meet some very specific requirements. as long as you do those things, we don't need to have a complete federal system. one of the things for california that has been good is that the essa, a lot of the components that are required are parts that the state is already developing, through the rubrics and through the multiple measure system that we have now. so the federal government requires a number of key measurements such as academic achievement, graduation rates, academic growth, progress for english learners, and a non-academic measure such as school climate. the state is already doing all that. all of that is already embedded within those state priority areas and those performance indicators. the essi also requires two different levels of support for schools. there's this more targeted support if there is a school that's having trouble with a particular sub-group. and there's a more comprehensive level of support for a school that has sort of more persistent systemic problems. it's very similar to the structure that we have in our system for identifying districts that need technical assistance for some specific subgroups that are not performing well versus that more intensive intervention that we set and specific in laws that for more long term ongoing problems in the school districts. the one key difference between the two systems is the essa is all about school level performance whereas the state system is mostly district based. but with the dashboard we will be able to look at school level data as well. and so you can imagine very easily being able to combine the state requirements, and the federal requirements together, so that you don't have multiple systems with different ways to identify whether districts are in need of support. i wanted to specify to discuss a little bit of some of the uncertainty about regulations and i think in general, we would say that there are some uncertainty in our regulations but we don't think there's any reason that the state needs to change what it's doing in the current plan or timeline for submitting a plan for essa. right now the state's plan is to submit its plan to the federal government by september of 2017. the final essa regulations were finalized in november of 2016. the new administration delayed the implementation of those until march. and then, congress actually is considered, as part of something called the congressional review act, they have the authority to repeal any regulations that have been recently adopted by an administration. right now, they have a resolution that's passed the house that would repeal any of the final essa regulations. again, we don't know exactly what will happen there. and but we did it recently hear from the new secretary of education sent out a letter to the chief state school officer saying that obviously acknowledging the uncertainly around there. but that the department of education will be looking to make sure that most of the things that are in this template for any essa plan are tight specifically to statutes and not regulations. so that there are changes in the regulations, there are major changes to what states are expected to submit. and there are also specified they still have same expectation from when plans are due to the federal government and for the state that would be for california that's september of 2017. so again i mentioned that because i know that's something that's come up. but we dont think it means that there should be significant changes in the states planning at this moment. on page 7, we just highlighted some of the major ways that we funded some of these accountability activities. all of them have been one time. there is one on going spending that the state's going to have to start doing beginning in 2018/19 with title, one funding. so under essa the state's are required to set aside 7% of their title one funding to provide support to school and that's about $140 million. so coming into 18/19 budget and that will be an important decision for the legislature to make. and then finally just in terms of some general issues for consideration. i think again we think that the state it is well on its way to creating one coherent systems that can align the state and the federal systems together. so you have a little bit more clarity for schools, for districts, for the public. a couple of key things moving forward i think once the dashboard is in place and we have a better sense of how many districts do qualify for needing technical assistance. then i think an important conversation would be, kind of what is our capacity to provide assistance and support to these districts. what are the specific subgroups or populations where there is needed for additional assistance. and that might help inform decisions about distributing resources and making decisions about what entities should be involved in providing additional support to districts. the other key thing is with regards to the collaborative we would highlight again that all of the collaborative's funding to the state has been one time funding. and so moving forward as we make decisions about what the system looks like in the long run. what important decision will be deciding. what we think the core activities of the collaborative should be on an ongoing basis and providing funding associated with that. i'm so off the top there and happy to help you to answer any questions you might have.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Keric Ashley: All right, Keric Ashley, Deputy Superintendent, California Department of Education. It's very exciting, actually, to be here with you this morning. I told my wife that all I wanted for my birthday was to be able to testify at a legislative hearing. And since today is my birthday, It's your birthday! I got everything that I wanted. Happy birthday. But actually, the exciting part of testifying this morning is to let you know that California really is on the leading edge. It's not that bad, come on. Not at all. Not at all. California really is on the leading edge and playing a leadership role across the nation in this whole area of assessment and accountability. And it started with the support of the Governor and the Legislature, the Superintendent, our business community and our school districts. And their support of California State standards and the implementation of those standards. And then in follow-up to that, the last two years the incredible success we have had with implementing smarter balance assessments. Millions of kids taking this test, with only less than 1,000 kids needing to take it on paper and pencil. While other states have struggled, doing that assessment. And then follow it up with, LCFF funding and being able to put funding out there that's targeted to kids that are of poverty, especially. And then on top of that, a local accountability system. Which, again, is something that's historic and playing a leadership role across the nation. And all of that happening before the new federal law. And the new federal law came in and realized that the federal government needed to turn more control over to the states. And in the same way, a little bit ahead of the federal government. The state already realized that we need to turn around and let the experts of the local level have more control over how to spend their funding. We need to provide supports to them, and one of the biggest supports that we can provide is an accountability system. A dashboard of what we were talking about today in order to provide some information, some data, back to those schools and districts. So that they can make informed decisions about how to spend their money. How to improve things for their English learners. For their kids of poverty, for their students with disabilities. So again, I just wanted to tell you, as I talked to colleagues across the nation in other states, they're in somewhat awe of what California has done the last five years. We're not there yet, there's a lot of work to be done for all of us. But we are, once again, playing a leadership role across the nation. As President Kirst mentioned, what we put together here is, and we're referring at to as the Dashboard, the California School Dashboard, officially. So when you hear Dashboard, what you hearing is evaluation rubrics. This is the new name for the evaluation rubrics. Because we think as it's a little more understandable for folks to understand, not only in schools and districts. But this is for the community as a whole as they look at data for their schools and districts. So help them understand, to give them easy reports. The goal here is at one glance, for a parent who doesn't need to have a lot of educational background, or experience, or working in schools. At one glance, they can get an idea, in multiple measures, how well their school or district is doing, at one glance. And for those that need more deeper information, there's background information, more detailed reports. Downloadable data for the data geeks that want to get into the specifics of this. Because this color coded dashboard is not going to solve the problem, it's just going to highlight where issues have to be investigated. And so it's that background data that's part of this website to be that districts can use to help, again, make choices on how to spend money and where to focus their resources. Because we're much more than just looking at schools and districts by a single test score anymore. That was the old system, and it was a very narrowly defined system, because it was driven by the federal government. Now California has taken back the driver's seat, here. We're providing a system in which we're going to provide multiple measures and data, back to schools and districts, so that we can make those decisions. And as we look at the new federal law, we'll make the federal law fit into our system here in the state. And it will be a single system, not multiple systems. We won't have EPI and AYP, dueling systems, anymore. It'll be a single system by which we can do it. So the idea here is for a parent to at first glance, just like they do their report cards at home. They get every quarter, they open their report card, and their report card doesn't say your child is a C-. It has multiple measures on it. It tells parent how their child is doing in English Language Arts, in math, in science, in social, in many areas. Even how they're doing behavior-wise or effort-wise. All of these are important aspects for the success of a student. In the same way, multiple measures are needed in order to look at the success of a school. So again, at one glance, being unable to see where the strengths are, where the negatives are, and where the student groups are that need assistance. So the reports are going to be searchable. You'll be able to look by school, look by district. The primary purpose of these is not to make judgments that this school is doing well, this school is doing not well. The idea here is to provide information back to schools and districts so that they can identify their own strengths and weaknesses. And be able to identify their areas of improvement, so that they can then make plans to get better. We were talking a little bit about, in the previous discussion, about support to schools. We got a little ahead of ourselves in that discussion, but that happens with gifted students. They always get ahead of the teacher. We're talking about the system first, and once the system's in place, then we can talk about the support that goes with that system. But let me be clear, schools and districts are not sitting on their hands, waiting for the state to identify what are system support are. They're out there helping schools and helping kids even now. County offices are out there helping schools and helping them get better. So they're not waiting for the state. But once the state has this accountability system in place, it's fully implemented this year. But we won't be using it for assistance this year, or for identifying schools for assistance or districts for assistance this year. That comes next year, right? In future years, after it's fully implemented. So as was mentioned before, the multiple measures include seven indicators for which we have state data. So the state takes the data in, state does the calculations, state puts out some indicators by color. By pie charts if you will and you'll see in example of that in a little bit. So that's data that we provide, then there's local indicators that the state does not have. The local school districts are much better position to have that data and to provide that data on self reflection and to provide their own evaluation of how they're doing. So it's a system that again, combines state indicators with local indicators. Something that again, is playing a leadership role regarding how other states are doing this. So it maybe easiest. And if you haven't seen it in your packet, there is a tab in the packet that you've got and it's called California school dashboard prototype. Now I think what you have in there, it's a tab that's in the middle, California school dashboard prototype. If you look at that, I have a nice color copy and of cours,e the website will be in a color copy. What you have I believe is black and white, but that's why we have the pie charts there. I call them pie charts, pizza pies, apple pie, whatever works for you. And what those pie charts circles are supposed to indicate is a reflection that the same thing that the colors indicate. So while blue indicates the highest level of performance, a full pie indicates blue, indicates the highest level of performance. So if you don't have a color copy, what you're hoping for is your school district has a full pie. If it only has a single slice on that pie, then you know that they're performing at their lowest level of performance. And that's a red color in the color coded system. But if you look at that, you can see that multiple measures from the state indicators. Starting with chronic absenteeism, suspension rates, English learner progress, graduation rates, college and career, English Language Arts and Mathematics. So it's really seven indicators when you break out the assessment data in the English Language Arts and Mathematics. And then there a four local indicators including how well they're implementing academic standards, parent engagement, local climate survey and so forth. So this is just the landing page, right? Again, if you want to more detailed information, more detailed information will be available for how to look at any one of these individual indicators. There will be a way to click on an individual indicator and say how are all of my student groups doing? Like English learners, like our students of poverty. How are all of them doing in graduation rates or in suspension rates? If you look at the example that you have been given, which is a fictitious school district. And you go down to English Language Arts, English Language Arts or K8 there is on my copy as a green color. But for yours it has four of the five pie slices which indicates that they're the second highest level performers. So they're doing very well. But if you keep going across English Language Arts on the far right column, you'll see that under the student groups in red and orange, there is one student group indicated that's in the red or orange. So right again, at a single glance you can see we are dong well overall in this district in English Language Arts. But there's a one here, there's a student group that's in the red or orange. We'd better look and see what student group that is because our work isn't finished just because overall we're doing well. So again, at a single glance being able to see that information. So some of these have an NA next to them. College and career, chronic absenteeism. That's because the system has just now rolling out. It'll be rolled out publicly in March. But during that, this is a continues improvement process. It's true of the state, as well as locals. So while these dashboards are to help school and districts get better on a continuous basis. We need at the state level to also get better on a continuous basis. And the system itself needs to continue to improve over time. So it's not completely done, chronic absenteeism is data we're collecting for the first time at the end of the school year. So that will be put in when that data is available, not this year but the following year because you actually need two sets of data. Because remember, we're not looking just at status, are they performing high or are they performing low? But as Mr. Kebral mentioned before, we're looking at the change, how have they done over time? It's great that they were high, but how has that high changed from year to year? From last year, have they slipped lightly, right. That would be something to look at. Are they low performing? Yes, that's a concern but look, overtime, they've actually been getting better. So whatever they're doing, they should keep doing. So again, it looks at status and change. The other one here, college and career, this is also one that the California is leading on the cutting edge here across the nation is having a college and career indicator. Made up of multiple measures within college and career indicator and that will be rolled out next year as we have our second set of data. So, while we have these dashboards, people need to know how to use them. So there's a number of webinars, there's a number of meetings going on, there's a number of trainings going on. Dr. Cohen will talk a little bit about what CCEE is doing in terms of their training on school and districts. County offices are out there providing these training to school districts even as we speak. The state department is doing webinars. There's one happening actually today and every Wednesday between now and the rollout of the systems to give more information to schools and districts. And I think we had over 400 attend the very first webinar that we've had. So, excuse me, so those are going well and a lot of information is going out to schools and districts on this. There's also a number of workgroups. So we've got a large stakeholder input on the development of the system. And we'll continue to have these stakeholder groups as the system develops more. We've got an English learner workgroup to talk about some of the English learner data. That is needed to be put into the system to help our English learners get better. We have a technical design group that looks at technical issues related to the information in each dashboard. We have schools condition and climate workshop. This is to talk about things like parent engagement and student engagement and how to measure that locally. We've got an equity and policy stakeholder workgroup. You're going to hear from the next panel. They're the California Practitioners Advisory Group. So the actual school districts are telling us how they can use this and how to make it better. So there's a number of stakeholder groups involved in this. When it comes as Doctor Kirst mentioned earlier, when it comes to SN in the state plan as he mentioned, we'll be turning that in in September. The first draft of that plan will be presented to the board in May, but that's just the first draft. We've been making some decisions, when I say we I mean the state board's been making some decisions. To go into that plan over the last six months. So the first draft of the plan should look very familiar to the state board members. Because they've been making decisions already that'll be in this first draft. And then we'll continue to make some decisions including what we're going to do now we have these dashboards rolling out the next logical step is what are we going to do with them. How do we use them? What's the system of support we're going to provide to schools and districts on this. Yesterday we had a meeting of state agencies, it was the third in a series of meetings that will continue to meet. And when I say state agencies, I mean the California Department of Education, the State Board of Education, the collaborative CTC, our credentialing agency. Our Association for county superintendents come to those meetings. Subject matter projects, we've got a number of state agency level people meeting To talk exactly about this. It's the start of the conversation of what is the support going to look like for these schools and districts. There's a lot of support going out right now from all of those agencies and the first thing to do is get a level setting to find out what everyone is doing and to make sure that we're collaborating, we're coordinating those efforts so that we're not duplicating or missing out on, on services. Once we develop that, once we have a good view of the landscape, we can then talk about how we going to build upon that. Because the system is built for all schools and districts to get better. This isn't a system to identify the lowest 5%. This is to let all schools and all districts know how they're doing because we think all schools and all districts can and should get better over time. So we first have to talk about what's the support that's going to be available to all schools and districts, all 10,000 schools out there. And then we can talk about what do we going to do for those that have a large number of reds in their dashboard and what does that look like. So, I think I'll stop.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2628, 'end': 2633, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 11205, 'end': 11211, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 12153, 'end': 12158, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 12193, 'end': 12197, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 13681, 'end': 13686, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Karen Valdez: good morning i'm valdez and i'm the assistant superintendent at menifee union school district.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Fred Jones: mr. chairman, fred edgar jones on behalf of the california business education association which is also a member of the get real coalition which is chaired by the manufacturers and the state building trades council which is an unusual coalition of labor and business and we are focused like a laser beam on career tactical education. we are having conversations with state board staff and department about how to define career readiness. so college and career readiness is one of the priorities that you all set. everyone understands at least on paper what college readiness is, the courses you take, the sat, etc. the state board is grappling with how to come up with student based career readiness criteria of indicators. and we hope to be able to work with him in devising ways that they can include this in the state accountability system because the drivers of our k12 system remain the same. what sacramento requires, funds and measures is what gets taught. so careertech has really been left out of the measurements, has been left our of the state mandates. the funding element, therefore, has been the only driver sustaining these programs. we are in the middle of the largest investment in career tech in our nation's history, $900 million, three year incentive grant. but that runs out in another year and a half, so until careertech is included in our state accountability system. we would hope our state policy makers continue to sustain these programs with incentive grant funding, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brad Strong: member's brad, senior director of children now. here just kind of remind you that the academic performance index back in 1999 was calling for a multiple measuring system and we'd passed i think the legislature has passed, five, six, seven bills in the last 15 years that have asked to make progress on a number of things related to that academic performance index. the state board and department have been doing wonderful work and really have been making progress. we're appreciative of that.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Martha Alvarez: good afternoon, martha fred alvarez with acsa the association of california school administrators. we are very pleased with the direction of the state regarding the new system. we have been waiting for this new accountability system for about three years now since lcsf was adopted in 2013. we are members, that administrators are very excited about the opportunity to talk about multiple measures, thinking more holistically about an education of a child. i think at the discussion today between all of you and the questions that you ask the staff and the panel members, it's probably a preview of what's happening across the state at school board meetings. looking at the data, looking at the dashboard, that will be happening starting in march. being able to use the dashboard and the color coding indicators as a tool to be able to identify those strengths, the weaknesses, and opportunities for improvement. so we think it's really great to be able to think about holistically how can we improve student outcomes, and not just based on test scores. the other really great thing about this that we should not forget about is equity, how we're embracing student disparity, or improving student disparities, and being able to target those resources for those students who need the most support. for axa, we're very interested in the capacity building aspect. we do believe that the site leaders, the central office, and school site leaders, educators, both teachers, principals, and administrators, they will need support in being able to adapt, think about how to better collaborate, and how to work with the county offices to be able to support students. last comment i'll make, acsa was one of the hosts for one of the professional learning communities to do the cce. so we're very interested in thinking about how can we replicate the support that we're providing to administrators to be able to replicate across the state. thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Seth Litt: good afternoon, my name is litt, i serve as the executive director of parent revolution, a non-profit based in los angeles. over the past nine years our organization's worked with thousands of families throughout california as they work together to try to improve low performing schools. and in the last year, we've worked with over a thousand families in south los angeles as they try to choose better schools for their children through various public school choice programs, whether district or charter. parents have been coming up to sacramento from los angeles for the last year to share their input and feedback on new state accountability system and the dashboard. i want to speak a little bit about that perspective through two use cases that we see often with the families we work with who are largely low income parents of children of color in los angeles. the two use cases are the ability of parents to choose the best school for their child. in los angeles, about half of the students enrolled in the boundaries of lausd are enrolled through some type of public school choice, whether a district, magnet, open enrollment or charter. for many families, the lack of a clear, summative rating produced by the current dashboard means that they are on their own to compare their school options. families recently had a focus group at cde who was gracious enough to take the time to preview the system. families resoundly said that they are appreciative of multiple measures. they'd love that they can see all this information, but they also said i now don't know what to do with it. i do not know how to compare school a with school b and decide which school is best for my children. families with a lot of resources have the time to visit schools. they can make their own excel spreadsheet. many families do not have the time or the resources to do that. the second use case is when a family goes into a school and tries to hold a school accountable, the bottom up accountability that we all know is important. when a family goes in and says to a principal, i'm worried about this one data point right here, they have a great principal, the principal acknowledges it. admits that the school has some challenges and shares the plan for improvement. unfortunately, many of the low income families that we work with get the run around when they point to a negative data point. they often hear, well, ignore that red, look at this green. everything here is great. families have said that without strong summative rating they lack the tool to hold their schools accountable for student performance. and so we are appreciative of all the work to continuously improve the system, appreciative of the move to multiple measures. i really think that the cde and the state board can build on the current design and provide families an overall rating for all schools. thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Lillis: good afternoon, sarah martha lillis with edvoice, and we just want to express our appreciation for both committees in holding this hearing. we think it's critically important for the legislature to have continued oversight, as the accountability system is built and implemented. if it is actually to realize, if lcff's goal is actually to  realize this goal of addressing these historic inequities and opportunity and outcome, we do think the details really matter. and so we appreciate the substantive conversation and really paying attention to some of the details, particularly as dr. pan was talking about the signals that these measures are sending. as well as how they're helping guide locals in improving their schools in their districts. and particular as you're thinking about achievement gaps, we acknowledge dr [unknown] point that closing achievement gap takes time, but if we are not set up with the signals saying that's our goal, and that the expectations, the performance standards are to close those gaps, it will never happen. and so, one issue that we've been continuing to raise is, that if gaps are going to close, the growth targets, the change targets for those groups that are furthest behind, have to be more aggressive, have to be more rapid than those who are achieving at higher levels. which we hope will be addressed. we also appreciate the conversation about having a high school academic indicator. we also want to just, and i know these are really detailed points but, on the academic indicator, there's a difference between all the other indicators in terms of the colors. as mr. ashley said, parents are going to look at the dashboard. green and blue means good, red and orange means concerned, what do we do with yellow? right now the performance standards for yellow are low performance, maintaining low performance. so we're saying we're going to ignore the over 1,000 schools that are maintaining low academic performance. we don't think that's good enough. and just to reinforce the theme of making sure these dashboards are actually something that parents and the communities can use, we think that that's something we need to continue to work on. we also appreciate multiple measures. i think that if you think about this as comparing it to a student's report card, we're not actually using them for the same decisions. we hope the parents aren't deciding which of their children they're going to choose or which of their children they're going to invest in. but that is how parents and community members are going to use these dashboards about school and district performance so again, we enforce that. thanks.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 587, 'end': 590, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1613, 'end': 1619, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Elizabeth Robitaille: Hello, my name is Elizabeth Robitaille. I'm the Senior Vice President for Achievement and Performance Management from the California Charter Schools Association. I just wanted to reiterate what you've heard from others, and that is that the California Charter Schools Association remains deeply concerned about the lack of a high school academic indicator as part of the California school dashboard. We believe that, for charter schools, the state law says that increases in student learning, those academic outcomes, matter most. And yet, for high schools, what the state is saying is that there is not a state academic indicator for high schools that is looked at separately, that parents can easily find. And while they might be able to click down to some other tab and find it, it is not shown as being a priority. We've heard from the state that they may in the future, when they have an 8th through 11th grade measure, add it. So we're thinking, you know that's four years plus the additional two, or however many years it takes them to come up with a growth indicator. And we're saying, why do we need to wait. They should be able to put an academic indicator now that looks at high school effectiveness and add growth when it becomes available. We'd ask you to help us reinforce that message and thank you for your time.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ricardo Gaudino: Good afternoon, I am Ricardo Gaudino. I'm the Education Director for Golden State History of Community Team Builders of California. I took the position last so I could give you members a poster before I make my statement. Okay. Here we get each one and then after all, when I complete I will give you this collection of letters that are to the Governor for what we see as a very basic step to expand and guarantee to use, as diversed learners, knowledge that they must have to be a success in our state. Now, what we did in 2004, very quickly, was we saw a deficiency in the education system because the law did not provide any permission for maritime influences to be discussed in the classroom. Since then, we had the Senate resolution 33, Pacific Maritime [UNKNOWN], passed. We've developed a whole statewide program where teachers are all receiving that particular calendar for showing caring about California. Our mission is very clear, and we share that with you humbly because we're embarrassed. Our youth are at risk to ignorance. That's our reality. Of their town and building their country. This is our community problem. And the reason to framework is that History Social Science for 8th grade, and others that were done by the California Department of Education, are a failure. I think you need to read and I will email each one of your offices the text and then you can do the same thing we did as public historians, we compared it with Florida, Oregon, Texas, Massachusetts, and Hawaii. And the writing is so confusing, I don't see how a teacher could ever approach a lesson plan and teach students. Now the great thing about our state is we care. We got a heart as big as that calendar. But we need to take some steps right now to guarantee the basic knowledge to our students. I know that it sells politically when you fund different things. But just the simple question, who named America? If you know the answer, you know you're prepared. If you don't, you don't understand the cornerstone of our geography, that is our mathematics and it chairs the social sciences. This is a real crisis we have. Now, I'm going to bring a solution. We need specific geography guaranteed to our youth, all learners, and we have the February 25th date coming up and maybe you don't know what February 25th is. Again, we return to celebrate California's founding, 1850, okay. So this is our opportunity for you to participate in the solution to sign the petition for the Assembly and the Senate to implement Sr 33 as a law, as a proclamation that the Governor would sign, hopefully, at Colton Hall. So am going give to Patrick the Assembly wording, so he can review with the staff and we would like to see this filled out, we are talking accountability here because our kids they are teenagers cannot ask the most basic questions about the town and the building of our nation. This should be a priority. It is our embarrassment that we can not compare on our public history standard, which Golden State History is putting together, with Florida, Texas, and Hawaii. We don't. And I'm going to prove it because I'm going to send you the writing. Now, it sounds good if you got UC Davis writing it, it sounds nice. But if you haven't produced in your institutions the historians and the scholars that understand landscape and the people and 50% of the population in the writing Patrick, the writing in the document does not cite the Irish building the rail road across the country. I'm not joking, it's that bad. Ask you to wrap it up. So, thats for you guys and then here is one of these for both of you. But this is our renaissance moment for the Pacific, the Governor needs to guarantee Pacific geography to all students as a fundamental essential foundation of knowledge. Thank you.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2619, 'end': 2626, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3175, 'end': 3183, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3375, 'end': 3382, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Edgar Cabral: good morning mr. chair and members. edgar jonah cabral of the legislative analyst's office. i was asked to provide kind of a very high level overview of the system to just provide you with some context before you hear from the other panelists and some of them are detailed work that's been going on. there's a lot of background, a lot of years of work in developing the system, so i think i'll do my best to just cover at a high level to help you understand some of the things that other panelists will be discussing. and we do have a handout that we developed that i would use on as the basis of this presentation, but i won't go through everything in specific detail. i wanted to be and by just talking about is starkly some of the state and federal changes and what's been going on, where we are now and then a few things for you to consider moving forward in terms of some things the legislature might want to think about. this change in the state accountability system really began in 2013 as part of the adoption of the lcff, the local control funding formula. attached to the legislation that created lcff was this whole new accountability framework that's been rolled out over the last several years. and some of the things that are part of that framework you may have heard about. we have now been talking for several years about eight state priority areas, that are in statute that specify kind of the key things that the state thinks are most important, and there are other things the state is using to kind of determine whether districts and schools are doing well. and then you have local control and accountability plans which is one of the ways where these priority areas kind of show up. the districts now for three years have been developing these plans that require them to set goals in these priority areas, to use some of the performance measures in statute to measure how they are going to improve in those priority areas, and specify the actions they're going to make that improvement. and we're now in the third year, for the 16/17 year was the third that districts have had to adopt an lcap and they have to go out and get feedback from their communities, from stakeholders and they have to ultimately get their lcaps adopted and approved by the county office of education. so those are the things i think now, have been around and been going on for a couple years. on page two we talk a little bit more about the detail of what is called the evaluation rubrics. i think ultimately the valuation rubrics will show up for most people in this dashboard that i think the board stuff is sort of expected to be available for the public in the spring of 2017. and the board developed this and adopted the rubrics in september of 2016. what the initial legislation said is that these rubrics are intended to be used to identify districts that might need assistance and to also be a tool for districts to use to identify their own strengths and weaknesses. these rubrics were to be based on these eight priority areas on the things that the state have said are important. and the board, in developing them, they've developed a set of 10 state performance indicators that are used at the district-level and in some cases, can be used for subgroups and individual schools. they kind of split it up into two different kinds of indicators depending on what data we have available. so they are what the board's calling the state performance indicators where we have statewide data that's collected across the state for schools, for school districts, for individual student subgroups. and for that data which i think is a lot about what the conversations have been about in terms of what will be up on the dashboard, that's data that will be, the board has set these performance categories that are color-coded, going from red, which is the lowest performing, to blue, which is the highest performing. and you'll be able to see for all of these, state performance indicators for a school district, how they're doing, for a individual subgroup within the school district. and then for a school and then for subgroups within that school. so the idea there is that this is going to be a tool for districts for the public to be able to use to kind of look at how a district is doing, how schools are doing, how individuals or groups are doing. those performance categories are based on two things. one is how overall is a district performing in that area and the second thing is what's the improvement or growth over time or potentially change over time. so in general districts who might have be in a red category or districts that have an absolute low performance on that particular indicator and also are not seeing much growth. and then on the other side, the districts with the blue category would be districts with high performance and likely high growth as well. so that's part of what will be when the dashboards are available to the public. you'll be able to see that information and there will be, i know there's been a lot of discussions of the functionality of the tool, but from what we've heard from the state board of education, that'd be the ability to drill down and look at, for example, individual student groups', subgroups' scores, scores at the district level or at the school level. it's a little bit different for these other performance indicators, what are called the local performance indicators. and these are areas where the state does not have a uniform consistency state-wide data that i can use to categorize performance based on these different categories. so for example, one example is parent engagement. there is no state-wide measurement for how we're engaging parents. and so what the board is going to be requiring as part of the rubrics is for districts to develop their own local measure of parent engagement, and so they would, at the local level, develop what it is they're going to use to determine that. to measure progress, and to see how they are improving over time and to provide some information in a narrative form that will be uploaded into a dashboard for the public to be able to see. and in this case, as long as districts are developing a local indicator, describing how their performance is changing. and submitting that information will be considered to have, to be meeting that specific standard. so, that's kind of the general framework of what's going on with those rubrics. and we will be available on that dashboard. then that information then, it can be used and is required to be used by county offices of education to identify which districts need to receive technical assistance. and the state board has specified based on the rubrics how you would define whether a district needs to receive additional assistance, that's tied to some of the language that was in the initial legislation. for districts to receive assistance, generally what we require to receive assistance, if you have any student subgroup that is in that lowest performance category for more than one of the priority areas. so for example, if you have a student sub-group that based on their graduation rates and their student test scores are in that red category, that would reflect that that district needs to receive technical assistance, to get support for improving outcomes for that student sub-group. there's also another more intensive level of intervention. if you have a district where three or more sub-groups are in that lowest performance category for two or more priority areas, in three out of four the consecutive years. so, we're talking about now, multiple students subgroups struggling over multiple years in a number of areas. so, we don't expect that there'll be as many districts who will be in that category. but that is one of the possibilities. so moving on to page 4, that's a very quick summary of what the rubrics or the dashboard is expected to look like. i wanted to highlight a couple of other key things that are now associated with that. first is the california collaborative for educational excellence, which is a state entity that was created in 2013, specifically with the idea that they would be a statewide expert that would help in providing assistance to schools and districts. the idea is that it would be a small entity that would be able to contract out with experts, but also that they might be one of the key entities in helping provide support to some of those school districts, who are persistently under performing for many years. the state has provided two different sources of one-time funding for the collaborative. first, an initial $10 million to get the agency up and running. and then last year in the budget, additional funding for specific activities, one was to conduct statewide professional development or training for anybody actually, anybody in the general public, but also teachers, administrators, parents, to learn about the rubrics and how they can be used. and then also funding to develop a pilot program to work with some school districts who are struggling to improve outcomes with the idea that this pilot program would help inform what the collaborative would do moving forward. as it works to assist some school districts who are struggling to improve outcomes. so those are the key things in the state system. i wanted to briefly talk about the federal changes. so the state has started doing it in 2013, in december 2015 the federal government passed the every student succeeds act,  which essentially got rid of the no child left behind assistant which was a very prescriptive federal system and it meant that we had a state and federal accountability system. two systems at the same time that often told districts conflicting things. and now the federal law essentially says, states you can have your own accountability model. it has to meet some very specific requirements. as long as you do those things, we don't need to have a complete federal system. one of the things for california that has been good is that the essa, a lot of the components that are required are parts that the state is already developing, through the rubrics and through the multiple measure system that we have now. so the federal government requires a number of key measurements such as academic achievement, graduation rates, academic growth, progress for english learners, and a non-academic measure such as school climate. the state is already doing all that. all of that is already embedded within those state priority areas and those performance indicators. the essi also requires two different levels of support for schools. there's this more targeted support if there is a school that's having trouble with a particular sub-group. and there's a more comprehensive level of support for a school that has sort of more persistent systemic problems. it's very similar to the structure that we have in our system for identifying districts that need technical assistance for some specific subgroups that are not performing well versus that more intensive intervention that we set and specific in laws that for more long term ongoing problems in the school districts. the one key difference between the two systems is the essa is all about school level performance whereas the state system is mostly district based. but with the dashboard we will be able to look at school level data as well. and so you can imagine very easily being able to combine the state requirements, and the federal requirements together, so that you don't have multiple systems with different ways to identify whether districts are in need of support. i wanted to specify to discuss a little bit of some of the uncertainty about regulations and i think in general, we would say that there are some uncertainty in our regulations but we don't think there's any reason that the state needs to change what it's doing in the current plan or timeline for submitting a plan for essa. right now the state's plan is to submit its plan to the federal government by september of 2017. the final essa regulations were finalized in november of 2016. the new administration delayed the implementation of those until march. and then, congress actually is considered, as part of something called the congressional review act, they have the authority to repeal any regulations that have been recently adopted by an administration. right now, they have a resolution that's passed the house that would repeal any of the final essa regulations. again, we don't know exactly what will happen there. and but we did it recently hear from the new secretary of education sent out a letter to the chief state school officer saying that obviously acknowledging the uncertainly around there. but that the department of education will be looking to make sure that most of the things that are in this template for any essa plan are tight specifically to statutes and not regulations. so that there are changes in the regulations, there are major changes to what states are expected to submit. and there are also specified they still have same expectation from when plans are due to the federal government and for the state that would be for california that's september of 2017. so again i mentioned that because i know that's something that's come up. but we dont think it means that there should be significant changes in the states planning at this moment. on page 7, we just highlighted some of the major ways that we funded some of these accountability activities. all of them have been one time. there is one on going spending that the state's going to have to start doing beginning in 2018/19 with title, one funding. so under essa the state's are required to set aside 7% of their title one funding to provide support to school and that's about $140 million. so coming into 18/19 budget and that will be an important decision for the legislature to make. and then finally just in terms of some general issues for consideration. i think again we think that the state it is well on its way to creating one coherent systems that can align the state and the federal systems together. so you have a little bit more clarity for schools, for districts, for the public. a couple of key things moving forward i think once the dashboard is in place and we have a better sense of how many districts do qualify for needing technical assistance. then i think an important conversation would be, kind of what is our capacity to provide assistance and support to these districts. what are the specific subgroups or populations where there is needed for additional assistance. and that might help inform decisions about distributing resources and making decisions about what entities should be involved in providing additional support to districts. the other key thing is with regards to the collaborative we would highlight again that all of the collaborative's funding to the state has been one time funding. and so moving forward as we make decisions about what the system looks like in the long run. what important decision will be deciding. what we think the core activities of the collaborative should be on an ongoing basis and providing funding associated with that. i'm so off the top there and happy to help you to answer any questions you might have.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Keric Ashley: All right, Keric Ashley, Deputy Superintendent, California Department of Education. It's very exciting, actually, to be here with you this morning. I told my wife that all I wanted for my birthday was to be able to testify at a legislative hearing. And since today is my birthday, It's your birthday! I got everything that I wanted. Happy birthday. But actually, the exciting part of testifying this morning is to let you know that California really is on the leading edge. It's not that bad, come on. Not at all. Not at all. California really is on the leading edge and playing a leadership role across the nation in this whole area of assessment and accountability. And it started with the support of the Governor and the Legislature, the Superintendent, our business community and our school districts. And their support of California State standards and the implementation of those standards. And then in follow-up to that, the last two years the incredible success we have had with implementing smarter balance assessments. Millions of kids taking this test, with only less than 1,000 kids needing to take it on paper and pencil. While other states have struggled, doing that assessment. And then follow it up with, LCFF funding and being able to put funding out there that's targeted to kids that are of poverty, especially. And then on top of that, a local accountability system. Which, again, is something that's historic and playing a leadership role across the nation. And all of that happening before the new federal law. And the new federal law came in and realized that the federal government needed to turn more control over to the states. And in the same way, a little bit ahead of the federal government. The state already realized that we need to turn around and let the experts of the local level have more control over how to spend their funding. We need to provide supports to them, and one of the biggest supports that we can provide is an accountability system. A dashboard of what we were talking about today in order to provide some information, some data, back to those schools and districts. So that they can make informed decisions about how to spend their money. How to improve things for their English learners. For their kids of poverty, for their students with disabilities. So again, I just wanted to tell you, as I talked to colleagues across the nation in other states, they're in somewhat awe of what California has done the last five years. We're not there yet, there's a lot of work to be done for all of us. But we are, once again, playing a leadership role across the nation. As President Kirst mentioned, what we put together here is, and we're referring at to as the Dashboard, the California School Dashboard, officially. So when you hear Dashboard, what you hearing is evaluation rubrics. This is the new name for the evaluation rubrics. Because we think as it's a little more understandable for folks to understand, not only in schools and districts. But this is for the community as a whole as they look at data for their schools and districts. So help them understand, to give them easy reports. The goal here is at one glance, for a parent who doesn't need to have a lot of educational background, or experience, or working in schools. At one glance, they can get an idea, in multiple measures, how well their school or district is doing, at one glance. And for those that need more deeper information, there's background information, more detailed reports. Downloadable data for the data geeks that want to get into the specifics of this. Because this color coded dashboard is not going to solve the problem, it's just going to highlight where issues have to be investigated. And so it's that background data that's part of this website to be that districts can use to help, again, make choices on how to spend money and where to focus their resources. Because we're much more than just looking at schools and districts by a single test score anymore. That was the old system, and it was a very narrowly defined system, because it was driven by the federal government. Now California has taken back the driver's seat, here. We're providing a system in which we're going to provide multiple measures and data, back to schools and districts, so that we can make those decisions. And as we look at the new federal law, we'll make the federal law fit into our system here in the state. And it will be a single system, not multiple systems. We won't have EPI and AYP, dueling systems, anymore. It'll be a single system by which we can do it. So the idea here is for a parent to at first glance, just like they do their report cards at home. They get every quarter, they open their report card, and their report card doesn't say your child is a C-. It has multiple measures on it. It tells parent how their child is doing in English Language Arts, in math, in science, in social, in many areas. Even how they're doing behavior-wise or effort-wise. All of these are important aspects for the success of a student. In the same way, multiple measures are needed in order to look at the success of a school. So again, at one glance, being unable to see where the strengths are, where the negatives are, and where the student groups are that need assistance. So the reports are going to be searchable. You'll be able to look by school, look by district. The primary purpose of these is not to make judgments that this school is doing well, this school is doing not well. The idea here is to provide information back to schools and districts so that they can identify their own strengths and weaknesses. And be able to identify their areas of improvement, so that they can then make plans to get better. We were talking a little bit about, in the previous discussion, about support to schools. We got a little ahead of ourselves in that discussion, but that happens with gifted students. They always get ahead of the teacher. We're talking about the system first, and once the system's in place, then we can talk about the support that goes with that system. But let me be clear, schools and districts are not sitting on their hands, waiting for the state to identify what are system support are. They're out there helping schools and helping kids even now. County offices are out there helping schools and helping them get better. So they're not waiting for the state. But once the state has this accountability system in place, it's fully implemented this year. But we won't be using it for assistance this year, or for identifying schools for assistance or districts for assistance this year. That comes next year, right? In future years, after it's fully implemented. So as was mentioned before, the multiple measures include seven indicators for which we have state data. So the state takes the data in, state does the calculations, state puts out some indicators by color. By pie charts if you will and you'll see in example of that in a little bit. So that's data that we provide, then there's local indicators that the state does not have. The local school districts are much better position to have that data and to provide that data on self reflection and to provide their own evaluation of how they're doing. So it's a system that again, combines state indicators with local indicators. Something that again, is playing a leadership role regarding how other states are doing this. So it maybe easiest. And if you haven't seen it in your packet, there is a tab in the packet that you've got and it's called California school dashboard prototype. Now I think what you have in there, it's a tab that's in the middle, California school dashboard prototype. If you look at that, I have a nice color copy and of cours,e the website will be in a color copy. What you have I believe is black and white, but that's why we have the pie charts there. I call them pie charts, pizza pies, apple pie, whatever works for you. And what those pie charts circles are supposed to indicate is a reflection that the same thing that the colors indicate. So while blue indicates the highest level of performance, a full pie indicates blue, indicates the highest level of performance. So if you don't have a color copy, what you're hoping for is your school district has a full pie. If it only has a single slice on that pie, then you know that they're performing at their lowest level of performance. And that's a red color in the color coded system. But if you look at that, you can see that multiple measures from the state indicators. Starting with chronic absenteeism, suspension rates, English learner progress, graduation rates, college and career, English Language Arts and Mathematics. So it's really seven indicators when you break out the assessment data in the English Language Arts and Mathematics. And then there a four local indicators including how well they're implementing academic standards, parent engagement, local climate survey and so forth. So this is just the landing page, right? Again, if you want to more detailed information, more detailed information will be available for how to look at any one of these individual indicators. There will be a way to click on an individual indicator and say how are all of my student groups doing? Like English learners, like our students of poverty. How are all of them doing in graduation rates or in suspension rates? If you look at the example that you have been given, which is a fictitious school district. And you go down to English Language Arts, English Language Arts or K8 there is on my copy as a green color. But for yours it has four of the five pie slices which indicates that they're the second highest level performers. So they're doing very well. But if you keep going across English Language Arts on the far right column, you'll see that under the student groups in red and orange, there is one student group indicated that's in the red or orange. So right again, at a single glance you can see we are dong well overall in this district in English Language Arts. But there's a one here, there's a student group that's in the red or orange. We'd better look and see what student group that is because our work isn't finished just because overall we're doing well. So again, at a single glance being able to see that information. So some of these have an NA next to them. College and career, chronic absenteeism. That's because the system has just now rolling out. It'll be rolled out publicly in March. But during that, this is a continues improvement process. It's true of the state, as well as locals. So while these dashboards are to help school and districts get better on a continuous basis. We need at the state level to also get better on a continuous basis. And the system itself needs to continue to improve over time. So it's not completely done, chronic absenteeism is data we're collecting for the first time at the end of the school year. So that will be put in when that data is available, not this year but the following year because you actually need two sets of data. Because remember, we're not looking just at status, are they performing high or are they performing low? But as Mr. Kebral mentioned before, we're looking at the change, how have they done over time? It's great that they were high, but how has that high changed from year to year? From last year, have they slipped lightly, right. That would be something to look at. Are they low performing? Yes, that's a concern but look, overtime, they've actually been getting better. So whatever they're doing, they should keep doing. So again, it looks at status and change. The other one here, college and career, this is also one that the California is leading on the cutting edge here across the nation is having a college and career indicator. Made up of multiple measures within college and career indicator and that will be rolled out next year as we have our second set of data. So, while we have these dashboards, people need to know how to use them. So there's a number of webinars, there's a number of meetings going on, there's a number of trainings going on. Dr. Cohen will talk a little bit about what CCEE is doing in terms of their training on school and districts. County offices are out there providing these training to school districts even as we speak. The state department is doing webinars. There's one happening actually today and every Wednesday between now and the rollout of the systems to give more information to schools and districts. And I think we had over 400 attend the very first webinar that we've had. So, excuse me, so those are going well and a lot of information is going out to schools and districts on this. There's also a number of workgroups. So we've got a large stakeholder input on the development of the system. And we'll continue to have these stakeholder groups as the system develops more. We've got an English learner workgroup to talk about some of the English learner data. That is needed to be put into the system to help our English learners get better. We have a technical design group that looks at technical issues related to the information in each dashboard. We have schools condition and climate workshop. This is to talk about things like parent engagement and student engagement and how to measure that locally. We've got an equity and policy stakeholder workgroup. You're going to hear from the next panel. They're the California Practitioners Advisory Group. So the actual school districts are telling us how they can use this and how to make it better. So there's a number of stakeholder groups involved in this. When it comes as Doctor Kirst mentioned earlier, when it comes to SN in the state plan as he mentioned, we'll be turning that in in September. The first draft of that plan will be presented to the board in May, but that's just the first draft. We've been making some decisions, when I say we I mean the state board's been making some decisions. To go into that plan over the last six months. So the first draft of the plan should look very familiar to the state board members. Because they've been making decisions already that'll be in this first draft. And then we'll continue to make some decisions including what we're going to do now we have these dashboards rolling out the next logical step is what are we going to do with them. How do we use them? What's the system of support we're going to provide to schools and districts on this. Yesterday we had a meeting of state agencies, it was the third in a series of meetings that will continue to meet. And when I say state agencies, I mean the California Department of Education, the State Board of Education, the collaborative CTC, our credentialing agency. Our Association for county superintendents come to those meetings. Subject matter projects, we've got a number of state agency level people meeting To talk exactly about this. It's the start of the conversation of what is the support going to look like for these schools and districts. There's a lot of support going out right now from all of those agencies and the first thing to do is get a level setting to find out what everyone is doing and to make sure that we're collaborating, we're coordinating those efforts so that we're not duplicating or missing out on, on services. Once we develop that, once we have a good view of the landscape, we can then talk about how we going to build upon that. Because the system is built for all schools and districts to get better. This isn't a system to identify the lowest 5%. This is to let all schools and all districts know how they're doing because we think all schools and all districts can and should get better over time. So we first have to talk about what's the support that's going to be available to all schools and districts, all 10,000 schools out there. And then we can talk about what do we going to do for those that have a large number of reds in their dashboard and what does that look like. So, I think I'll stop.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2628, 'end': 2633, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 11205, 'end': 11211, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 12153, 'end': 12158, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 12193, 'end': 12197, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 13681, 'end': 13686, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Karen Valdez: Good morning I'm Karen Valdez and I'm the assistant Superintendent at Menifee Union school district.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Fred Jones: Mr. Chairman, Fred Jones on behalf of the California business education Association which is also a member of the Get Real coalition which is chaired by the manufacturers and the state building trades council which is an unusual coalition of labor and business and we are focused like a laser beam on career tactical education. We are having conversations with state board staff and department about how to define career readiness. So college and career readiness is one of the priorities that you all set. Everyone understands at least on paper what college readiness is, the courses you take, the SAT, etc. The state board is grappling with how to come up with student based career readiness criteria of indicators. And we hope to be able to work with him in devising ways that they can include this in the state accountability system because the drivers of our K12 system remain the same. What Sacramento requires, funds and measures is what gets taught. So Careertech has really been left out of the measurements, has been left our of the state mandates. The funding element, therefore, has been the only driver sustaining these programs. We are in the middle of the largest investment in career tech in our nation's history, $900 million, three year incentive grant. But that runs out in another year and a half, so until CareerTech is included in our state accountability system. We would hope our state policy makers continue to sustain these programs with incentive grant funding, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brad Strong: member's brad edgar strong, senior director of children now. here just kind of remind you that the academic performance index back in 1999 was calling for a multiple measuring system and we'd passed i think the legislature has passed, five, six, seven bills in the last 15 years that have asked to make progress on a number of things related to that academic performance index. the state board and department have been doing wonderful work and really have been making progress. we're appreciative of that.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Martha Alvarez: good afternoon, martha with acsa the association of california school administrators. we are very pleased with the direction of the state regarding the new system. we have been waiting for this new accountability system for about three years now since lcsf was adopted in 2013. we are members, that administrators are very excited about the opportunity to talk about multiple measures, thinking more holistically about an education of a child. i think at the discussion today between all of you and the questions that you ask the staff and the panel members, it's probably a preview of what's happening across the state at school board meetings. looking at the data, looking at the dashboard, that will be happening starting in march. being able to use the dashboard and the color coding indicators as a tool to be able to identify those strengths, the weaknesses, and opportunities for improvement. so we think it's really great to be able to think about holistically how can we improve student outcomes, and not just based on test scores. the other really great thing about this that we should not forget about is equity, how we're embracing student disparity, or improving student disparities, and being able to target those resources for those students who need the most support. for axa, we're very interested in the capacity building aspect. we do believe that the site leaders, the central office, and school site leaders, educators, both teachers, principals, and administrators, they will need support in being able to adapt, think about how to better collaborate, and how to work with the county offices to be able to support students. last comment i'll make, acsa was one of the hosts for one of the professional learning communities to do the cce. so we're very interested in thinking about how can we replicate the support that we're providing to administrators to be able to replicate across the state. thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Seth Litt: good afternoon, my name is seth brad litt, i serve as the executive director of parent revolution, a non-profit based in los angeles. over the past nine years our organization's worked with thousands of families throughout california as they work together to try to improve low performing schools. and in the last year, we've worked with over a thousand families in south los angeles as they try to choose better schools for their children through various public school choice programs, whether district or charter. parents have been coming up to sacramento from los angeles for the last year to share their input and feedback on new state accountability system and the dashboard. i want to speak a little bit about that perspective through two use cases that we see often with the families we work with who are largely low income parents of children of color in los angeles. the two use cases are the ability of parents to choose the best school for their child. in los angeles, about half of the students enrolled in the boundaries of lausd are enrolled through some type of public school choice, whether a district, magnet, open enrollment or charter. for many families, the lack of a clear, summative rating produced by the current dashboard means that they are on their own to compare their school options. families recently had a focus group at cde who was gracious enough to take the time to preview the system. families resoundly said that they are appreciative of multiple measures. they'd love that they can see all this information, but they also said i now don't know what to do with it. i do not know how to compare school a with school b and decide which school is best for my children. families with a lot of resources have the time to visit schools. they can make their own excel spreadsheet. many families do not have the time or the resources to do that. the second use case is when a family goes into a school and tries to hold a school accountable, the bottom up accountability that we all know is important. when a family goes in and says to a principal, i'm worried about this one data point right here, they have a great principal, the principal acknowledges it. admits that the school has some challenges and shares the plan for improvement. unfortunately, many of the low income families that we work with get the run around when they point to a negative data point. they often hear, well, ignore that red, look at this green. everything here is great. families have said that without strong summative rating they lack the tool to hold their schools accountable for student performance. and so we are appreciative of all the work to continuously improve the system, appreciative of the move to multiple measures. i really think that the cde and the state board can build on the current design and provide families an overall rating for all schools. thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Lillis: good afternoon, sarah with edvoice, and we just want to express our appreciation for both committees in holding this hearing. we think it's critically important for the legislature to have continued oversight, as the accountability system is built and implemented. if it is actually to realize, if lcff's goal is actually to  realize this goal of addressing these historic inequities and opportunity and outcome, we do think the details really matter. and so we appreciate the substantive conversation and really paying attention to some of the details, particularly as dr. pan was talking about the signals that these measures are sending. as well as how they're helping guide locals in improving their schools in their districts. and particular as you're thinking about achievement gaps, we acknowledge dr [unknown] point that closing achievement gap takes time, but if we are not set up with the signals saying that's our goal, and that the expectations, the performance standards are to close those gaps, it will never happen. and so, one issue that we've been continuing to raise is, that if gaps are going to close, the growth targets, the change targets for those groups that are furthest behind, have to be more aggressive, have to be more rapid than those who are achieving at higher levels. which we hope will be addressed. we also appreciate the conversation about having a high school academic indicator. we also want to just, and i know these are really detailed points but, on the academic indicator, there's a difference between all the other indicators in terms of the colors. as mr. ashley said, parents are going to look at the dashboard. green and blue means good, red and orange means concerned, what do we do with yellow? right now the performance standards for yellow are low performance, maintaining low performance. so we're saying we're going to ignore the over 1,000 schools that are maintaining low academic performance. we don't think that's good enough. and just to reinforce the theme of making sure these dashboards are actually something that parents and the communities can use, we think that that's something we need to continue to work on. we also appreciate multiple measures. i think that if you think about this as comparing it to a student's report card, we're not actually using them for the same decisions. we hope the parents aren't deciding which of their children they're going to choose or which of their children they're going to invest in. but that is how parents and community members are going to use these dashboards about school and district performance so again, we enforce that. thanks.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 573, 'end': 576, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1599, 'end': 1605, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Elizabeth Robitaille: hello, my name is robitaille. i'm the senior vice president for achievement and performance management from the california charter schools association. i just wanted to reiterate what you've heard from others, and that is that the california charter schools association remains deeply concerned about the lack of a high school academic indicator as part of the california school dashboard. we believe that, for charter schools, the state law says that increases in student learning, those academic outcomes, matter most. and yet, for high schools, what the state is saying is that there is not a state academic indicator for high schools that is looked at separately, that parents can easily find. and while they might be able to click down to some other tab and find it, it is not shown as being a priority. we've heard from the state that they may in the future, when they have an 8th through 11th grade measure, add it. so we're thinking, you know that's four years plus the additional two, or however many years it takes them to come up with a growth indicator. and we're saying, why do we need to wait. they should be able to put an academic indicator now that looks at high school effectiveness and add growth when it becomes available. we'd ask you to help us reinforce that message and thank you for your time.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ricardo Gaudino: good afternoon, i am ricardo. i'm the education director for golden state history of community team builders of california. i took the position last so i could give you members a poster before i make my statement. okay. here we get each one and then after all, when i complete i will give you this collection of letters that are to the governor for what we see as a very basic step to expand and guarantee to use, as diversed learners, knowledge that they must have to be a success in our state. now, what we did in 2004, very quickly, was we saw a deficiency in the education system because the law did not provide any permission for maritime influences to be discussed in the classroom. since then, we had the senate resolution 33, pacific maritime [unknown], passed. we've developed a whole statewide program where teachers are all receiving that particular calendar for showing caring about california. our mission is very clear, and we share that with you humbly because we're embarrassed. our youth are at risk to ignorance. that's our reality. of their town and building their country. this is our community problem. and the reason to framework is that history social science for 8th grade, and others that were done by the california department of education, are a failure. i think you need to read and i will email each one of your offices the text and then you can do the same thing we did as public historians, we compared it with florida, oregon, texas, massachusetts, and hawaii. and the writing is so confusing, i don't see how a teacher could ever approach a lesson plan and teach students. now the great thing about our state is we care. we got a heart as big as that calendar. but we need to take some steps right now to guarantee the basic knowledge to our students. i know that it sells politically when you fund different things. but just the simple question, who named america? if you know the answer, you know you're prepared. if you don't, you don't understand the cornerstone of our geography, that is our mathematics and it chairs the social sciences. this is a real crisis we have. now, i'm going to bring a solution. we need specific geography guaranteed to our youth, all learners, and we have the february 25th date coming up and maybe you don't know what february 25th is. again, we return to celebrate california's founding, 1850, okay. so this is our opportunity for you to participate in the solution to sign the petition for the assembly and the senate to implement sr 33 as a law, as a proclamation that the governor would sign, hopefully, at colton hall. so am going give to patrick the assembly wording, so he can review with the staff and we would like to see this filled out, we are talking accountability here because our kids they are teenagers cannot ask the most basic questions about the town and the building of our nation. this should be a priority. it is our embarrassment that we can not compare on our public history standard, which golden state history is putting together, with florida, texas, and hawaii. we don't. and i'm going to prove it because i'm going to send you the writing. now, it sounds good if you got uc davis writing it, it sounds nice. but if you haven't produced in your institutions the historians and the scholars that understand landscape and the people and 50% of the population in the writing patrick, the writing in the document does not cite the irish building the rail road across the country. i'm not joking, it's that bad. ask you to wrap it up. so, thats for you guys and then here is one of these for both of you. but this is our renaissance moment for the pacific, the governor needs to guarantee pacific geography to all students as a fundamental essential foundation of knowledge. thank you.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2611, 'end': 2618, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3167, 'end': 3175, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3367, 'end': 3374, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kevin Highbaum: good afternoon, mr. pro tem and committee members. my name is kevin jonah highbaum, an agent with the alcoholic beverage control. i'm also the president of the alcoholic beverage control agents which falls under the california statewide law enforcement association and president alan barcelona behind me. today, we are here to support ms ajax in this confirmation hearing.
[{'start': 62, 'end': 82, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 279, 'end': 293, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 338, 'end': 342, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Allen Barcelona: Hi Senators. Allen Barcelona, California Statewide Law Enforcement Association. We are very much support of her appointment, as well, Mr. Chairman.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Stellar: hello, chris kevin stellar with the california artisanal distillers guild. we're here in support because we were witness to lori's brain. our licenses over the last couple of years, a brand new license here in california for the liquor manufacturer's and her incredible support of both the industry and the regulation and all the things that went into bringing a new license under the new alcohol beverage control agency was incredible. her leadership, all the way from the beginning, introducing the legislation to getting what we needed done. thank you very much.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 124, 'end': 128, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Khurshid Khoja: my name is khurshid chris khoja. i'm general counsel of the california cannabis, sorry, khurshid chris khoja, general counsel of the california cannabis industry association, and chair of its diversity and inclusion committee and we're here to enthusiastically support chief ajax's confirmation. we really appreciate just her overall level of competence that she's bringing to this position and also really appreciate her commitment to licensing equity as well. so with that said, we enthusiastically support her confirmation.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 88, 'end': 108, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 275, 'end': 279, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Shane Gaspin: mr. chairman, members, shane khurshid gaspin on behalf of the teamsters, we are here to support the confirmation. pleased to be here. throughout the early process in this very, very complicated, as you've identified world, ms. ajax has had an open door policy, met with stakeholders on a regular basis, and we are very pleased to support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 227, 'end': 231, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
George Miller: Mr. Chairman members, George Miller on behalf of Weed Maps here, to support Miss Ajax. I, too, have to say we very much have appreciated her openness and willingness to meet with all the stakeholders.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 81, 'end': 85, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Max Magallones: Thank you, I'm Max Magallones, consulting, on behalf of Quantum Management Company, I'm here to support Ms. Ajax's confirmation. I had the pleasure of working with Ms Ajax extensively. In my experience with Assembly member Rob, office previously and I've all good things to say about her and her professionalism and her dedication to the cause into making sure that licensing gets done on time, and given the extensive requirements. So, thank you. Quite support her confirmation.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 108, 'end': 112, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 167, 'end': 171, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 223, 'end': 226, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sam Rodriguez: Mr. Chairman, Members of the Committee, I'm Sam Rodriguez, Director for United Food and Commercial Workers State Council. As our letter we submitted, we support the confirmation of Lori Ajax. Her open door policy has helped us tremendously in identifying how best to protect workers, and train workers. Not only does she have an open policy here in Sacramento, but she's met with our folks in Los Angeles, and San Diego and the Bay Area and has been very influential and proposing ideas that will regulate the industry and protect workers and for that, we all highly support confirmation to be the Director of the bureau. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 181, 'end': 190, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Hezekiah Allen: Mr. Chair and Committee Members, Hezekiah Allen on behalf of the California Growers Association. Just want to briefly applaud Lori's open mind and humility in approaching such a large unknown from San Diego to Siskiyou County. Our members are pleased to offer our support for the confirmation.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 126, 'end': 130, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Robert Harris: Mr. Chairman, my name is Robert Harris, on behalf of the Drug Policy Alliance, who were the second largest donor to the passage of Prop 64. They're a social justice organization dedicated to undoing the drug war and the arms caused by it to communities of color. So we want to support Ms. Ajax. We had wonderful conversations with her and we hope that when we, as we move forward with the implementation that none of the goods contained within Prop 64 are no one undoes them, thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 289, 'end': 293, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lee-Andrea Marcus: He did the not it. Hi, I'm Captain Lee-Andrea Marcus, with the Sacramento County Sheriff's Department. I'm the Division Commander of our Work Release program and we're here in support of Laurie Ajax. She's been an outstanding partnership with the Sacramento County Sheriff's Department. We've had a number of grants. She's been instrumental in the assistance of, just helping to eliminate underage drinking, sales to minors and listening to the importance of taking care of our community's children. I know that's first and foremost for her so we all support her.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 187, 'end': 198, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ellen Johnson: i say opposition, although i'm rather agnostic. okay. because i'm really only speaking to one aspect of my own personal experience. my name is johnson. and i want to thank the committee for this opportunity to address the confirmation of specifically kathleen allison. i am married to a lifer inmate, bunche johnson, ko3- 198, currently residing at csp sag. i am a former cdcr employee having retired on june 1st, 2015. i'm here to describe what i believe to be a woefully inadequate process of appealing visitation suspensions. the lack of responsivity on the part of ms. allison and her offices is, i believe, in direct violation of title 15, section 3179, which states visitor appeals related to institution procedures, the staff decision shall be addressed to the institution head. written response should be provided within 15 days upon receipt. if dissatisfied with facility response, appellant may further to the director. appeals related to visiting should be addressed to the director, written response to appeals addressed the director shall be provided within 20 working days.
[{'start': 143, 'end': 150, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 251, 'end': 267, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 301, 'end': 315, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 573, 'end': 580, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Victor Malin: hello my name is victor shane malin. i'm with the anti-recidivism coalition. i'm in support of all three candidates. i think they've done some great work in offering hope and rehabilitation. me, myself, i was incarcerated at 18 years old, came home when i was 23. while i was incarcerated, i had the opportunity to get all my lower division college credits. and i actually got my acceptance letter to sac state before i came home. so, just the fact that i was able to still have that hope that you guys speak of, i was able to graduate. got my degree in finance. i've worked as an accountant for the last eight years. and i bought three houses in my neighborhood of del paso heights. and now, i actually run the anti-recidivism coalition, sacramento office. so, i'm in full strong support and i look forward to the fellows coming home and being able to help them get on their feet, as well. and i appreciate the time.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Daniel Silva: good afternoon. my name's daniel. i too support the candidates here. i started getting arrested at the age of 12. in and out of camps, doing all those foster homes. at a young age of 18, i did a life sentence behind prison walls that lasted 39 long years of incarceration. i'm here to tell you that, since the r was placed in cdc-r, there's been many changes that i, personally, seen take place. and, if people took advantage of the opportunities that were provided behind prison walls, you were able to, you know, deal with your traumas in many ways. i took many programs that helped me heal my wounded inner child that today i recognize was the cause of my out of control behaviors as a young person that led me straight to prison, for the time that i endured. thanks to my creator up above, i got smart halfway into my time, and i sought out rehabilitation. and i took advantage of all their programs that are behind prison walls, including i created a program in 2006 that i, today, recognize as the founder of a program called self-awareness and recovery. a program that has spread through the prison system, many facilities, and this program saved my life. gave me the strength to come out here into this community. been free for two years. grateful and thankful every day to have been given this opportunity. so today, i take the wisdom that i picked up behind the walls and i go to the schools and i share with young people. hoping that they don't have to endure what had to go through. and i'm just here to let you know that rehabilitation is real. if people go for it, you can change, you can transform your life. i'm living proof of that. and thank you for hearing me off.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Reginald Hola: good afternoon, my name is reginald victor hola. i'm here in support of all three candidates. i'm part of anti-recidivism coalition in sacramento. for the past eight years, i was incarcerated. for the past eight years, i was incarcerated. i took many programs, but at the time of the crime, i feel like, i didn't care about anybody or anything. but through the programs inside of prison, i started to look inside when you were talking about internal things. these internal things i have to look in on. and i began to understand extremely contributing factors to my criminal behavior. i'll get to that. and well, some of the programs that i did get into was one, inside garden, was the last mile. they then created a program called code 7370. and every one of these programs reiterated the golden rule for me. and that was just you create your own destiny. you make your choices. and, i started to see by the habit of thought, of thinking the positive way, that positive things come to you. and when i started to practice these things, i started to see within the environment how things were changing inside of this violent environment and how things can happen when you come out. since i've been out, i've been out for 8 months and i've been part of the work with arc, we've been doing a lot of community outreach, youth outreach. been going to the high schools with dan and victor and talking to the kids back there about substance abuse and how they can recover from the traumas that they faced on a daily basis. and it's just listening and they never listened and i think it started from administration inside of prison listening to us. and so i feel like this work goes full circle. we heal ourselves in there, and we come out, step out here to heal our community, heal our people. but my name's reginald, thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1367, 'end': 1370, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1375, 'end': 1381, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1800, 'end': 1808, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Drew Soderborg: madam chair and members, drew jonah soderborg legislative analysts office. so in front of you you'll find a handout and if you turn to the first page of that handout you'll see where our discussion of the major provisions of prop 64 begins. so prop 64 changed state law to legalize the use of cannabis for non-medical purposes by adult age 21 and over. however, there are some restrictions on this use if you look at the first figure on page one of the handout. that figure summarizes both the activities that would be allowed under prop 64 and the activities that would continue to be restricted. for example, individuals could smoke cannabis in a private home or a business licensed for on-site consumption. however, individuals could not smoke cannabis while driving a car, in any public place other than one of those businesses licensed for on-site consumption. or anywhere that smoking tobacco is prohibited. in addition, individuals could grow up to six plants in their home and possess the cannabis the plants produced. however, individuals could not grow these plants in an area that's unlocked or visible from a public place. in addition, proposition 64 creates a system for regulating non-medical cannabis. this system is largely similar to the system the state created for regulating medical cannabis. for example, the state agency's responsibilities under proposition 64 are largely similar, with some notable differences, as they are for regulating medical cannabis. in addition, under the measure of the system for tracking medical cannabis has to be expanded to track non-medical cannabis. proposition 64 also allows cities and counties to regulate non-medical cannabis. for example, cities and counties could obtain, could require businesses to obtain local licenses and set rules for these businesses. cities and counties would also be allowed to completely ban cannabis related businesses. so if you turn to page two of the hand out, you'll see a discussion of the changes and penalties related to cannabis crime under prop 64. so prop 64 generally reduces the penalties for cannabis related crimes. for example, prior to prop 64 selling cannabis for a non-medical purpose was punishable by up to four years in prison and jail. under the measure, selling cannabis without a license is a crime generally punishable by six months in jail and/or a fine of up to $500. in addition, individuals who are currently serving sentences for cannabis related crimes that have lesser penalties on prop 64 could petition the courts to seek that their sentence be modified to the lesser penalty. in addition, individuals who have already completed their sentences could petition the courts to have their criminal history modified to reflect a lesser conviction. proposition 64 also imposes taxes on cannabis. and the figure on page two summarizes the tax structure under prop 64. to begin with there is going to be a new state tax on the growing of cannabis. this would apply to both medical and non-medical cannabis. and would be $9.25 per ounce of dried cannabis flowers and $2.75 per ounce of dried cannabis leaves. in addition, there will be a new state retail excise tax on both medical and non-medical cannabis at a rate of 15% of the retail price. the measure also indicates that existing state and local sales taxes will continue to apply to cannabis for non-medical purposes. however, individuals who have a medical marijuana card can get the sales tax that's levied on them reduced under the measure. in addition, the measure also allows local governments to levy additional taxes on cannabis. the state excise tax on retail sales and the state tax on growing, as well as certain fines, will be deposited into a new special fund known as the california marijuana tax fund. as we discuss later, proposition 64 will specify how the monies in the fund would be allocated. so that gives you an overview of the major provisions of prop 64, i'd be happy to answer any questions that you might have about them.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Seth Kerstein: Seth Kerstein, Legislative Analysis Office. It's correct that prescription medicines are generally fully exempt from sales tax My understanding though is that medical marijuana is not issued through formal prescriptions. And so for that reason wouldn't be entitled to that exemption. So therefore, Prop 64 does contain language that reduces the sales tax on those items.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Colby White: thank you, madam chair. colby drew white, department of finance. today i'm going to just give you a brief overview of the revenue, the revenue estimates that we prepared as part of the '17-'18 governor's budget that went into the, for the marijuana tax revenues. so i'm going to start by reiterating some of the concerns that have already been raised. and so some of the caveats and the broad-based assumptions that had to be made for this revenue forecast. so have to assume basically that there's going to be no signficant change in federal action. obviously, if that changes significantly, that could have some very significant impacts on the revenues. we did adjust the revenue estimates for start-up difficulties. but we do assume a substantially functional market by july 1, 2018. and that's six months following when the regulations are due. so we have assumed no revenues in '17-'18, and we assume $100 million reduction from our baseline forecast in '18-'19. this forecast that i'm going to provide to you today, it's only related to the excise tax revenues for the marijuana. so it includes the tax on the flower and the leaf, and it includes the 15% excise tax. it does not include income taxes, it does not include direct or indirect or secondary impacts on the economy, and it does not include sales taxes. i just would point out, as other people had mentioned, there's large uncertainties with this forecast. so i'll be providing point revenue estimates. however, the actual numbers, given the variety of uncertainties, could be significantly above or below these estimates. and as we do with all of our tax revenue forecasts, we will be looking at this again at the may revision, and we'll be refining assumptions, and looking at new data. and we'll be continuing to revise these estimates going forward. so with that, if you turn to the next page in tax structure. and this has already been covered, so i'll just briefly reiterate. there's a cultivation tax, 925 per ounce, 275 per ounce of leaves. and then the 15% excise tax on the final retail selling price. and those are the estimates that i'll be providing to you today. as we approached this revenue estimate, we divided it basically into three different modules, and so we looked at three things separately. we looked at the recreational market, and the medical market and the tourist market. so we expect some revenue gains from people visiting california and consuming marijuana. to forecast the recreational and medical markets, we start with a look at kind of what the current market looks like today. obviously, that's a bit difficult given that the recreational is a black market for the most part. what we did, we looked at surveys that were provided by the substance abuse and mental health services administration. and they survey people on their marijuana usage. and we look at what, so roughly they say 14.5% of californians have consumed marijuana within the last year. and so that kind of gives us a population of users in california. and then we look at when we have to estimate the number of medical users. and so, california does not require you to carry a card, to have a medical marijuana carrying card, it's optional. so unlike other states, like oregon for example, where they have actual really good data on the medical users, we don't have that here in california yet. so when we looked at oregon and how many users they have, medical marijuana users, and we adjusted for california's population. so that gives us 750,000 medical users, and out of a population of about 4.8 million total users. so, and then that leaves about 4.1 million recreational users. we then have to estimate rates of usage. and we did this, for the recreational we assumed 3.5 ounces per person on average. this consists of some very heavy users and also some very light users. these were similar estimates that were employed by colorado and oregon when they initially did the revenue estimates that they were able to achieve. and we assume a much higher use among medical, as you'd expect. medical users should be much heavier users, and on average we assume 9 ounces per person, per year, for medical users. so that kind of gives us the state of the current market, which roughly 14 million ounces recreational, almost 7 million ounces medical. so from there, we prepare a forecast for each part of each module. so, we looked at, so recreational. so one of the biggest challenges with recreational is how big, large the black, gray, homegrown market is currently. we expect it to be quite significant in the beginning. and so we're estimating that roughly two-thirds of the market will initially be black or gray, or outside of the taxable market.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brendan Murphy: Hi, Brendan Murphy, Department of Finance. As you know, Senator, I think we're very much still working through what the regulatory structure's going to look like. But ultimately the collections do rest on the Board of Equalization. So we are working with them to kind of build up what the model looks like. And how they're going to use both the IT systems to validate the collections that they're getting. And then, hopefully they are going through a process that will, as Senator Mcguire referred to, kind of more explain their rules kind of across the state on what the collections methodology will be.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 481, 'end': 488, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Seth Kerstein: Thank you Madam Chair. Seth Kerstein, Legislative Analyst Office. Some of the information I'll be presenting appears on page three of our handout. And to a large extent, will be covering ground that the Department of Finance has covered, so I'll try to make it brief. The way the excised taxes are structured, you have three basic factors that determine how much revenue the state will collect. The amounts of cannabis grown and consumed, the prices consumers pay, and the rate of compliance with the new taxes. We and the administration have tried to ascertain those things as best we can given available data, but as Mr. White mentioned they're tremendously uncertain. Just to briefly illustrate that uncertainty. Consider a comparison between the new cannabis excise taxes under Proposition 64 and the new tobacco taxes under another November ballot measure, Proposition 56. On the tobacco side, we have an established tax program that gives us a precise measure of the existing tax base. We also have the experiences of quite a few other states that have raised tobacco taxes, which helps us gauge how producers and consumers are likely to respond. And so our office in analyzing that ballot measure was able to come up with a relatively concrete quantitative revenue estimate for Prop 56, but it was still even then subject to significant uncertainty. We had a range of several hundred million dollars. With cannabis, we have a tax base that is very difficult to measure because most of it is still part of the underground economy. Experiences from a relatively small number of other states. The potential as Senator Skinner and others have mentioned for major changes in federal enforcement and a concurrent effort at the state level to apply a brand new regulatory framework to the industry. So it's really a whole other level of uncertainty. That said, with revenue potentially materializing before the end of the upcoming 2017-18 fiscal year, the budget will need to incorporate some kind of revenue assumption. In our ballot analysis of Prop 64, our best estimate was that the state and local governments could eventually collect net additional revenues ranging from the high hundreds of millions of dollars to over $1 billion annually. We noted that the revenues likely would be significantly lower in the first several years following the passage of the measure. Our current estimates are based on the same analysis that led us to that conclusion, which actually has a lot in common with the analysis that the administration has done. I'll highlight two things to keep in mind, relative to our summary for the November ballot. First, related to a point that Senator Moorlach has raised, that estimate totaled up the net change in revenue for all state and local taxes, at least the ones that, based on our initial estimates, were significant enough to include in the total. The biggest piece of that is what we're discussing today, revenue from the new state excise taxes on cannabis. That accounted for about three quarters of our total estimated net increase in state and local revenue. The second thing is this distinction between the short run and the long run. Even if the state's implementation were to go relatively smoothly, the transition from the current State of the world to the world that's envisioned in Prop 64 will be drawn out over a number of years, likely the better part of a decade. And to some extent that's by design. The measure for example doesn't allow the state issued licenses for the largest scale cultivators until 2023. So whatever form the industry will take in the long run, we probably won't see it until the mid 2020's at the earliest. So then focusing on that Shorter run revenue, the scenario that we've put together is in many ways similar to what the administration has presented. In the first year of full implementation, so full implementation meaning assuming that everything is up and running as planned, we're looking at annual revenue roughly on the order of half $1 billion initially. Relative to the administration, our scenario has somewhat slower growth in subsequent years. But in light of the uncertainty we've emphasized, we'd say the administration's estimates are reasonable. One last key point to consider is both our revenue projections and the administration's depend quite heavily on a variety of assumptions about government actions at the federal, state, and local levels. On the whole, our estimates are aligned with what you would expect if things play out in a way that's relatively favorable to the formation and growth of a legal cannabis market. For example, if as has been discussed, the federal government takes a more aggressive approach to enforcement. Or, as another example, if local governments throughout the state, take a highly restrictive approach to licensing and regulation then revenues could potentially come in much lower than either our estimate or the administrations. I'll conclude my comments with that and if you have any questions I'd be happy to answer them.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 623, 'end': 628, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1622, 'end': 1629, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2678, 'end': 2686, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brendan Murphy: so brendan colby murphy, department of finance. senator nielsen, i think your reference to the camp program, as you know, is a program i used to run in a former life at the office of emergency services. this is the funding allocations that you'll hear in the next panel, the detail of those have not been decided. i think that's a key, there won't be any revenue until the 18-19 fiscal year at the earliest for that. so i think that that gets back to one of those points where the legislature may have some input in the coming fiscal year, meaning for next year's budget.
[{'start': 3, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 56, 'end': 63, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Richard Miadich: good morning, madame chair, members of the committee. my name's richard, i'm a partner with olson, hagel and fishburn. our law firm in consultation with the drug policy alliance, tamar todd, who i know will be speaking to you later. we were the primary drafters of prop 64. i just want to take a few minutes and give you sort of a brief overview of what our thinking was in terms of the allocations. and what limitations we faced when we were doing that, the first in terms of a legal restriction, we were mindful of the single subject rule that we have in california. that requires that initiatives, all the provisions within an initiative, are reasonably germane to each other. and so from our purposes as the lawyers, we wanted to make sure that where we allocated the tax revenues had some connection to the main purpose of the initiative which was to decriminalize marijuana. if we violate the single subject rule, the entire initiative is invalidated. so we made a risk assessment there and we wanted to make sure we were careful on how we allocated that money. from a policy perspective, of course the members of the coalition had significant input on how we allocated those monies. we had significant outreach with various groups that includes social justice groups, drug policy alliance and others, environmental groups. a number of environmental groups gave us extensive feedback which we incorporated by and large into the initiative. and then the state and local governments also provided input which was incorporated into the initiative. in addition to that, at the time we were drafting the initiative, the lieutenant governor's blue ribbon commission on marijuana policy was holding stakeholder meetings around the state, receiving input. we looked at other states, and one of the lessons we felt that we learned was that it would be a mistake to treat the new revenues we generate as sort of a panacea for all of california's financial woes and instead the best approach would be to direct it at specific purposes. that's in the blue ribbon commission report and i think we've seen that experience in other states, so that was part of our thinking as well. then finally during the drafting process we reached out and received significant feedback on the tax structure and the allocations from the board of equalization. so we tried to engage them during the drafting process to make sure that they were able to provide their feedback to us before the initiative went final. the final point i want to make, this dove tails with something drew just mentioned, we're also mindful that we want to provide some measure of flexibility for the legislature with respect to the allocation of the tax revenues over time. and so, that is what lead to the provision that does allow the legislature to reallocate the money after 10 years. and in addition to that, we do provide that the legislature may, by a two thirds vote, amend the initiative consistent with the purposes and intent. and those are my prepared remarks. i'm happy to answer questions.
[{'start': 64, 'end': 71, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 109, 'end': 117, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 179, 'end': 189, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2553, 'end': 2557, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tamar Todd: once again, my name is tamard. i'm the legal director for the drug policy alliance. our c4 arm, drug policy action, was one of the co-chairs of the campaign, and we are involved in the drafting with the olson hagel firm. i'm going to overview today some of the key social justice aspects of the initiative. it had obviously, it resulted in creating this new sort of revenue for the state, a new regulatory system, new business opportunities. but an equally important aspect of marijuana decriminalization, legalization was to undo some of the social harm and racial justice harm that had been caused in the state by marijuana prohibition. and we are very intentional in the initiative to think about the fact that we were not just seeking to end the criminalization of marijuana. but we were also seeking to undo at least some of the harm that that criminalization had caused in the state of california in a number of ways. for the environment as one, and you'll a little bit about that in the revenue allocation. but specifically the people and community is through out the states and not just to look forward what are we going to do moving forward. but to take a look back and think about how do we undo some of the harm that was cause by a policy that we now no longer think was effective. so there's three main areas that i want to lump what the initiative did into sort of three buckets that i think touch on where the social justice aspects appear most profoundly in the initiative. the first is something that we haven't talked that much today except beginning in a very overview of the measure, and that's the criminal justice reform aspect of the initiative. that one of the primary things it's thought to do was to reduce the criminalization of people in the state for marijuana. and it did that by legalizing personal possession and use amounts for adults 21 and older. but it also did it through broad sentencing reform for marijuana offenses. so it looked at our health and safety code and it reduced most marijuana felonies, save a few to misdemeanors. in some cases to wobblers, and in some cases to infractions. and it did that not just for adults, but it also reduced the criminalization of youth for children under the age of 18. and then as part of that sentencing reduction and this is the look back piece, is that it said, if you're currently incarcerated or on probation or parole in prison or in county jail. you can ask a judge to resentence you under the new structure and reduce your time. and if you have an old conviction, an old felony conviction on your record for something that now might be legal or might be a misdemeanor. you can go seek and have your criminal record changed to reflect the change we've made in law. and to hopefully open up opportunities for people to no longer have a felony on their record in terms of employment, housing, other opportunities. so included those elements to the initiative. the second piece of what we tried to be intentional about in the initiative is as we look towards creating this new legal industry to think about equity and inclusion in the industry. and economic opportunity for people who may have been harmed by marijuana prohibition. harmed by the war on drugs generally, or who in the past have been left out of other industries in terms of economic opportunity. so we did a number of things. one, the initiative does not allow people to just be automatically excluded for most prior drug offenses. so that can't be the sole basis of denial of participation in this new industry. it has to be a look beyond that in order to create opportunity for people in the past who have criminal records. there's a number of provisions sprinkled throughout the measure and the structure of the licensing generally to create a structure that allows, is not going to be a very small number, very expensive licenses to obtain. but does look at our rural counties and also the urban counties and think about how do we create a license structure where the fees are not so high. all of the licenses are not so enormous, that it doesn't allow an average person, a smaller actor, to come in and not to seek employment in this new industry. but some measure of ownership and equity in various parts of the state. so we're not excluding people from this new economic opportunity in california. and thought also intentionally about the pieces about training and getting people up to speed in terms of licensure and what it means now to run this business in a legal way. and then in the third piece, my colleagues will talk even more in depth about this here. who helped give input into the drafting, but is through the revenue allocation and this came up with mr. miadich on the last one. the two buckets particularly the community reinvestment fund which gives $50 million a year targeted specifically at communities who are most harmed by our prior drug policies. and seeking to get those money to the communities that were the most harmed. and also that fund requires some input from community members. and from the non-profits who seek to receive that money into the decision making of where that money goes and how those grants are allocated. and then the second bucket is the use prevention and treatment account, which allows money to be spent in a variety of ways around the state. but specifically these grants that go to schools to help reduce overdose are targeted at schools where the, i'm sorry, well overdose, yes. but also school expulsion and retention issues, go to the schools that are suffering the most on those two counts. so those are the three areas. reducing criminalization, trying to get entry and access to the market. and then looking to spend the revenue that's generated in a way that is equitable and targeted in some areas, the communities that did bear the brunt of marijuana enforcement and our drug law policies of the past.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 29, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4723, 'end': 4730, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Zachary Norris: Last night, my daughter's asleep at about 8:30, and then promptly knocked out myself at about 9 o'clock. I think I was trying to catch up on sleep that my wife and I had been worried about their future. Especially of late, but last night I slept pretty well. Proposition 64 is one of the things that gives me hope in this moment. My name is Zachary Norris, and I am the Executive Director of Ella Baker Center for Human Rights. We work to advance ratio and economic justice in law income communities and communities of colour and tour that in. We seek investment in jobs not jails, books not bars, housing and healthcare not handcuffs. And that's why we endorsed Proposition 64 as Ms. Todd mentioned for some of the reasons connected to sentencing reform that it would stop the incarceration of people under 18 for marijuana offenses including sale offenses. It would clean the record of offensives when they reach the age of 18 and would reduce the penalty for persons over 18 to misdemeanors. It would also allow people to clean up their records for past felonies. It will invest hundreds of millions each year for drug prevention and treatment for young people which Reverend, Which Reverend Vaughn will address in his comments. And would invest hundreds of millions each year in green jobs and parks and environmental clean up which Mr. Brown will address. So I'd like to talk in particular about the community reinvestment fund. Which will start at $10 million in 2018, 2019 and grow to 50 million a year by 2022, 2023. And it will stay at 50 million, it's not a percentage dependant on revenue projections but rather a hard number. As has been discussed will be managed by the Governor's Office of Business and Economic Development in consultation with the Labor and Workforce Development Agency and Department of Social Services. And the funds will go to local health departments and nonprofits to support job placement, mental health treatment, substance abuse treatment, systems navigation, and legal services to address barriers to reentry as well as linkages to medical. And it's all prioritized to communities disproportionately affected by past federal and state drug policies. And I think it's important to note that that is the literal language of the act. That it's designed to address folks disproportionately affected by past federal and state drug policies. We believe that language needs to be implemented with fidelity. It needs to be implemented either through regulation by the Governor's Office of Business and Economic Development. Or through budget trailer bills to target this fund to communities that have had the highest arrest and incarceration rates due to those past drug policies. So that means targeting down to the level of zip code. Or using another measure that ensures that we tightly focus on low income communities that have been damaged by ferocious policies that have tore families apart. As well as preventing communities from ever accumulating wealth, health, and opportunity. And I believe that as revenue materializes, it's going to be kind of like blood in the water. And I would just ask that people really pay attention to the intent of the legislation and the will of the voters in passing Proposition 64. So therefore, we are requesting that the Governor's Office create a public process inviting economic and social justice advocates, as well as others from impacted communities. Health experts to advise the Governor's Office on how to make best use of this fund to heal communities. It wasn't hard for our organization as a racial and economic justice advocacy group to support passage of this act given the community re-investment that I've described. We ask that the Legislature and the Governor commit to implementation and investment with community input. And we commit to participate in that process. Thank you.
[{'start': 341, 'end': 355, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 685, 'end': 689, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1195, 'end': 1201, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Troy Vaughn: Thank you, Madam Chair, and Committee Members, thank you for allowing me to speak here today on this much needed topic. The focus of my discussion would be centered upon the aspect of legislation that sets aside funding for youth education, prevention, early intervention, and the treatment account. My name is Pastor Troy Vaughn, and I serve as the Executor Director of the Los Angeles Regional Reentry Partnership, it's a network organization of over 400 member organizations, and we exist to end mass incarceration, and cut it in half by 2030. I also am the Senior Pastor of Inglewood Community Church, Assemblies of God, and President/CEO of Christ-Centered Ministries. In light of the community challenges and changes and opportunities ahead, resulting from the much needed resources, I believe that a comprehensive, well-balanced review was welcomed and needful. I don't pretend to represent a consensus from the treatment community, the mental health community, or even the reentry community, or any other group of how these funds should ultimately be allocated, but the fact is is that we do need a consensus. There is no consensus yet, and we need people to weigh into this particular opportunity. We need the voices of our community members to be heard, and not to become echoes. If anything, we must learn from the echoes of our past, and we've failed to give voice to community, since the mid 1980s, growing numbers of Americans have come to recognize the harshness, expense and ineffectiveness of US drug prohibition, and they have advocated alternative approaches, including harm reduction, drug decriminalization, and drug legalization. They have also looked for lessons in America's own experience in alcohol prohibition in which how the US turned from nationwide alcohol prohibition to various forms of local alcohol regulation, and I know that historical studies cannot provide simple and straight forward answers to how complex drug policy questions are now confronting us today. However, closer attention to the history of alcohol prohibition and regulation and to the character and scope of global drug prohibition, can help us better understand the situation we face today, and help move us to less costly and more humane and effective drug policies. We need the Legislature and the administration of Governor Jerry Brown to convene hearings and forums throughout the state to hear from diverse communities on how to use these allocations in 2018 and 19, and into years to come. My question today is, what future do our children envision for themselves, what opportunities are we presenting for them to grow up in? We know that many of our children in our communities, those of less deserved, are living amidst poverty, violence, and illness, they see their families, friends, and communities suffering from the effects of alcoholism, unemployment, incarceration, AIDS, or the lack of educational opportunities. I'm here from my heart today to say that we need to take time to understand how these funds should be used in our particular communities. When we don't do this, and we have, instead of a preventive approach, we have a get tough approach on how we come and use and talk to our children, this only perpetuates the school to prison pipeline. We know what works, effective strategies include comprehensive approaches that provide opportunities for education, mentoring, conflict resolution, training, and safety to engage our youth and their families and our community based on integration, the school to prison pipeline exists, in part, because of the capacity of America's low income, rural, and urban communities to provide critical, positive activities where environments have declined, and we need to change that, and we have an opportunity to change that with the use of this funding for our children. Youth education and prevention at early intervention and treatment accounts constitute a massive investment of resources, as such, could constitute a massive investment and time to determine its use. This is money that we shouldn't rush to use it, we should use our time to really get other people's weigh in and buy in on how the funding should be utilized. The focus is on youth, it's on young people, in school, out of school, foster care youth, all of our youth. The act says that funds should go to the State Department of Healthcare Services for programs for youth that are designed to educate about and to prevent substance use disorders, and to prevent harm from substance abuse. That, and also that DHCS shall enter into interagency agreements with Department of Education and Department of Public Health to implement these programs. These programs shall emphasize accurate education, effective prevention, early intervention, and school retention, and timely treatment of services for youth, their families, and caregivers. We need to focus also on the families that are supporting these youths, that's what the legislation calls for, we have to help them develop close relationships with their parents, and their role models, to provide encouragement, healthy benefits, and clear standards of behavior for protecting them from the negative enviroment that are in our communities. We cannot do it alone, prevention strategies seek to reduce existing risk factors, provide protective factors that are missing from our youth's environments today, in many ways, preventing strategies that tend to provide for at risk what effective parents and communities provide in the natural course of youth development. The most effective prevention strategy attend to family and community deficits over a sustained period of time, and I just want to make sure that we understand that when we start talking about how we want to use this funding, that we've already been given a framework of where the money should be going. There is tremendous flexibility within the framework of providing drug treatment and prevention services for you. That's why we think that public process this year to inform organizations and the community that in Prop 64 that there should be a part of the planning and information process, we need to include them in. And to the process, here are some of them, schools, primary care health providers, behavior health programs, substance abuse disorder service providers, community organizations, faith based organizations, foster care providers, juvenile and family courts. They should be included in the process. We shouldn't be making decisions without people that have experienced long term expertise and proven track records in helping us to solve a issue around our children. And in conclusion, I'll say this, improving education, and youth employment opportunities, enhancing social skills, and providing youth with mentors and adult role models are essential components of delinquency prevention. We need our children to stay in school. And they need role models in order to do that. And we need the community to begin to wrap a net around them in order for them to sustain themselves and create opportunities and environments where they feel safe. Environments where they feel protected, and where they feel like they're able to learn in. I want to thank you for allowing me to share today. I'm full because I took great time coming here today. As a pastor who supported Prop 64, I got a lot, a lot of backlash in my community. But I saw the vision of what it could do to help us to begin to erase some of the ills that we are facing in our community for so long. We have turned our back on our children and we have to stop. We have to stop and we have to give voice to them. We have to include other people, and their families, and their parents into the process. So that we'll know how we should be creating programs, programs that work in our community,. That will sustain our children for years to come long after all of us are gone. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 318, 'end': 329, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2332, 'end': 2343, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Barry Broad: madam chair. barry brendan broad, on behalf of the teamsters, i just want to say that all of this money depends on collecting the taxes that are levied here. and that depends on creating a strong regulatory structure that doesn't allow for diversion of the product into the illegal market where there will be no tax collection. and that is an issue that is squarely before you and there are certain big issues related to that including the fact that there is still no access to banking in this industry. so for example our members in the industry, there is a problem for them even having their payroll taxes remitted at this point. so that's an issue that we would ask the legislature to work very hard on, and to make this a very tight, highly regulated industry that is above ground, not underground. thank you.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Hezekiah Allen: Madam Chair, members Hezekiah Allen on behalf of the California Growers Association. I'm just wanted to briefly comment about the deliberation that was done last year on SB 987, AB 2243. The two tax measures that were moving through the Legislature. They started almost word for word, identical to the tax programs that were passed in Prop 64. Several months later, they finished a very different place. We recognize that there are going to be procedural challenges getting that language changed. But there are a number of features in the bills when they were shelved at the end of session that we think are much superior with regards to attracting participations, streamlining tax collection, and ultimately getting our businesses the fastest path to compliance. At the end of the day, there was more revenue generated as well. So we love to explore options to reconciliation there. Thank you.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linsey Fredenburg-Humes: yes, thank you. my name is linsey, i'm with the californian state parks foundation. and i would like to thank you for holding this oversight hearing today. on behalf of our tens of thousands of members throughout california, we want to express our strong support for the funding framework that's set out in proposition 64 for the environmental restoration and protection accounts. and asset members of the legislature make funding for state parks a priority within that account. i've provided a letter from the california state parks foundation and 18 other non-profit organizations throughout california, that as the state parks do remain a priority for funding from prop 64, not only for cleaning up years of illegal grows on public lands, but also to help address stewardship and operation of state parks to increase equitable access to state parks. and help welcome new visitors and hopefully prevent future illegal growth. thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
James Hinton: Good afternoon. James Hinton, Napa California. We heard earlier about the environmental impacts from cultivating Cannabis. And I encourage you to, as you're really trying to work hard to get the regulations, to look at the State of Washington. They've done a really great job at crafting legislation, marijuana waste disposal, liquids and solids. So when you have a commercial grow, I got the opportunity last month to fly up there to Seattle. In tour, one of these intercoma, it's pretty wild. There's no soil indoor, they bring in the water. They purify it there, then they add the nutrients they want to it so that they can control it. And the plants are basically all grown in pipes. So all the roots are in pipes and they control the water through the system. And they recycle the water a lot. So they don't use that much water but in the end when they get rid of the water, it is very nutrient rich and it needs to be disposed of properly so you don't damage the local counties and cities where you're cultivating it like it has done up in the trees and the hills. And there's also when you have the large producers that are making oils and edibles, they receive maybe 50, maybe 100 pounds of marijuana a month. They come in these plastic bags, and they process it. When they get rid of the plastic bags and they throw them away in the garbage, they have over a gram of Kief in these bags. That makes it to where the youth could steal these bags, scrape the key, smoke it, and get high and California isn't collecting any of its revenue. There's a machine out there called the Cannamia, they can take the plastic bag when they're done with it, throw it in there. It'll take the keef out, preserve it. Allow that keef to come to the floor, for sale, for markets so California can collect its revenue and the bag can go out into the recycling bin with no keef, no danger to the youth at all. And I encourage you to consider that as you drafting the legislation which is sustainable and keep our community safe. Thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Jenkins: thank you. amy barry jenkins with platinum advisors on behalf of the california cannabis industry association. we applaud the work of the committee and staffs and appreciate your thoughtful examination of all the issues today. as mr. broad previously pointed out, the industry is extremely concerned about our continued banking challenges as well as whether or not the licensing entities have the necessary infrastructure to collect the cash. so we really appreciated the discussion that took place on that issue. it's certainly a critical issue and we want to partner with you on solutions. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 234, 'end': 239, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Helen Mishar: madam chair and members. helen amy mishar on behalf of the california association of alcohol and drug program executives. we are the steward association of drug treatment and alcohol recovery programs. we operate in 300 sites throughout the state including both in custody and post release individuals and programs. we support a broad based and inclusive stakeholder process on the distribution on the two funds. we have submitted a letter to the committee outlining what we see as a beginning of a framework for that distribution and look forward to participating in a very robust and, as i said, exclusive inclusive stakeholder process on that. thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maya Ingram: Maya Ingram on behalf of the ACLU, a co-sponsor in strong support. Also, on behalf of the California Public Defenders Association, a co-sponsor in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ronald Coleman: good morning, ronald jonah coleman with the california immigrant policy center, here as a co-sponsor, and also in strong support of ab3, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christopher Castrillo: Good morning Madam Chair and Members. Christopher Castrillo on behalf of the over 27,000 members of the California Faculty Association, in strong support.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Young: good morning members, young on behalf of the california labor federation, also here in support.
[]
Jennifer Harms: Good morning, Jennifer Harms with the National Association of Social Work, in strong support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Herald: Mike Herald, Western Center of Law and Poverty, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Victor Christy: Victor Christy, California Health Plus Advocates, representing 1200 federally qualified health centers, and clinics across the state, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rene Bayardo: bayardo, seiu california, also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 9, 'end': 13, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kathleen Howard: thank you very much, madam chair, members of the committee, howard, or i go by katie, the executive director of the bscc, very happy to be here to talk with you about this important subject. i would like to fill in some additional background from the perspective of the board about our activities on this regulation over the last year, and in particular, focusing on the approval that was approved last week and that is a draft regulation which then begins the administrative procedures act, processed through the office of administrative law. so i wanted to say at the outset that there still is the opportunity for additional public comment on this proposed regulation and to bring you up to date about, i think there really actually has been a significant move toward what the legislature attempted to do last year in sb 1157 with this regulation and there was a particular sense of urgency for the board to move quickly at the meeting last thursday, so that there could be a date certain on which the regulation changes. with that, the board is intent on saying that additional facilities should not be permitted to move to an exclusively video option and i realize that reasonable minds can and will differ on this, but the position of the board is that the regulation has to be clear and specific as to date and measurable. the board of state and community corrections has the responsibility to inspect our local facilities for compliance with the regulations. and the issue here is that on a going forward basis, we need to be able to say, as of this date, no additional facilities can do this, and some of the discussion that you were in with the previous panel focused on, well, why is there this issue of grandfathering a number of facilities? and the difficult legal issue, from the board's perspective, is that until the rule is changed, the elevation of the rule was at such a spot that it required that there be visitation available, but it did not specify whether the video option could be allowed. so i realize that's one significant area of disagreement, but that's where we get into this gray area with some facilities being grandfathered and then everything else going forward would not be able to move to the video only option on sight. so, backing up for just a minute about how we got here, as you know, the board of state and community corrections is responsible for regulations for the local detention facilities, and those are title 15, operational regulations and title 24, which are the physical plant and the building regulations and in the operational regulations, generally speaking, the altitude of the regulations is quite high, the board does not direct the specific details about what policies around operations should be, and i can say that that was part of the thought process last year, this has been an emerging issue and as lynn outlined, the executive steering committee did look at the regulation on visitation, did consider adding language, which the board did not act on, as lynn also pointed out. but nonetheless, this issue of, generally speaking, the regulations set a minimum standards and then the local facilities, the local agencies, are responsible for promulgating the regulations in compliance with those regs. so i think i would say the good news is that as we've moved forward, collected a lot more information, understood the level of concerns, and taken the direction from the governor in the veto message to talk with the concerned stakeholders and identify options for going forward, we've landed in a compromised space, which addresses, frankly, more detail than the board typically puts into the regulations for local facilities, and says now there is a requirement for in-person visitation. the very short summary of what the regulation does are a couple of different features, it prohibits additional facilities, as i've emphasized, from moving to a video-only approach. it requires that all new adult detention facilities are required to provide in person visitation and any future must be constructed with sufficient space for in person visitation, and then, as mentioned, because of the significant costs and the fact that the rule was not specific as to the manner of the delivery of visitation, there, the regulation is perspective only, that gets into the grandfathering issue. as noted by the previous panel, we initially had put the draft to the board with a provision that said the first hour of remote video visitation would be free of charge, there was some significant discussion by the board about that last thursday and one of the things i also wanted to mention is that chair linda penner and i visited the santa rita jail in alameda county just a couple of weeks ago, you'll hear from sheriff ahern later, and in that example this was one of the considerations that was clearly on the board's mind. the video visitation at the santa rita jail will be exclusively supplementary, they will always have space for in-person visitation, and although i understand some of the concerns about the technology for video visitation, it seems the technology is improving. there were issues and concerns when we talked with the sponsors about connections being cut off, sometimes cameras pointing at the top of heads, we saw the setup in the alameda county jail and for a supplemental option, it really does look like it's technologically the state of the art, and it's only going to be a supplemental remote type service. there are some other details but for purposes of this conversation, i just want to say that the board was concerned about the operational aspect of not charging for that first hour free, tracking of how that would work, as well as how the contracts are set up, particularly, i think, in the positive case of alameda, that it's supplemental only. they also have a less expensive rate, from what i understand, in their contract of $9.00 for 30 minutes, the board did decide to remove that provision about the first hour being for no charge. just a couple of other thoughts to add here and then i'm very happy to take your questions. you've heard about the governor's veto of senate bill 1157, i don't need to repeat what the prior panel walked you through. the governor did direct the bscc to work with stakeholders and explore ways to address these issues, chair linda penner and i, and some of our colleagues, had meetings throughout november and december with the sponsor organizations, with many advocates, with the state sheriff's association, csac, urban county caucus, and others. and the issue of a requirement coming through a regulation that would have the local facilities responsible for something that has a cost attached to it was just something that the board did not feel that it could do. i mean, that is certainly within the province of this legislature, but for the regulation, this issue of having a clear date and a perspective regulation seemed like the best landing spot that we could get to, with that, i'm happy to take your questions.
[{'start': 60, 'end': 66, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 79, 'end': 84, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2863, 'end': 2867, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3018, 'end': 3022, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4654, 'end': 4666, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4772, 'end': 4777, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6351, 'end': 6363, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Zoe Wilmott: wonderful, thank you so much for having us here this morning. my name is zoe jonah wilmott and i'm the manager of advocacy and programs at essie justice group. we are an organization of woman with incarcerated loved ones. i'm also the daughter of a formerly incarcerated mother. and for years i spent my weekends visiting my mom at a federal prison here in dublin, california. every sunday i drove to my destination, she was hidden behind barbed wire, metal detectors, cold steel, shackles and clinking chains that kept her inside of this place, of this prison. as we pulled up to the front gates, my four year old body became restless. form after form to fill out, line after line to wait in. the processing room to get into the prison visiting room was filled with antsy families, some from as far away as other countries. and then of course were the teary eyed people who'd been sent home because they didn't meet some regulation that day. then finally, we were escorted by multiple guards to the visiting room, which brought with it even more waiting. staring at those thick beige doors, desperately hoping that every time the red light came on, my mom would be the one to walk out. eventually she would, but every time i stood there waiting, i feared she would never come out to see me again. i remember rushing across the room to get to her, and holding on so tight i thought that i'd never let go. that visiting room holds so many of my childhood memories. it's almost like a part of me grew up there. with my mom we talked, we played games, we laughed and we cried until it was time to say goodbye. saying goodbye to my mom was the one thing i swore i would be able to do again yet every weekend i was forced to. those goodbyes when everyone got quiet. all the mothers standing on one side of the room with tears sliding down their cheeks mirroring their sobbing children. leaving my mom was the hardest thing i have ever had to do, yet it was the only option i had. i wanted so much to take her home with me. to show her my room, my school and my friends. every time i had a chance to blow out birthday candles or make a wish in a fountain, it was for her to come home but she couldn't. which is why i will never forget those sunday morning visits, my one chance to be a part of her life. i wrote the piece you just heard when i was in high school and i share it with you because it's vital for you to understand the experiences that we go through when visiting. it's important that when you, as the legislators who set the laws for our state, come up with visitation policy, you think about it from the perspective of a four year old child. it is important that when you consider replacing in person visits with video calls, you remember lashar, who is a mother of four children who's husband was arrested in 2014 and spent the last two years in jail where her only communication was through video calls. lashar struggled to fit her four children into the tiny booths at the jail where her husband's forehead would appear once a week on a scratched up tv screen. her children would cry for their father, confused about not being able to see him. leshar couldn't even follow what her husband was saying, because the technology was so poor, that the screen, what was being said, wasn't matching the sound coming out. they tried visiting from home, but the cost was too high to be worth the technological challenges that they faced. the bond between them was ruptured, because it felt like fake talking to a screen, it was robotic rather than human. it's important that you remember zovena, who was the formerly incarcerated mother who asked me to share a piece of her story with you today as she was unable to be here in person with us. when zovena was incarcerated, many of the women in jail were pre-trial and had not been sentenced. it's a cruel punishment to eliminate our rights to see our loved ones before we have even been convicted. when i was arrested that is when my children needed to see me and be reassured that i was okay. when i had in person visits, they allowed me to stay connected with my children. i engaged with them and they brought homework and books for me to read to them. touching their hands to the glass and feeling their tiny hands up against mine gave me hope and purpose and allowed me to parent from inside. these in-person real visits were necessary for my recovery and my reentry, not to mention reduce disciplinary infractions. later on, my daughter was separated from me and our only communication was through video calls. it's had a direct impact on both of our mental health and our emotional bond. it was dehumanizing. it caused us so much strain that we stopped visiting. it is important that you remember ms. anita and mike who you're about to hear from. and the millions of people who are bearing the burdens of incarceration in this country. it is important that you not only remember us, but carry our stories with you. that you defer to us as experts on visitation. that when you hear my story, you understand that in-person visitation saved my life. our stories are here to ground you as you move forward in setting this policy. but also to remind you that we are here to provide input, expertise, and insights and solutions along the way. so with that, i'm proud to welcome up ms. anita wills who's going to share her personal experience, followed up by michael cortez.
[{'start': 73, 'end': 90, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2748, 'end': 2754, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2915, 'end': 2921, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3156, 'end': 3162, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3590, 'end': 3596, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3750, 'end': 3756, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4759, 'end': 4764, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4769, 'end': 4773, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5337, 'end': 5348, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5410, 'end': 5424, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Anita Wills: Good afternoon. My name is Anita Wills and as so many women like me, I've spent decades of my life taking on the cause of my love one's incarceration. I'm speaking with you today as a fellow and Advisory Council Member of Essie Justice Group, an organization of women with incarcerated loved ones. I want to thank Senator Skinner for conveying this hearing and prioritizing visitation and Senator Mitchell for championing this issue alongside us. And continuing the fight for our rights to maintain healthy, meaningful relationships with our loved ones behind prison bars. It means the world when politicians actually do what they say they will. I have worked as a childcare provider and preschool teacher, I've been raising my family in California since 1972. I'm a writer and published author of five books. The last one, A Nation of Flaws, Just Us in the Homeland, details how the law does not work for everyone in this country. I'm a mother to four children. 5 and 3 quarter grandchildren, my daughter and son-in-law are expecting, and my youngest son has been unconsecrated for the last 16 years. Serving an Undetermined sentence. I often lie awake wondering if I will be able to hug him again and when if ever he will be free. When I found out that our county jail started eliminating in-person visits and replacing them with video calls, I was appalled. My son was in the county jail. He spent two years there before he was sentenced and sent to state prison. And for me to go in there and see him and sit with him, and know that physically he was okay, even if I could not touch him, just the idea that I could see him through that glass and talk to him on the phone, that is what kept me going. And now, we have contact visits in the state system. It takes me 12 hours round trip to drive to Corcoran and see my son, even though it is a challenge it is worth it. Our visits are where my grandson saw his father for the first time in 11 years. Where I get to see my son's face, where we laugh together, where I can tell when he is doing well and when he is struggling. Our visits are where my family gets to be reunited again, even for a few hours. Video calls pose a threat to that sacred bond that we maintain through visitation. There are far too many barriers with video calls that prevent others to having what I get with my son. The fact that video visitation is not only a form of separation but one that we have to pay for is absurd. Remote video visitation requires spending an average of $1.00 a minute on video calls, not to mention the cost of technology. That is a huge injustice to us. Once you pay to have video capacity in your home, you have to have high speed Internet for it to function. Otherwise, you lose your time and they don't refund the money. For already strained families, we cannot afford this cost. We are the ones who are paying for these contracts. We are the ones who are already struggling to make ends meet in the absence of our loved ones. And now, we have to pay to see them. The profit to the sheriff's department comes from us, from women with incarcerated loved ones. It comes from grandmothers like me. On top of all that, you have to be technologically savvy in order to operate the video call systems. Older people can not begin to operate or even understand the video technology. They're telling people to stay home and do a video visit because they say it's more convenient. It's the opposite. It's a burden, a separation, and a cost that we can't afford. Then when you go to the county to visit on site, the video are not that good. You can't even make eye contact. Eye contact, excuse me. It's inhumane to cut off all contact like that. I am opposed to replacing video calls with in person visitation. You cannot replace real visits. It is counter to all of the conversations about rehabilitation and re-entry. It does not make sense that you will expects someone to get the help they need while incarcerated and yet separate them further from their support systems. Is setting people up for failure. If I could only see my son through a video screen for the rest of his incarceration, I don't know what I would do. I would lose my connection to him. It would be like taking him away from me all over again. Even when your child is an adult, you want to at least see them and look them in the eye. You really want to hug and touch them because it's healing to have a hug from a loved one. A mother has a right to see her child. And look them in the eye. As a black grandmother, I'm a pillar of strength in my family and in my community. My family's future, my grandchildren's safety relies upon bringing it into systems that make it impossible for us to stay together. And I'm not alone. Nearly one in two black women like me has an incarcerated loved one. We deserve the right to keep our families together. Thank you for your time.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 322, 'end': 329, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 397, 'end': 405, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Cortez: Hey everybody. My name is Michael Cortez. I'm 19 years old and I'm a youth advocate of Project WHAT! and my brother here is being incarcerated in the Solano County jail for about three years now. So, he was in a facility that only offered video visitation. And none of my family members liked that at all. Like for my grandmother who would drive to come see him at least through the glass, she would get confused with the technology and even at home it wasn't really that great for her as well. Now, also the cost of it be very costly on families like with Ms. Anita has said, having to pay for the commissary and the day to day life expenses. And they also add that on top of you. And just going straight to the point, that communication is really fundamental for human beings. So we need, for example the blind, they have braille to read. The deaf, they have sign language to speak. See, we need this communication because it is very dear to us. Our family members need it. When they're cut off from this sort of communication and this sentiment, the rehabilitation factor is just basically cut off. So, do you really expect inmates to really heal themselves or be healed by their family members when they cannot even have a basic right while visiting their family members. But, the glitches when you are at home on the computer sometimes you always see a forehead, like a what Zoe was saying, I forgot whose story, but yeah, that's pretty much it, that's all I have to say. Those straight facts.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 561, 'end': 566, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1380, 'end': 1383, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jolena Voorhis: Madame Chairs and members, Jolena Voorhis on behalf the Urban Counties of California. I just want to say at the outset, we're not opposed to in person visitation, it's a fiscal issue. That's why we are opposed to 1157. There's four urban counties that are affected. Two of which have all ready, it's completely done, it's constructed. So, if this is a priority for the Legislature, I would suggest that provide funding. We're in the middle of a really big cost shift right now in IHSS and counties just do not have the money to do this significant rehab and reconstruction of these facilities. Some facilities they may be able to bus them to another facility in the county that does have in person. But right for us, it's not a policy issue, it's a fiscal issue. Thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gail Brown: i'm gail zoe brown and i'm a chair of inmate family council of solano prison. and of course, if it's in the jails, we're concerned as heading toward the prisons also. and i've known that we've gotten further away and more into technology, further away from human contact in being able to visit. 40 years ago, we had seven days of visiting in the prisons, i think it was 8 hours a day. and it went to four days, three days, then two days and the possibility of having the video visiting can be a little bit of a help for those who are at a distance, but the fear, of course is to have it only be video. human contact is really important. i see people in the visiting rooms that share meals together. play games together and i think that's of vital importance. i hate to move away from that, so i just am concerned it's heading to the prisons also. thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Derrick Ciprian: Good afternoon, my name is Derrick Ciprian, former incarcerated citizen who currently works in restorative justice for AFSC, American Friends Service Committee and I can attest personally to the therapeutic and rehabilitative value in person visits can provide. When I was incarcerated, the one thing that meant the most to me was my visits. It gave me strength. It kind of gave me an outlet to actually be able to look into the eyes of my wife and to my sons and see the love, see the sadness and see the grief. It had a profound effect on me, it made me want to to better. It made me think. So in person visit, they're needed to help heal and to help mend these broken families. I just urge you, I just employ to actually to keep this in-person visit intact and I'm let them do if there's things to do which is to heal and mend the broken families that are using. Again, I say, thank you for your time and consideration.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Cruz: Good afternoon, I'm Mary Cruz with the California Immigrant Policy Center, a statewide organization that advocate for pro-immigrant policy and also strongly supported SB 1157 authored by Senator Mitchell in 2016. We thank Senator Skinner for bringing together this hearing and Senator Mitchell for her leadership in preserving in-person visitations. Video visitations should never replace the possibility of visiting your loved one in person. In-person visitation has proven to reduce recidivism, increase chances of obtaining employment post-release and facilitate successful reentry. As local law enforcement agencies are increasingly collaborating with federal immigration enforcement to detain and deport immigrant community members in local jails, we need for family contact during this stressful time. It is incredibly important. In-person visits recognize the human dignity of every person and preserve the importance of something as simple as human to human contact, and the connection to one's community. The sole use of video visitation technology unfairly burdens low income and limited proficient families with the high cost of video visits, building lack of language accessibility. Without to mention, the challenges with limited literacy computer skills. Because low income people are disproportionately incarnated, video visitation commission, essentially works like a request of task. We encourage the Legislature to ensure meaningful in-prison visits are preserved and we encourage the BSCC to revisit the title 15 and title 24 violation motions task on February 16. Thank you for your time.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 195, 'end': 203, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 230, 'end': 237, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 285, 'end': 293, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Azadeh Zohrabi: good afternoon, my name is azadeh gail zohrabi. i'm the national campaigner at the ella baker center for human rights,we were co-sponsor of sb 1157. i want to thank you all for your continued attention to this matter. i want to encourage you to continue looking for ways to make sure that all counties are required to provide in person visitation. and specifically looking at ways to reduce the number of counties that are proposed to be grandfathered in by the bscc. this number is unacceptable, extremely high, and there's definitely ways that we can ensure that all counties in california offer in-person visitation. but especially the one's that have this base and haven't broken ground yet and we look forward to continuing to work with you to make sure that happens.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Escobar: Hi, good afternoon. I'm Jessica Escobar. I'm a fellow with the Essie Justice Group. I'm a registered voter in Alameda County,and I'm a woman who has an incarcerated loved one, as one in four women in this country does. And I'm really grateful to you, Senator Mitchell, for always amplifying our voices. It's always interesting for me to hear experts and different people kind of speculate about my experiences. And I really appreciate any opportunity to be able to speak for myself about what I've experienced. And I just wanted to say that I speak as someone kind of on both sides. I have a brother who works as a corrections officer and I also have a close family member who is incarcerated in California. And by both of their accounts, visitation is extremely important to maintaining a safe ambiance in the jail, a relatively safe ambiance in the jail. By both accounts the stress levels and the aggression and the more violent tendencies seem to be more amplified when people are denied most basic things like face to face communication with their families. Our visits are already pretty encumbered. It's difficult to get to see our loved ones. There's all kinds of restrictions on what we can wear, what we can say, what we can do, what can we. It's complicated as it is. And so, we don't really need to be further harming these connections. As a hard working, tax paying citizen it's kind of disturbing to me to see something that's so cost effective be harmed. And definitely us out here who are supporting the people inside, we are the best re-entry system. And anyone who is truly concerned about decreasing recidivism and cost to the state should encourage these connections. And thanks again for the time. Thank you.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 259, 'end': 267, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Allegra Taylor: my name is allegra azadeh taylor and i am the daughter of the longest held prisoner in solitary confinement, mr. hugo pinell who is now deceased. i'm here today to speak on behalf of families who might have to endure this video visitation. i wasn't privileged to being able to spend a lot of time with my dad because i didn't get to know him until i was an adult. although, i did visit him every weekend both saturday and sunday for 18 months speaking to him through the glass window. i was glad to hear that one of the sheriffs brought up the glass window because that is not an in-person visit. that's a visit with a thick glass between you. you don't experience the touch of a human being. you do not experience the emotion that's tied in with an in-person visit, which is a contact visit. i was only privileged to have one contact visit with my dad before he was murdered. that's the one visit that i'll hold dear to my heart for the rest of my life. the reason that i felt the need to speak up in regards to this particular bill or situation is because my grandmother is 90 years old. and as i spend time with her as often as i can, there's one thing she continues to bring up. this is the woman that spent 44 years visiting her son all throughout the state of california in every cdc that you probably have. last 23 of them being at pelican bay. and then the last year of his life over here folsom. the one thing that she continues to say whether i'm talking to her on the phone or whether i see her and visit is that she didn't get that one last contact visit, because he died before she was endured that. she talks about how she she wanted to hug him one more time. how she just wanted to hold his hand one more time. after spending 44 years of being denied the right to touch her son due to being in the shoe for 46 years, it is inhumane to even consider eliminating in person visits for families. that's an additional punishment to the family, as well as the prisoner. enough is enough, please don't do this. please don't do this for the sake of families who need, you are supposed to be the state that stands for california department of rehabilitation where is the rehabilitation in a no contact visit, in a video visit. that's not for rehabilitation purposes. that's for the sole point of saving money and maybe saving some guards to doing some extra work. for the record, i am also the wife of a former california department of corrections guard.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 113, 'end': 124, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Laura Minaughnee: laura with the american friends service committee, just wanted to make a couple of points i would really appreciate the depth of this hearing. i have been doing this work for over 40 years, god help us all. and in that amount of time, i can't tell you how many formally incarcerated people have said that they have been able to turn their lives around when they held their grandchild or when they looked in the eyes of their children and they suddenly realize that they weren't in their life on a daily basis. this kind of contact is essential if you really want to talk about rehabilitation and the other aspect of realignment was not just the rehabilitation programs, and that kind of thing. it was bringing people closer to their families, bringing them home. that's what was really intended there and we need to make sure that it doesn't get lost in the shuffle. i hope that you will not approve one single dime more money for counties to build these facilities without in person visits and i would feel terrible if we left here today and the message was if you just give us more money, we could get it right. look at the definition of retroactive in the way that these regs are written or i would say, not really written. they're talking about a letter of intent and anything that follows after a letter of intent is now retroactive, and nothing can be changed. a letter of intent is not even approved. it's not even an application and we're talking about that being something that's already in the pipeline, and that can't be changed. this has to stop. and obviously, it's not going to stop, unless you take action and you've been courageous on it in the past, and we just want to encourage you to keep doing that. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 190, 'end': 193, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Corey Sells: Good afternoon, Madam Chair and members. Corey Sells over here on behalf of the California State Sheriffs' Association. First, again, I would say that sheriffs in the Association are not opposed to in person visitation. Many if not, most jails continue to offer solely in person visitation as the means to have that visitation between inmates and their family and their loved ones. But again, this like many of the issues that you face on a daily basis here in the Legislature is a balancing act between what counties can afford and what security provides and what jails need to do in the footprint of the buildings that they are operating in. So we would just highlight that, we did oppose SB 1157. We discussed the bill with the author significantly and extensively. We weren't able to come to a compromise in legislative process. We worked with the Board of State and Community Corrections to attempt to address this issue. We did not oppose SB 44 in as much as that provision required any new facilities to have in person visitation. We understood that was a reasonable compromise, given the sheriffs who would apply for that money would know going forward the rules of the game. And that's what largely this turns on is that sheriffs and jails, and counties, and planners have worked within the confines of what the law allows, and what the law permits. And again, trying to establish that balance between what is desirable and what is affordable and what can be precluded or what can be provided potentially at the expense of others. Again, just wanted to clarify the facilities that are offering onsite video visitation are not charging in California and the reg highlights that. And again, precludes that. Excuse me, I look forward to working with you and the board as this moves forward. Thank you.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 46, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Chuck Carpenter: thank you, dr. weber and senator skinner, whatever your name is. my name is chuck allegra carpenter, i'm here today to listen. and today, i heard again the bscc, the sheriffs, the sheriff's association saying, we want to do the right thing. we're  your friends. if they want to do the right thing, there's a simple solution. ab 42, bail realignment. fixing the bail system that's economically driven will allow them to lay off deputies and have face to face visits. so, i asked them to please support ab 42.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 20, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 33, 'end': 40, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 76, 'end': 99, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathleen Howard: Thank you very much, Madam Chair, Members of the Committee, Kathleen Howard, or I go by Katie, the Executive Director of the BSCC, very happy to be here to talk with you about this important subject. I would like to fill in some additional background from the perspective of the board about our activities on this regulation over the last year, and in particular, focusing on the approval that was approved last week and that is a draft regulation which then begins the Administrative Procedures Act, processed through the Office of Administrative Law. So I wanted to say at the outset that there still is the opportunity for additional public comment on this proposed regulation and to bring you up to date about, I think there really actually has been a significant move toward what the legislature attempted to do last year in SB 1157 with this regulation and there was a particular sense of urgency for the Board to move quickly at the meeting last Thursday, so that there could be a date certain on which the regulation changes. With that, the Board is intent on saying that additional facilities should not be permitted to move to an exclusively video option and I realize that reasonable minds can and will differ on this, but the position of the board is that the regulation has to be clear and specific as to date and measurable. The Board of State and Community Corrections has the responsibility to inspect our local facilities for compliance with the regulations. And the issue here is that on a going forward basis, we need to be able to say, as of this date, no additional facilities can do this, and some of the discussion that you were in with the previous panel focused on, well, why is there this issue of grandfathering a number of facilities? And the difficult legal issue, from the Board's perspective, is that until the rule is changed, the elevation of the rule was at such a spot that it required that there be visitation available, but it did not specify whether the video option could be allowed. So I realize that's one significant area of disagreement, but that's where we get into this gray area with some facilities being grandfathered and then everything else going forward would not be able to move to the video only option on sight. So, backing up for just a minute about how we got here, as you know, the Board of State and Community Corrections is responsible for regulations for the local detention facilities, and those are Title 15, Operational Regulations and Title 24, which are the Physical Plant and the Building Regulations and in the operational regulations, generally speaking, the altitude of the regulations is quite high, the Board does not direct the specific details about what policies around operations should be, and I can say that that was part of the thought process last year, this has been an emerging issue and as Lynn outlined, the Executive Steering Committee did look at the regulation on visitation, did consider adding language, which the Board did not act on, as Lynn also pointed out. But nonetheless, this issue of, generally speaking, the regulations set a minimum standards and then the local facilities, the local agencies, are responsible for promulgating the regulations in compliance with those regs. So I think I would say the good news is that as we've moved forward, collected a lot more information, understood the level of concerns, and taken the direction from the Governor in the veto message to talk with the concerned stakeholders and identify options for going forward, we've landed in a compromised space, which addresses, frankly, more detail than the Board typically puts into the regulations for local facilities, and says now there is a requirement for in-person visitation. The very short summary of what the regulation does are a couple of different features, it prohibits additional facilities, as I've emphasized, from moving to a video-only approach. It requires that all new adult detention facilities are required to provide in person visitation and any future must be constructed with sufficient space for in person visitation, and then, as mentioned, because of the significant costs and the fact that the rule was not specific as to the manner of the delivery of visitation, there, the regulation is perspective only, that gets into the grandfathering issue. As noted by the previous panel, we initially had put the draft to the Board with a provision that said the first hour of remote video visitation would be free of charge, there was some significant discussion by the Board about that last Thursday and one of the things I also wanted to mention is that Chair Linda Penner and I visited the Santa Rita Jail in Alameda County just a couple of weeks ago, you'll hear from Sheriff Ahern later, and in that example this was one of the considerations that was clearly on the Board's mind. The video visitation at the Santa Rita Jail will be exclusively supplementary, they will always have space for in-person visitation, and although I understand some of the concerns about the technology for video visitation, it seems the technology is improving. There were issues and concerns when we talked with the sponsors about connections being cut off, sometimes cameras pointing at the top of heads, we saw the setup in the Alameda County Jail and for a supplemental option, it really does look like it's technologically the State of the art, and it's only going to be a supplemental remote type service. There are some other details but for purposes of this conversation, I just want to say that the Board was concerned about the operational aspect of not charging for that first hour free, tracking of how that would work, as well as how the contracts are set up, particularly, I think, in the positive case of Alameda, that it's supplemental only. They also have a less expensive rate, from what I understand, in their contract of $9.00 for 30 minutes, the Board did decide to remove that provision about the first hour being for no charge. Just a couple of other thoughts to add here and then I'm very happy to take your questions. You've heard about the Governor's veto of Senate Bill 1157, I don't need to repeat what the prior panel walked you through. The Governor did direct the BSCC to work with stakeholders and explore ways to address these issues, Chair Linda Penner and I, and some of our colleagues, had meetings throughout November and December with the sponsor organizations, with many advocates, with the State Sheriff's Association, CSAC, Urban County Caucus, and others. And the issue of a requirement coming through a regulation that would have the local facilities responsible for something that has a cost attached to it was just something that the Board did not feel that it could do. I mean, that is certainly within the province of this legislature, but for the regulation, this issue of having a clear date and a perspective regulation seemed like the best landing spot that we could get to, with that, I'm happy to take your questions.
[{'start': 60, 'end': 75, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 88, 'end': 93, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2872, 'end': 2876, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3027, 'end': 3031, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4663, 'end': 4675, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4781, 'end': 4786, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6360, 'end': 6372, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Zoe Wilmott: wonderful, thank you so much for having us here this morning. my name is wilmott and i'm the manager of advocacy and programs at essie justice group. we are an organization of woman with incarcerated loved ones. i'm also the daughter of a formerly incarcerated mother. and for years i spent my weekends visiting my mom at a federal prison here in dublin, california. every sunday i drove to my destination, she was hidden behind barbed wire, metal detectors, cold steel, shackles and clinking chains that kept her inside of this place, of this prison. as we pulled up to the front gates, my four year old body became restless. form after form to fill out, line after line to wait in. the processing room to get into the prison visiting room was filled with antsy families, some from as far away as other countries. and then of course were the teary eyed people who'd been sent home because they didn't meet some regulation that day. then finally, we were escorted by multiple guards to the visiting room, which brought with it even more waiting. staring at those thick beige doors, desperately hoping that every time the red light came on, my mom would be the one to walk out. eventually she would, but every time i stood there waiting, i feared she would never come out to see me again. i remember rushing across the room to get to her, and holding on so tight i thought that i'd never let go. that visiting room holds so many of my childhood memories. it's almost like a part of me grew up there. with my mom we talked, we played games, we laughed and we cried until it was time to say goodbye. saying goodbye to my mom was the one thing i swore i would be able to do again yet every weekend i was forced to. those goodbyes when everyone got quiet. all the mothers standing on one side of the room with tears sliding down their cheeks mirroring their sobbing children. leaving my mom was the hardest thing i have ever had to do, yet it was the only option i had. i wanted so much to take her home with me. to show her my room, my school and my friends. every time i had a chance to blow out birthday candles or make a wish in a fountain, it was for her to come home but she couldn't. which is why i will never forget those sunday morning visits, my one chance to be a part of her life. i wrote the piece you just heard when i was in high school and i share it with you because it's vital for you to understand the experiences that we go through when visiting. it's important that when you, as the legislators who set the laws for our state, come up with visitation policy, you think about it from the perspective of a four year old child. it is important that when you consider replacing in person visits with video calls, you remember lashar, who is a mother of four children who's husband was arrested in 2014 and spent the last two years in jail where her only communication was through video calls. lashar struggled to fit her four children into the tiny booths at the jail where her husband's forehead would appear once a week on a scratched up tv screen. her children would cry for their father, confused about not being able to see him. leshar couldn't even follow what her husband was saying, because the technology was so poor, that the screen, what was being said, wasn't matching the sound coming out. they tried visiting from home, but the cost was too high to be worth the technological challenges that they faced. the bond between them was ruptured, because it felt like fake talking to a screen, it was robotic rather than human. it's important that you remember zovena, who was the formerly incarcerated mother who asked me to share a piece of her story with you today as she was unable to be here in person with us. when zovena was incarcerated, many of the women in jail were pre-trial and had not been sentenced. it's a cruel punishment to eliminate our rights to see our loved ones before we have even been convicted. when i was arrested that is when my children needed to see me and be reassured that i was okay. when i had in person visits, they allowed me to stay connected with my children. i engaged with them and they brought homework and books for me to read to them. touching their hands to the glass and feeling their tiny hands up against mine gave me hope and purpose and allowed me to parent from inside. these in-person real visits were necessary for my recovery and my reentry, not to mention reduce disciplinary infractions. later on, my daughter was separated from me and our only communication was through video calls. it's had a direct impact on both of our mental health and our emotional bond. it was dehumanizing. it caused us so much strain that we stopped visiting. it is important that you remember ms. anita and mike who you're about to hear from. and the millions of people who are bearing the burdens of incarceration in this country. it is important that you not only remember us, but carry our stories with you. that you defer to us as experts on visitation. that when you hear my story, you understand that in-person visitation saved my life. our stories are here to ground you as you move forward in setting this policy. but also to remind you that we are here to provide input, expertise, and insights and solutions along the way. so with that, i'm proud to welcome up ms. anita wills who's going to share her personal experience, followed up by michael cortez.
[{'start': 73, 'end': 80, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2738, 'end': 2744, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2905, 'end': 2911, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3146, 'end': 3152, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3580, 'end': 3586, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3740, 'end': 3746, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4749, 'end': 4754, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4759, 'end': 4763, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5327, 'end': 5338, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5400, 'end': 5414, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Anita Wills: Good afternoon. My name is Anita Wills and as so many women like me, I've spent decades of my life taking on the cause of my love one's incarceration. I'm speaking with you today as a fellow and Advisory Council Member of Essie Justice Group, an organization of women with incarcerated loved ones. I want to thank Senator Skinner for conveying this hearing and prioritizing visitation and Senator Mitchell for championing this issue alongside us. And continuing the fight for our rights to maintain healthy, meaningful relationships with our loved ones behind prison bars. It means the world when politicians actually do what they say they will. I have worked as a childcare provider and preschool teacher, I've been raising my family in California since 1972. I'm a writer and published author of five books. The last one, A Nation of Flaws, Just Us in the Homeland, details how the law does not work for everyone in this country. I'm a mother to four children. 5 and 3 quarter grandchildren, my daughter and son-in-law are expecting, and my youngest son has been unconsecrated for the last 16 years. Serving an Undetermined sentence. I often lie awake wondering if I will be able to hug him again and when if ever he will be free. When I found out that our county jail started eliminating in-person visits and replacing them with video calls, I was appalled. My son was in the county jail. He spent two years there before he was sentenced and sent to state prison. And for me to go in there and see him and sit with him, and know that physically he was okay, even if I could not touch him, just the idea that I could see him through that glass and talk to him on the phone, that is what kept me going. And now, we have contact visits in the state system. It takes me 12 hours round trip to drive to Corcoran and see my son, even though it is a challenge it is worth it. Our visits are where my grandson saw his father for the first time in 11 years. Where I get to see my son's face, where we laugh together, where I can tell when he is doing well and when he is struggling. Our visits are where my family gets to be reunited again, even for a few hours. Video calls pose a threat to that sacred bond that we maintain through visitation. There are far too many barriers with video calls that prevent others to having what I get with my son. The fact that video visitation is not only a form of separation but one that we have to pay for is absurd. Remote video visitation requires spending an average of $1.00 a minute on video calls, not to mention the cost of technology. That is a huge injustice to us. Once you pay to have video capacity in your home, you have to have high speed Internet for it to function. Otherwise, you lose your time and they don't refund the money. For already strained families, we cannot afford this cost. We are the ones who are paying for these contracts. We are the ones who are already struggling to make ends meet in the absence of our loved ones. And now, we have to pay to see them. The profit to the sheriff's department comes from us, from women with incarcerated loved ones. It comes from grandmothers like me. On top of all that, you have to be technologically savvy in order to operate the video call systems. Older people can not begin to operate or even understand the video technology. They're telling people to stay home and do a video visit because they say it's more convenient. It's the opposite. It's a burden, a separation, and a cost that we can't afford. Then when you go to the county to visit on site, the video are not that good. You can't even make eye contact. Eye contact, excuse me. It's inhumane to cut off all contact like that. I am opposed to replacing video calls with in person visitation. You cannot replace real visits. It is counter to all of the conversations about rehabilitation and re-entry. It does not make sense that you will expects someone to get the help they need while incarcerated and yet separate them further from their support systems. Is setting people up for failure. If I could only see my son through a video screen for the rest of his incarceration, I don't know what I would do. I would lose my connection to him. It would be like taking him away from me all over again. Even when your child is an adult, you want to at least see them and look them in the eye. You really want to hug and touch them because it's healing to have a hug from a loved one. A mother has a right to see her child. And look them in the eye. As a black grandmother, I'm a pillar of strength in my family and in my community. My family's future, my grandchildren's safety relies upon bringing it into systems that make it impossible for us to stay together. And I'm not alone. Nearly one in two black women like me has an incarcerated loved one. We deserve the right to keep our families together. Thank you for your time.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 322, 'end': 329, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 397, 'end': 405, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Cortez: Hey everybody. My name is Michael Cortez. I'm 19 years old and I'm a youth advocate of Project WHAT! and my brother here is being incarcerated in the Solano County jail for about three years now. So, he was in a facility that only offered video visitation. And none of my family members liked that at all. Like for my grandmother who would drive to come see him at least through the glass, she would get confused with the technology and even at home it wasn't really that great for her as well. Now, also the cost of it be very costly on families like with Ms. Anita has said, having to pay for the commissary and the day to day life expenses. And they also add that on top of you. And just going straight to the point, that communication is really fundamental for human beings. So we need, for example the blind, they have braille to read. The deaf, they have sign language to speak. See, we need this communication because it is very dear to us. Our family members need it. When they're cut off from this sort of communication and this sentiment, the rehabilitation factor is just basically cut off. So, do you really expect inmates to really heal themselves or be healed by their family members when they cannot even have a basic right while visiting their family members. But, the glitches when you are at home on the computer sometimes you always see a forehead, like a what Zoe was saying, I forgot whose story, but yeah, that's pretty much it, that's all I have to say. Those straight facts.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 561, 'end': 566, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1380, 'end': 1383, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jolena Voorhis: madame chairs and members, jolena jonah voorhis on behalf the urban counties of california. i just want to say at the outset, we're not opposed to in person visitation, it's a fiscal issue. that's why we are opposed to 1157. there's four urban counties that are affected. two of which have all ready, it's completely done, it's constructed. so, if this is a priority for the legislature, i would suggest that provide funding. we're in the middle of a really big cost shift right now in ihss and counties just do not have the money to do this significant rehab and reconstruction of these facilities. some facilities they may be able to bus them to another facility in the county that does have in person. but right for us, it's not a policy issue, it's a fiscal issue. thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gail Brown: I'm Gail Brown and I'm a Chair of Inmate Family Council of Solano Prison. And of course, if it's in the jails, we're concerned as heading toward the prisons also. And I've known that we've gotten further away and more into technology, further away from human contact in being able to visit. 40 years ago, we had seven days of visiting in the prisons, I think it was 8 hours a day. And it went to four days, three days, then two days and the possibility of having the video visiting can be a little bit of a help for those who are at a distance, but the fear, of course is to have it only be video. Human contact is really important. I see people in the visiting rooms that share meals together. Play games together and I think that's of vital importance. I hate to move away from that, so I just am concerned it's heading to the prisons also. Thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Derrick Ciprian: good afternoon, my name is derrick jolena ciprian, former incarcerated citizen who currently works in restorative justice for afsc, american friends service committee and i can attest personally to the therapeutic and rehabilitative value in person visits can provide. when i was incarcerated, the one thing that meant the most to me was my visits. it gave me strength. it kind of gave me an outlet to actually be able to look into the eyes of my wife and to my sons and see the love, see the sadness and see the grief. it had a profound effect on me, it made me want to to better. it made me think. so in person visit, they're needed to help heal and to help mend these broken families. i just urge you, i just employ to actually to keep this in-person visit intact and i'm let them do if there's things to do which is to heal and mend the broken families that are using. again, i say, thank you for your time and consideration.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Cruz: good afternoon, i'm mary derrick cruz with the california immigrant policy center, a statewide organization that advocate for pro-immigrant policy and also strongly supported sb 1157 authored by senator mitchell in 2016. we thank senator skinner for bringing together this hearing and senator mitchell for her leadership in preserving in-person visitations. video visitations should never replace the possibility of visiting your loved one in person. in-person visitation has proven to reduce recidivism, increase chances of obtaining employment post-release and facilitate successful reentry. as local law enforcement agencies are increasingly collaborating with federal immigration enforcement to detain and deport immigrant community members in local jails, we need for family contact during this stressful time. it is incredibly important. in-person visits recognize the human dignity of every person and preserve the importance of something as simple as human to human contact, and the connection to one's community. the sole use of video visitation technology unfairly burdens low income and limited proficient families with the high cost of video visits, building lack of language accessibility. without to mention, the challenges with limited literacy computer skills. because low income people are disproportionately incarnated, video visitation commission, essentially works like a request of task. we encourage the legislature to ensure meaningful in-prison visits are preserved and we encourage the bscc to revisit the title 15 and title 24 violation motions task on february 16. thank you for your time.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 203, 'end': 211, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 238, 'end': 245, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 293, 'end': 301, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Azadeh Zohrabi: good afternoon, my name is azadeh. i'm the national campaigner at the ella baker center for human rights,we were co-sponsor of sb 1157. i want to thank you all for your continued attention to this matter. i want to encourage you to continue looking for ways to make sure that all counties are required to provide in person visitation. and specifically looking at ways to reduce the number of counties that are proposed to be grandfathered in by the bscc. this number is unacceptable, extremely high, and there's definitely ways that we can ensure that all counties in california offer in-person visitation. but especially the one's that have this base and haven't broken ground yet and we look forward to continuing to work with you to make sure that happens.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Escobar: Hi, good afternoon. I'm Jessica Escobar. I'm a fellow with the Essie Justice Group. I'm a registered voter in Alameda County,and I'm a woman who has an incarcerated loved one, as one in four women in this country does. And I'm really grateful to you, Senator Mitchell, for always amplifying our voices. It's always interesting for me to hear experts and different people kind of speculate about my experiences. And I really appreciate any opportunity to be able to speak for myself about what I've experienced. And I just wanted to say that I speak as someone kind of on both sides. I have a brother who works as a corrections officer and I also have a close family member who is incarcerated in California. And by both of their accounts, visitation is extremely important to maintaining a safe ambiance in the jail, a relatively safe ambiance in the jail. By both accounts the stress levels and the aggression and the more violent tendencies seem to be more amplified when people are denied most basic things like face to face communication with their families. Our visits are already pretty encumbered. It's difficult to get to see our loved ones. There's all kinds of restrictions on what we can wear, what we can say, what we can do, what can we. It's complicated as it is. And so, we don't really need to be further harming these connections. As a hard working, tax paying citizen it's kind of disturbing to me to see something that's so cost effective be harmed. And definitely us out here who are supporting the people inside, we are the best re-entry system. And anyone who is truly concerned about decreasing recidivism and cost to the state should encourage these connections. And thanks again for the time. Thank you.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 259, 'end': 267, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Allegra Taylor: My name is Allegra Taylor and I am the daughter of the longest held prisoner in solitary confinement, Mr. Hugo Pinell who is now deceased. I'm here today to speak on behalf of families who might have to endure this video visitation. I wasn't privileged to being able to spend a lot of time with my dad because I didn't get to know him until I was an adult. Although, I did visit him every weekend both Saturday and Sunday for 18 months speaking to him through the glass window. I was glad to hear that one of the sheriffs brought up the glass window because that is not an in-person visit. That's a visit with a thick glass between you. You don't experience the touch of a human being. You do not experience the emotion that's tied in with an in-person visit, which is a contact visit. I was only privileged to have one contact visit with my dad before he was murdered. That's the one visit that I'll hold dear to my heart for the rest of my life. The reason that I felt the need to speak up in regards to this particular bill or situation is because my grandmother is 90 years old. And as I spend time with her as often as I can, there's one thing she continues to bring up. This is the woman that spent 44 years visiting her son all throughout the State of California in every CDC that you probably have. Last 23 of them being at Pelican Bay. And then the last year of his life over here Folsom. The one thing that she continues to say Whether I'm talking to her on the phone or whether I see her and visit is that she didn't get that one last contact visit, because he died before she was endured that. She talks about how she she wanted to hug him one more time. How she just wanted to hold his hand one more time. After spending 44 years of being denied the right to touch her son due to being in the shoe for 46 years, it is inhumane to even consider eliminating in person visits for families. That's an additional punishment to the family, as well as the prisoner. Enough is enough, please don't do this. Please don't do this for the sake of families who need, you are supposed to be the state that stands for California Department of Rehabilitation where is the rehabilitation in a no contact visit, in a video visit. That's not for rehabilitation purposes. That's for the sole point of saving money and maybe saving some guards to doing some extra work. For the record, I am also the wife of a former California Department of Corrections guard.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 106, 'end': 117, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1390, 'end': 1396, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Laura Minaughnee: laura mary minaughnee with the american friends service committee, just wanted to make a couple of points i would really appreciate the depth of this hearing. i have been doing this work for over 40 years, god help us all. and in that amount of time, i can't tell you how many formally incarcerated people have said that they have been able to turn their lives around when they held their grandchild or when they looked in the eyes of their children and they suddenly realize that they weren't in their life on a daily basis. this kind of contact is essential if you really want to talk about rehabilitation and the other aspect of realignment was not just the rehabilitation programs, and that kind of thing. it was bringing people closer to their families, bringing them home. that's what was really intended there and we need to make sure that it doesn't get lost in the shuffle. i hope that you will not approve one single dime more money for counties to build these facilities without in person visits and i would feel terrible if we left here today and the message was if you just give us more money, we could get it right. look at the definition of retroactive in the way that these regs are written or i would say, not really written. they're talking about a letter of intent and anything that follows after a letter of intent is now retroactive, and nothing can be changed. a letter of intent is not even approved. it's not even an application and we're talking about that being something that's already in the pipeline, and that can't be changed. this has to stop. and obviously, it's not going to stop, unless you take action and you've been courageous on it in the past, and we just want to encourage you to keep doing that. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 206, 'end': 209, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Corey Sells: good afternoon, madam chair and members. corey laura sells over here on behalf of the california state sheriffs' association. first, again, i would say that sheriffs in the association are not opposed to in person visitation. many if not, most jails continue to offer solely in person visitation as the means to have that visitation between inmates and their family and their loved ones. but again, this like many of the issues that you face on a daily basis here in the legislature is a balancing act between what counties can afford and what security provides and what jails need to do in the footprint of the buildings that they are operating in. so we would just highlight that, we did oppose sb 1157. we discussed the bill with the author significantly and extensively. we weren't able to come to a compromise in legislative process. we worked with the board of state and community corrections to attempt to address this issue. we did not oppose sb 44 in as much as that provision required any new facilities to have in person visitation. we understood that was a reasonable compromise, given the sheriffs who would apply for that money would know going forward the rules of the game. and that's what largely this turns on is that sheriffs and jails, and counties, and planners have worked within the confines of what the law allows, and what the law permits. and again, trying to establish that balance between what is desirable and what is affordable and what can be precluded or what can be provided potentially at the expense of others. again, just wanted to clarify the facilities that are offering onsite video visitation are not charging in california and the reg highlights that. and again, precludes that. excuse me, i look forward to working with you and the board as this moves forward. thank you.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 52, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Chuck Carpenter: thank you, dr. weber and senator skinner, whatever your name is. my name is carpenter, i'm here today to listen. and today, i heard again the bscc, the sheriffs, the sheriff's association saying, we want to do the right thing. we're  your friends. if they want to do the right thing, there's a simple solution. ab 42, bail realignment. fixing the bail system that's economically driven will allow them to lay off deputies and have face to face visits. so, i asked them to please support ab 42.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 20, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 33, 'end': 40, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 76, 'end': 85, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathleen Howard: thank you very much, madam chair, members of the committee, kathleen, or i go by katie, the executive director of the bscc, very happy to be here to talk with you about this important subject. i would like to fill in some additional background from the perspective of the board about our activities on this regulation over the last year, and in particular, focusing on the approval that was approved last week and that is a draft regulation which then begins the administrative procedures act, processed through the office of administrative law. so i wanted to say at the outset that there still is the opportunity for additional public comment on this proposed regulation and to bring you up to date about, i think there really actually has been a significant move toward what the legislature attempted to do last year in sb 1157 with this regulation and there was a particular sense of urgency for the board to move quickly at the meeting last thursday, so that there could be a date certain on which the regulation changes. with that, the board is intent on saying that additional facilities should not be permitted to move to an exclusively video option and i realize that reasonable minds can and will differ on this, but the position of the board is that the regulation has to be clear and specific as to date and measurable. the board of state and community corrections has the responsibility to inspect our local facilities for compliance with the regulations. and the issue here is that on a going forward basis, we need to be able to say, as of this date, no additional facilities can do this, and some of the discussion that you were in with the previous panel focused on, well, why is there this issue of grandfathering a number of facilities? and the difficult legal issue, from the board's perspective, is that until the rule is changed, the elevation of the rule was at such a spot that it required that there be visitation available, but it did not specify whether the video option could be allowed. so i realize that's one significant area of disagreement, but that's where we get into this gray area with some facilities being grandfathered and then everything else going forward would not be able to move to the video only option on sight. so, backing up for just a minute about how we got here, as you know, the board of state and community corrections is responsible for regulations for the local detention facilities, and those are title 15, operational regulations and title 24, which are the physical plant and the building regulations and in the operational regulations, generally speaking, the altitude of the regulations is quite high, the board does not direct the specific details about what policies around operations should be, and i can say that that was part of the thought process last year, this has been an emerging issue and as lynn outlined, the executive steering committee did look at the regulation on visitation, did consider adding language, which the board did not act on, as lynn also pointed out. but nonetheless, this issue of, generally speaking, the regulations set a minimum standards and then the local facilities, the local agencies, are responsible for promulgating the regulations in compliance with those regs. so i think i would say the good news is that as we've moved forward, collected a lot more information, understood the level of concerns, and taken the direction from the governor in the veto message to talk with the concerned stakeholders and identify options for going forward, we've landed in a compromised space, which addresses, frankly, more detail than the board typically puts into the regulations for local facilities, and says now there is a requirement for in-person visitation. the very short summary of what the regulation does are a couple of different features, it prohibits additional facilities, as i've emphasized, from moving to a video-only approach. it requires that all new adult detention facilities are required to provide in person visitation and any future must be constructed with sufficient space for in person visitation, and then, as mentioned, because of the significant costs and the fact that the rule was not specific as to the manner of the delivery of visitation, there, the regulation is perspective only, that gets into the grandfathering issue. as noted by the previous panel, we initially had put the draft to the board with a provision that said the first hour of remote video visitation would be free of charge, there was some significant discussion by the board about that last thursday and one of the things i also wanted to mention is that chair linda penner and i visited the santa rita jail in alameda county just a couple of weeks ago, you'll hear from sheriff ahern later, and in that example this was one of the considerations that was clearly on the board's mind. the video visitation at the santa rita jail will be exclusively supplementary, they will always have space for in-person visitation, and although i understand some of the concerns about the technology for video visitation, it seems the technology is improving. there were issues and concerns when we talked with the sponsors about connections being cut off, sometimes cameras pointing at the top of heads, we saw the setup in the alameda county jail and for a supplemental option, it really does look like it's technologically the state of the art, and it's only going to be a supplemental remote type service. there are some other details but for purposes of this conversation, i just want to say that the board was concerned about the operational aspect of not charging for that first hour free, tracking of how that would work, as well as how the contracts are set up, particularly, i think, in the positive case of alameda, that it's supplemental only. they also have a less expensive rate, from what i understand, in their contract of $9.00 for 30 minutes, the board did decide to remove that provision about the first hour being for no charge. just a couple of other thoughts to add here and then i'm very happy to take your questions. you've heard about the governor's veto of senate bill 1157, i don't need to repeat what the prior panel walked you through. the governor did direct the bscc to work with stakeholders and explore ways to address these issues, chair linda penner and i, and some of our colleagues, had meetings throughout november and december with the sponsor organizations, with many advocates, with the state sheriff's association, csac, urban county caucus, and others. and the issue of a requirement coming through a regulation that would have the local facilities responsible for something that has a cost attached to it was just something that the board did not feel that it could do. i mean, that is certainly within the province of this legislature, but for the regulation, this issue of having a clear date and a perspective regulation seemed like the best landing spot that we could get to, with that, i'm happy to take your questions.
[{'start': 60, 'end': 68, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 81, 'end': 86, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2865, 'end': 2869, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3020, 'end': 3024, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4656, 'end': 4668, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4774, 'end': 4779, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6353, 'end': 6365, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Zoe Wilmott: wonderful, thank you so much for having us here this morning. my name is zoe and i'm the manager of advocacy and programs at essie justice group. we are an organization of woman with incarcerated loved ones. i'm also the daughter of a formerly incarcerated mother. and for years i spent my weekends visiting my mom at a federal prison here in dublin, california. every sunday i drove to my destination, she was hidden behind barbed wire, metal detectors, cold steel, shackles and clinking chains that kept her inside of this place, of this prison. as we pulled up to the front gates, my four year old body became restless. form after form to fill out, line after line to wait in. the processing room to get into the prison visiting room was filled with antsy families, some from as far away as other countries. and then of course were the teary eyed people who'd been sent home because they didn't meet some regulation that day. then finally, we were escorted by multiple guards to the visiting room, which brought with it even more waiting. staring at those thick beige doors, desperately hoping that every time the red light came on, my mom would be the one to walk out. eventually she would, but every time i stood there waiting, i feared she would never come out to see me again. i remember rushing across the room to get to her, and holding on so tight i thought that i'd never let go. that visiting room holds so many of my childhood memories. it's almost like a part of me grew up there. with my mom we talked, we played games, we laughed and we cried until it was time to say goodbye. saying goodbye to my mom was the one thing i swore i would be able to do again yet every weekend i was forced to. those goodbyes when everyone got quiet. all the mothers standing on one side of the room with tears sliding down their cheeks mirroring their sobbing children. leaving my mom was the hardest thing i have ever had to do, yet it was the only option i had. i wanted so much to take her home with me. to show her my room, my school and my friends. every time i had a chance to blow out birthday candles or make a wish in a fountain, it was for her to come home but she couldn't. which is why i will never forget those sunday morning visits, my one chance to be a part of her life. i wrote the piece you just heard when i was in high school and i share it with you because it's vital for you to understand the experiences that we go through when visiting. it's important that when you, as the legislators who set the laws for our state, come up with visitation policy, you think about it from the perspective of a four year old child. it is important that when you consider replacing in person visits with video calls, you remember lashar, who is a mother of four children who's husband was arrested in 2014 and spent the last two years in jail where her only communication was through video calls. lashar struggled to fit her four children into the tiny booths at the jail where her husband's forehead would appear once a week on a scratched up tv screen. her children would cry for their father, confused about not being able to see him. leshar couldn't even follow what her husband was saying, because the technology was so poor, that the screen, what was being said, wasn't matching the sound coming out. they tried visiting from home, but the cost was too high to be worth the technological challenges that they faced. the bond between them was ruptured, because it felt like fake talking to a screen, it was robotic rather than human. it's important that you remember zovena, who was the formerly incarcerated mother who asked me to share a piece of her story with you today as she was unable to be here in person with us. when zovena was incarcerated, many of the women in jail were pre-trial and had not been sentenced. it's a cruel punishment to eliminate our rights to see our loved ones before we have even been convicted. when i was arrested that is when my children needed to see me and be reassured that i was okay. when i had in person visits, they allowed me to stay connected with my children. i engaged with them and they brought homework and books for me to read to them. touching their hands to the glass and feeling their tiny hands up against mine gave me hope and purpose and allowed me to parent from inside. these in-person real visits were necessary for my recovery and my reentry, not to mention reduce disciplinary infractions. later on, my daughter was separated from me and our only communication was through video calls. it's had a direct impact on both of our mental health and our emotional bond. it was dehumanizing. it caused us so much strain that we stopped visiting. it is important that you remember ms. anita and mike who you're about to hear from. and the millions of people who are bearing the burdens of incarceration in this country. it is important that you not only remember us, but carry our stories with you. that you defer to us as experts on visitation. that when you hear my story, you understand that in-person visitation saved my life. our stories are here to ground you as you move forward in setting this policy. but also to remind you that we are here to provide input, expertise, and insights and solutions along the way. so with that, i'm proud to welcome up ms. anita wills who's going to share her personal experience, followed up by michael cortez.
[{'start': 73, 'end': 76, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2734, 'end': 2740, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2901, 'end': 2907, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3142, 'end': 3148, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3576, 'end': 3582, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3736, 'end': 3742, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4745, 'end': 4750, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4755, 'end': 4759, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5323, 'end': 5334, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5396, 'end': 5410, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Anita Wills: good afternoon. my name is anita and as so many women like me, i've spent decades of my life taking on the cause of my love one's incarceration. i'm speaking with you today as a fellow and advisory council member of essie justice group, an organization of women with incarcerated loved ones. i want to thank senator skinner for conveying this hearing and prioritizing visitation and senator mitchell for championing this issue alongside us. and continuing the fight for our rights to maintain healthy, meaningful relationships with our loved ones behind prison bars. it means the world when politicians actually do what they say they will. i have worked as a childcare provider and preschool teacher, i've been raising my family in california since 1972. i'm a writer and published author of five books. the last one, a nation of flaws, just us in the homeland, details how the law does not work for everyone in this country. i'm a mother to four children. 5 and 3 quarter grandchildren, my daughter and son-in-law are expecting, and my youngest son has been unconsecrated for the last 16 years. serving an undetermined sentence. i often lie awake wondering if i will be able to hug him again and when if ever he will be free. when i found out that our county jail started eliminating in-person visits and replacing them with video calls, i was appalled. my son was in the county jail. he spent two years there before he was sentenced and sent to state prison. and for me to go in there and see him and sit with him, and know that physically he was okay, even if i could not touch him, just the idea that i could see him through that glass and talk to him on the phone, that is what kept me going. and now, we have contact visits in the state system. it takes me 12 hours round trip to drive to corcoran and see my son, even though it is a challenge it is worth it. our visits are where my grandson saw his father for the first time in 11 years. where i get to see my son's face, where we laugh together, where i can tell when he is doing well and when he is struggling. our visits are where my family gets to be reunited again, even for a few hours. video calls pose a threat to that sacred bond that we maintain through visitation. there are far too many barriers with video calls that prevent others to having what i get with my son. the fact that video visitation is not only a form of separation but one that we have to pay for is absurd. remote video visitation requires spending an average of $1.00 a minute on video calls, not to mention the cost of technology. that is a huge injustice to us. once you pay to have video capacity in your home, you have to have high speed internet for it to function. otherwise, you lose your time and they don't refund the money. for already strained families, we cannot afford this cost. we are the ones who are paying for these contracts. we are the ones who are already struggling to make ends meet in the absence of our loved ones. and now, we have to pay to see them. the profit to the sheriff's department comes from us, from women with incarcerated loved ones. it comes from grandmothers like me. on top of all that, you have to be technologically savvy in order to operate the video call systems. older people can not begin to operate or even understand the video technology. they're telling people to stay home and do a video visit because they say it's more convenient. it's the opposite. it's a burden, a separation, and a cost that we can't afford. then when you go to the county to visit on site, the video are not that good. you can't even make eye contact. eye contact, excuse me. it's inhumane to cut off all contact like that. i am opposed to replacing video calls with in person visitation. you cannot replace real visits. it is counter to all of the conversations about rehabilitation and re-entry. it does not make sense that you will expects someone to get the help they need while incarcerated and yet separate them further from their support systems. is setting people up for failure. if i could only see my son through a video screen for the rest of his incarceration, i don't know what i would do. i would lose my connection to him. it would be like taking him away from me all over again. even when your child is an adult, you want to at least see them and look them in the eye. you really want to hug and touch them because it's healing to have a hug from a loved one. a mother has a right to see her child. and look them in the eye. as a black grandmother, i'm a pillar of strength in my family and in my community. my family's future, my grandchildren's safety relies upon bringing it into systems that make it impossible for us to stay together. and i'm not alone. nearly one in two black women like me has an incarcerated loved one. we deserve the right to keep our families together. thank you for your time.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 316, 'end': 323, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 391, 'end': 399, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Cortez: hey everybody. my name is michael jonah cortez. i'm 19 years old and i'm a youth advocate of project what! and my brother here is being incarcerated in the solano county jail for about three years now. so, he was in a facility that only offered video visitation. and none of my family members liked that at all. like for my grandmother who would drive to come see him at least through the glass, she would get confused with the technology and even at home it wasn't really that great for her as well. now, also the cost of it be very costly on families like with ms. anita has said, having to pay for the commissary and the day to day life expenses. and they also add that on top of you. and just going straight to the point, that communication is really fundamental for human beings. so we need, for example the blind, they have braille to read. the deaf, they have sign language to speak. see, we need this communication because it is very dear to us. our family members need it. when they're cut off from this sort of communication and this sentiment, the rehabilitation factor is just basically cut off. so, do you really expect inmates to really heal themselves or be healed by their family members when they cannot even have a basic right while visiting their family members. but, the glitches when you are at home on the computer sometimes you always see a forehead, like a what zoe was saying, i forgot whose story, but yeah, that's pretty much it, that's all i have to say. those straight facts.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 567, 'end': 572, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1386, 'end': 1389, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jolena Voorhis: madame chairs and members, jolena michael voorhis on behalf the urban counties of california. i just want to say at the outset, we're not opposed to in person visitation, it's a fiscal issue. that's why we are opposed to 1157. there's four urban counties that are affected. two of which have all ready, it's completely done, it's constructed. so, if this is a priority for the legislature, i would suggest that provide funding. we're in the middle of a really big cost shift right now in ihss and counties just do not have the money to do this significant rehab and reconstruction of these facilities. some facilities they may be able to bus them to another facility in the county that does have in person. but right for us, it's not a policy issue, it's a fiscal issue. thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gail Brown: i'm gail jolena brown and i'm a chair of inmate family council of solano prison. and of course, if it's in the jails, we're concerned as heading toward the prisons also. and i've known that we've gotten further away and more into technology, further away from human contact in being able to visit. 40 years ago, we had seven days of visiting in the prisons, i think it was 8 hours a day. and it went to four days, three days, then two days and the possibility of having the video visiting can be a little bit of a help for those who are at a distance, but the fear, of course is to have it only be video. human contact is really important. i see people in the visiting rooms that share meals together. play games together and i think that's of vital importance. i hate to move away from that, so i just am concerned it's heading to the prisons also. thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Derrick Ciprian: Good afternoon, my name is Derrick Ciprian, former incarcerated citizen who currently works in restorative justice for AFSC, American Friends Service Committee and I can attest personally to the therapeutic and rehabilitative value in person visits can provide. When I was incarcerated, the one thing that meant the most to me was my visits. It gave me strength. It kind of gave me an outlet to actually be able to look into the eyes of my wife and to my sons and see the love, see the sadness and see the grief. It had a profound effect on me, it made me want to to better. It made me think. So in person visit, they're needed to help heal and to help mend these broken families. I just urge you, I just employ to actually to keep this in-person visit intact and I'm let them do if there's things to do which is to heal and mend the broken families that are using. Again, I say, thank you for your time and consideration.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Cruz: Good afternoon, I'm Mary Cruz with the California Immigrant Policy Center, a statewide organization that advocate for pro-immigrant policy and also strongly supported SB 1157 authored by Senator Mitchell in 2016. We thank Senator Skinner for bringing together this hearing and Senator Mitchell for her leadership in preserving in-person visitations. Video visitations should never replace the possibility of visiting your loved one in person. In-person visitation has proven to reduce recidivism, increase chances of obtaining employment post-release and facilitate successful reentry. As local law enforcement agencies are increasingly collaborating with federal immigration enforcement to detain and deport immigrant community members in local jails, we need for family contact during this stressful time. It is incredibly important. In-person visits recognize the human dignity of every person and preserve the importance of something as simple as human to human contact, and the connection to one's community. The sole use of video visitation technology unfairly burdens low income and limited proficient families with the high cost of video visits, building lack of language accessibility. Without to mention, the challenges with limited literacy computer skills. Because low income people are disproportionately incarnated, video visitation commission, essentially works like a request of task. We encourage the Legislature to ensure meaningful in-prison visits are preserved and we encourage the BSCC to revisit the title 15 and title 24 violation motions task on February 16. Thank you for your time.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 195, 'end': 203, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 230, 'end': 237, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 285, 'end': 293, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Azadeh Zohrabi: good afternoon, my name is azadeh. i'm the national campaigner at the ella baker center for human rights,we were co-sponsor of sb 1157. i want to thank you all for your continued attention to this matter. i want to encourage you to continue looking for ways to make sure that all counties are required to provide in person visitation. and specifically looking at ways to reduce the number of counties that are proposed to be grandfathered in by the bscc. this number is unacceptable, extremely high, and there's definitely ways that we can ensure that all counties in california offer in-person visitation. but especially the one's that have this base and haven't broken ground yet and we look forward to continuing to work with you to make sure that happens.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Escobar: hi, good afternoon. i'm jessica gail escobar. i'm a fellow with the essie justice group. i'm a registered voter in alameda county,and i'm a woman who has an incarcerated loved one, as one in four women in this country does. and i'm really grateful to you, senator mitchell, for always amplifying our voices. it's always interesting for me to hear experts and different people kind of speculate about my experiences. and i really appreciate any opportunity to be able to speak for myself about what i've experienced. and i just wanted to say that i speak as someone kind of on both sides. i have a brother who works as a corrections officer and i also have a close family member who is incarcerated in california. and by both of their accounts, visitation is extremely important to maintaining a safe ambiance in the jail, a relatively safe ambiance in the jail. by both accounts the stress levels and the aggression and the more violent tendencies seem to be more amplified when people are denied most basic things like face to face communication with their families. our visits are already pretty encumbered. it's difficult to get to see our loved ones. there's all kinds of restrictions on what we can wear, what we can say, what we can do, what can we. it's complicated as it is. and so, we don't really need to be further harming these connections. as a hard working, tax paying citizen it's kind of disturbing to me to see something that's so cost effective be harmed. and definitely us out here who are supporting the people inside, we are the best re-entry system. and anyone who is truly concerned about decreasing recidivism and cost to the state should encourage these connections. and thanks again for the time. thank you.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 264, 'end': 272, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Allegra Taylor: my name is allegra jessica taylor and i am the daughter of the longest held prisoner in solitary confinement, mr. hugo pinell who is now deceased. i'm here today to speak on behalf of families who might have to endure this video visitation. i wasn't privileged to being able to spend a lot of time with my dad because i didn't get to know him until i was an adult. although, i did visit him every weekend both saturday and sunday for 18 months speaking to him through the glass window. i was glad to hear that one of the sheriffs brought up the glass window because that is not an in-person visit. that's a visit with a thick glass between you. you don't experience the touch of a human being. you do not experience the emotion that's tied in with an in-person visit, which is a contact visit. i was only privileged to have one contact visit with my dad before he was murdered. that's the one visit that i'll hold dear to my heart for the rest of my life. the reason that i felt the need to speak up in regards to this particular bill or situation is because my grandmother is 90 years old. and as i spend time with her as often as i can, there's one thing she continues to bring up. this is the woman that spent 44 years visiting her son all throughout the state of california in every cdc that you probably have. last 23 of them being at pelican bay. and then the last year of his life over here folsom. the one thing that she continues to say whether i'm talking to her on the phone or whether i see her and visit is that she didn't get that one last contact visit, because he died before she was endured that. she talks about how she she wanted to hug him one more time. how she just wanted to hold his hand one more time. after spending 44 years of being denied the right to touch her son due to being in the shoe for 46 years, it is inhumane to even consider eliminating in person visits for families. that's an additional punishment to the family, as well as the prisoner. enough is enough, please don't do this. please don't do this for the sake of families who need, you are supposed to be the state that stands for california department of rehabilitation where is the rehabilitation in a no contact visit, in a video visit. that's not for rehabilitation purposes. that's for the sole point of saving money and maybe saving some guards to doing some extra work. for the record, i am also the wife of a former california department of corrections guard.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 114, 'end': 125, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1398, 'end': 1404, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Laura Minaughnee: Laura Minaughnee with the American Friends Service Committee, just wanted to make a couple of points I would really appreciate the depth of this hearing. I have been doing this work for over 40 years, God help us all. And in that amount of time, I can't tell you how many formally incarcerated people have said that they have been able to turn their lives around when they held their grandchild or when they looked in the eyes of their children and they suddenly realize that they weren't in their life on a daily basis. This kind of contact is essential if you really want to talk about rehabilitation and the other aspect of realignment was not just the rehabilitation programs, and that kind of thing. It was bringing people closer to their families, bringing them home. That's what was really intended there and we need to make sure that it doesn't get lost in the shuffle. I hope that you will not approve one single dime more money for counties to build these facilities without in person visits and I would feel terrible if we left here today and the message was if you just give us more money, we could get it right. Look at the definition of retroactive in the way that these regs are written or I would say, not really written. They're talking about a letter of intent and anything that follows after a letter of intent is now retroactive, and nothing can be changed. A letter of intent is not even approved. It's not even an application and we're talking about that being something that's already in the pipeline, and that can't be changed. This has to stop. And obviously, it's not going to stop, unless you take action and you've been courageous on it in the past, and we just want to encourage you to keep doing that. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 201, 'end': 204, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Corey Sells: Good afternoon, Madam Chair and members. Corey Sells over here on behalf of the California State Sheriffs' Association. First, again, I would say that sheriffs in the Association are not opposed to in person visitation. Many if not, most jails continue to offer solely in person visitation as the means to have that visitation between inmates and their family and their loved ones. But again, this like many of the issues that you face on a daily basis here in the Legislature is a balancing act between what counties can afford and what security provides and what jails need to do in the footprint of the buildings that they are operating in. So we would just highlight that, we did oppose SB 1157. We discussed the bill with the author significantly and extensively. We weren't able to come to a compromise in legislative process. We worked with the Board of State and Community Corrections to attempt to address this issue. We did not oppose SB 44 in as much as that provision required any new facilities to have in person visitation. We understood that was a reasonable compromise, given the sheriffs who would apply for that money would know going forward the rules of the game. And that's what largely this turns on is that sheriffs and jails, and counties, and planners have worked within the confines of what the law allows, and what the law permits. And again, trying to establish that balance between what is desirable and what is affordable and what can be precluded or what can be provided potentially at the expense of others. Again, just wanted to clarify the facilities that are offering onsite video visitation are not charging in California and the reg highlights that. And again, precludes that. Excuse me, I look forward to working with you and the board as this moves forward. Thank you.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 46, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Chuck Carpenter: thank you, dr. weber and senator skinner, whatever your name is. my name is chuck allegra carpenter, i'm here today to listen. and today, i heard again the bscc, the sheriffs, the sheriff's association saying, we want to do the right thing. we're  your friends. if they want to do the right thing, there's a simple solution. ab 42, bail realignment. fixing the bail system that's economically driven will allow them to lay off deputies and have face to face visits. so, i asked them to please support ab 42.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 20, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 33, 'end': 40, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 76, 'end': 99, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Margo Parks: hi, madame chair, members of the committee. margo on behalf of the california state parks foundation. very much in support of this bill, thank you very much, encourage your aye vote.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Anchong: good morning, madam chair and members, danielle jonah anchong on behalf of the california association of local conservation corps and community and nature connection, in support.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Juan Altamirano: good morning, juan on behalf of ottawa in california, in strong support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jay Kalkenio: Good morning, Jay Kalkenio with the Land Trust of Santa Cruz County and the Carbon Cycle Institute, in strong support of the bill.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vivian Erickson: good morning, vivian danielle erickson on behalf of laguna green belt and the los angeles neighborhood land trust in strong support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Goulden: Good Morning, Sarah Goulden on behalf of Grasslands water district and Tree People in support. Thank You.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alex Gibbs: Hi Alex Gibbs Towns and Public affairs here on behalf of the land conservancy of San Luis Obispo and the cities of Oakland, Walnut Creek, San Leandro, Fullerton, Half Moon Bay, Carson, Imperial, and the Desert Recreation District, in strong support.
[{'start': 3, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jacqueline Wong-Hernandez: Good morning, Jacqueline Wong-Hernandez with the Department of Finance. We would estimate that the upfront cost of the bill would be to include the proposed bond in the voter information guide for the 2018 primary election, that cost would be 483, 000 general fund based on per page cost information provided by the Secretary of State. Over the life of the bond if the bond will pass, we estimate 5.6 billion general fund over 30 years would be repaid based on current interest rates. The wildlife conservation board and CAL FIRE have both indicated that they would need additional positions but those would, of course, be paid out of the bond funds.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Chiu: good afternoon. i want to welcome everyone to the first hearing here in sacramento of the housing and community development committee. it's wednesday, february 22nd, 2017. i'm david jonah chiu, chair of the committee. i want to thank assembly member troy and i know we will be joined soon by other members of our committee. let me just start with a couple of prefacing comments. i think everyone here in this hearing room as well as around the state knows that our state is in the midst of the most intense crisis that we have experienced in recent decades. i'm not going to go into many of the statistics in data, which i know we'll have speakers here to talk about, except to say that with a state that has the sixth largest economy in the world. and the highest poverty rate in the country when you include housing costs with some of the highest rents, home prices, eviction rates, and foreclosure rates in the country, as well as the highest homeless rates. we have significant challenges that we need to face. since we're here in the assembly, i'll just want to thank our assembly speaker for stating that it is his hope and many of our profound hopes that this year in 2017, we'll be able to have some significant breakthroughs when it comes to housing policy and one indication of just how intensely our colleagues are looking at this just by way of comparison, two years ago, the beginning of the last legislative session, this committee was referred about 50 bills at the beginning of the session. at this time, we're aware of over a hundred bills in the assembly alone that touch on housing. on the senate side, we have another 30 bills. we have a lot of work to do. i want to take a moment and just mention that about a week and a half ago, this committee had a hearing in india when the coachella valley hosted by our colleague assembly member eduardo garcia and what i would say about that hearing, and i will speak first as a san franciscan. there are a lot of differences between the coachella valley and say, san francisco and we, obviously have many diverse communities around the state. just comparing san francisco to the coachella valley, you've got urban versus rural, coastal versus inland. significant differences and as far as cost of living. but the challenges that we heard in the coachella valley were not that different from what we hear in the bay area and around the state. a lack of affordable housing for families, incredibly substandard housing, overcrowding homelessness and communities that are not building housing. now, are our communities the same? of course not, but, the fact of the matter is, we have seen local challenges around the state, from the san diego border to our oregon border from the coast all the way inland. challenges that have received a crisis point and require state response. in recent years, for those of you who have been diligent observers of this committee, you know that many of us have focused on trying to think of how do we fund. the missing $1.7 billion that we have lost as a state in recent years when it comes to housing funding. you also know that last year when the assembly pushed for more funding. the governor responded with bi-right and we hit a bit of stalemate. this year we know full and well what the governor's priorities are for housing. he's laid out a number of principles and we'll hear from his agencies on that. and i think it's fair to say that those of us in a legislature very much share the goals and priorities that the governor had laid out and i think we're all interested in finding sources of funding for housing. we're all interested in figuring out how we streamline housing creation and hopefully do that within senates. we're interested in thinking about how we enforce and hold more accountable those jurisdictions that are not building, but we all know the doubles are in the details and that is why we have a lot of work to do. today, we have decided to put an informational hearing together. in part, to just ensure that this committee starts on the same page as far as how we think about these issues. at a high level, we have a great panel to help lay out some of the issues around the need for affordable housing funding. we also have a number of experts to help us think through the challenges and solutions for increasing housing production. we've also invited several academics to give us a sense of some of the policy considerations around displacement, filtering and other unintended consequences of various ideas that are out there and then of course, we look forward to hearing from the leaders of the various departments and agencies that oversee housing affordability in our state, but without further ado, let me just ask my colleague if you have any initial comments? and if not, we will first invite the first panel on the need for affordable housing funding. if you could please join us at the dius. we have maria chavez and rachel iskow from mutual housing california, as well as matt schwartz, the president and ceo of california housing partnership, and we will turn it over to miss chavez or miss iska, affordable housing development in sacramento, who's going to give you a very personal view of why quality affordable housing is needed here in california. maria.
[{'start': 176, 'end': 192, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 250, 'end': 254, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1856, 'end': 1870, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4931, 'end': 4943, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4948, 'end': 4960, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5004, 'end': 5017, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5109, 'end': 5115, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5124, 'end': 5128, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5285, 'end': 5290, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Maria Chavez: thank you, miss rachelle. good afternoon, my name is chavez. i am the property manager at mutual housing california. it is the largest property at affordable mutual housing california. i'm here to tell you how living in affordable housing like big cn mutual housing changed my life along with my family's life. this is my story. my husband and i are from mexico. we moved to california 35 years ago. in the beginning, my husband worked many different jobs and i worked briefly for two electronic companies. in 1992, my husband and my daughter had a bad car accident. he couldn't work for a long time while he was rehabilitating. at this time, i was a homestay mom and we ended up on welfare. in 1993, we moved into mutual housing at dixieanne, in affordable housing one of the first properties that mutual housing has, california has now. we moved because it was affordable, it was a bigger unit and it was very accommodating for my family. while living at mutual housing i participated in committees and resident events. it helped me become more confident in myself, after a couple of useful live in at the property. i gained all fees and assistant, all fees and i applied for the assistant manager and i got the position. by working in the office, i got customer skills, eventually l became the manager at dixieanne mutual housing. living in affordable mutual housing was a stable, safe and a strong community for my family. my children love living on mutual housing at dixieanne. they did not want to leave when we bought our own house. i have children and i'm proud of all of them. i have four growing children, and two more on their way. two of my children ricky, and jessica are currently attending university. jessica will be graduating this semester, from the university. it was not just my family that got benefit by living in an affordable housing. one of my best friends, loretta dillon. she used to live at dixieanne mutual housing also, she got her college education. she went to university and she bought her house and now, she is working for the state. she works in the food and agriculture department. mutual housing california has been instrumental in my personal life and professional growth. i have worked with different management companies for mutual housing for 20 years and it has been a great and pleasure experience. during this time, i have seen many, many families that they have the opportunity of purchasing their own homes. by living in affordable housing, they were able to save money, and achieve the american dream by owning a home. i truly appreciate being a part of the mutual housing california. thank you very much and that is my story and it is sad that we don't have enough fundings to provide more families like myself to take benefit and take advantage of living on affordable housing.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 24, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 53, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1662, 'end': 1667, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1673, 'end': 1680, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1717, 'end': 1724, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1883, 'end': 1897, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lauri Damrell: Great. Well, good morning. Committee chairs and Assembly members, my name is Lauri Damrell. And I am the second Vice Chair of the California Commission on The Status of Women and Girls. I'm also the Co-Chair of the California Pay Equity Task Force with California Labor Commissioner and Statutory Member of the Women's Commission Julie Su. The California Labor Commissioner's Office is the administrative agency that enforces the Equal Pay Act. I should also mention that I'm a partner at Orrick, Herrington, and Sutcliffe in their Employment Law Group, and regularly litigate these issues and advise employers on these issues as well. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today regarding the gender wage gap in the US and California. And specifically to provide you with an overview of the California Pay Equity Task Force's goals and objectives supporting meaningful compliance with the California Fair Pay Act, or SB 358. Authored by Senator Hannah Beth Jackson and signed into law by Governor Brown on October 7th of 2015. It's good to see Commission First Chair, First Vice Chair in Legislators' Women's Caucus Christina Garcia here. The Commission benefits every day from her leadership and passionate commitment to creating opportunities for California's women and girls. I also want to say how honored I am to be here today with the team from Secretary of Government Operations Marybel Batjer's office. I know she's spent much of her career in senior government positions while simultaneously striving for gender equity. And I know she's passionately committed to leading our state government forward on this issue as well. Despite Congress not yet passing the Paycheck Fairness Act, equal pay has emerged as an issue front and center in our national consciousness, and is gaining in momentum at the state and local levels. California, as you may know, has been a big player in this movement; enacting SB 358, the Fair Pay Act. Which is widely recognized as perhaps the most aggressive equal pay legislation in the country. Even now, as Massachusetts, New York, and Maryland follow suit with their own legislation aimed at eliminating the gender pay gap. And more recently as big city mayors are proactively working to close the gender pay gap in their communities. California continues its leadership by bringing together a multi-stakeholder Task Force that includes representatives from the public and private sectors as well as from employee and employer groups. In California the Task Force is looking for the best ways to address a pay gap that not only varies by gender, but also by ethnic and race categories. According to the Institute for Women's Policy Research, $41,486, that is the median annual pay for women of any color who hold a full-time job year round. This is 84 cents to every dollar earned by a man. For Asian women, the median is 72 cents for every dollar. For African-American women, the median is 63 cents for every dollar. And for Latinos, it's 43 cents. In addition, there are 1.75 million women heads of households in California, to your point, Ms. Eggman. Close to 500,000, or almost 30%, who have incomes that fall below the federal poverty line. The factors that contribute to the pay gap are complex and nuanced and require close attention. With the strongest pay equity legislation in the country enacted by our state, and a pay gap that has remained relatively stable. The Commission decided in January 2016 to make supporting the sound implementation of that law a priority. It was with an eye toward continuing the bipartisan work that went into the Fair Pay Act. And including employee and employer advocates, as well as government agency representatives, that we conducted an open application process. And then selected Task Force members from a distinguished group of applicants. A few short months later, the California Commission on the Status of Women and Girls convened the first meeting of the California Pay Equity Task Force in late July. Since that time we've held four full Task Force meetings, and at least six publicly noticed Subcommittee meetings. Commissioner Su and I view the Task Force as a forum for bringing together diverse interests with a common goal of proactive compliance. And we believe that to move the needle forward, it's crucial for those impacted to collaborate. Our work challenges the assumption that employees and employers are on the opposite sides of this issue. Whether you're a business looking to reach the top of the Fortune 500, a Silicon Valley tech leader, or an employee working or looking for a job. We all want to see the gender pay gap close once and for all. Collaboration is already fostering deeper understanding of the challenges faced by all stakeholders. By convening enforcement agencies, employers, and employees, as well as their advocates. Research experts, labor economists, and human resource practitioners. The Task Force is creating practical, thorough, and widely applicable guidelines for proactive compliance. We find that employees need guidance to make informed choices about their careers. And employers need guidance to create workplace policies and procedures that promote gender pay equity and compliance with the Fair Pay Act. We are developing tools to assist all stakeholders in this effort. We brought for you today a draft of our interim report which will be released on April 4th, 2017, which is Equal Pay Day. It provides a summary of our work so far and what we aim to accomplish in 2017. We are creating tool kits for employers, employees, and employer organizations. Some highlights include our work to define legal concepts in the Fair Pay Act. Such as the term substantially similar work which is different than the previous term equal pay for equal work. Which data employers should maintain about employee wages, how to analyze that data and how to remedy pay gaps that they find. The toolkits for employers will be tailored for small and large employers to accommodate differences in budgets, staff sizes, and available resources, such as Human Resource Departments. For employees, we will offer guidance about how to file a claim, where to go, and what to consider when looking for a job. And for employee organizations, we will provide sample contract language and information requests. Finally, our primary goals in 2017 are to bring all of the pieces together in one place on the web, to convene business leaders, to discuss guidelines, inform employees about equal pay protections and their rights under the law through outreach, and prepare a plan for ongoing future guidance. Our task force is confident that the results of our collaborative efforts will provide well drawn roadmaps for effective implementation of the Fair Pay Act, while simultaneously demonstrating successful approaches for government enforcement, transparency, and collaboration. Thank you, and I'm happy to answer any questions you have.
[{'start': 77, 'end': 90, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 330, 'end': 338, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 489, 'end': 495, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 497, 'end': 507, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 513, 'end': 522, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 949, 'end': 968, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1120, 'end': 1136, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1390, 'end': 1404, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3089, 'end': 3095, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4125, 'end': 4127, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kathleen Webb: good morning chair and committee members. my name is kathleen jonah webb and i am an assistant secretary for innovation and accountability of the government operations agency. secretary batjer her deepest regrets that she couldn't be here today and i know she's looking forward to meeting with all of you soon. as i begin, i especially want to acknowledge assemblymember susan talamantes eggman, committee on accountability and administrative review. assemblymember freddie rodriguez, chair of the committee on public employees retirement social security. and assemblymember cristina garcia, chair of the california legislative women's caucus. thank you so much for the opportunity to testify before you today on a very important subject of gender pay equity in state civil service. as you've noted, california state government, while having made significant improvements, still has a gender pay gap of 20.5%. govops shares your concerns that this is too high and we are working on a variety of fronts to lower this number. one of the first initiatives we tackled when the governor operations agency was created several years ago was civil service improvement. our state civil service is complicated, inflexible and highly bureaucratic set of rules, regulations, and policies, that had been slow to adapt to generational, and demographic changes in the work force, and to the emerging trends in the work place. we're working in concert with our partners calhr, the state personnel board, the department of finance and the governor's office and of course our union partners, to make changes to our system that will allow california to become an employer of choice. through the process we're also making changes that will hopefully continue to make improvements in our pay equity numbers. i want to talk about those numbers a little bit more. and then i will share in more detail about our efforts to date. first, i want to note good news in one area of state service. and that is in our career executive assignment, or cea class. as you may know, cea's are our top manager in state service. there are a total of 1,351 cea's in the state. represented by 675 men and 676 women in these classifications. so at least in this area we have achieved gender pay parity. you will hear more news in this area from our friends in the department of vehicle a little later. but there is more to this story. because there are three different levels of ceas each with a different pay range. and at the top pay scale, in the cea level c, there are 36 more men than women. so while the gender composition of the executive workforce has gender parity. there is still work to be done to reach parity at the most senior level. to this end we have been working on the issues of unconscious bias and hiring and promoting in our supervisory training with a focus on talent management. we don't want to just train people when they start their job, but develop them throughout their career. their perspective, duties and issues may all change and our training should speak to that. in response, we've created the california statewide leadership training and developement program which serves as the cornerstone for developing leaders across the state. with the skills and competencies they need to succeed in a leadership position. guided by our leadership philosophy, that our leaders develop and inspire our workforce, deliver great results for californians, and our values. we are designing programs that address the knowledge required to lead the civil service workforce. the talent management skills to recruit, hire, train, develop, and retain a diverse and dynamic workforce. and the organizational capabilities and tools to achieve those results. at the heart of this effort, is a full order stating that our people are our greatest resource. that our workforce must be represented of californians, and we must welcome our best and our brightest to achieve great results for the people of our state. our leaders set the tone for creating a diverse and dynamic workforce. and our training program will provide them with the knowledge, skills, tools, to cultivate a diverse workforce and mitigate biases, conscious and unconscious. training and developing our leaders is a step in the right direction. but it won't address where our greatest gender paid disparity exist. and we have found that is in our paid classifications under 70,000. we know that 61% of the men in the state workforce make more than 70,000 as opposed to just 39% of women. there are also a higher portion of people of color who make below 70,000. through our civil service improvement initiative, we have launched several initiatives to make improvements in this area. we are currently developing an information technology apprenticeship program with our partners at sciu local 1000. this program will be geared towards individuals in lower pay critical occupations that will teach them the skills to successfully move into higher paying it jobs. recently we've held several state job fairs at communities of color to attract more diverse workforce. this speaks to a larger recruitment strategy to focus our outreach and attract women to traditional male dominated occupations like law enforcement and fire fighting. you will hear more about this from our friends at the california highway patrol. we also acknowledge that creating more access to services and opportunity for women will help with parity. according to mckinsey and company, unpaid work is one factor that can hold women back from educational and promotional opportunities. to that end cal-hr is planning to release a policy statement encouraging agencies to use flexible work hours, telework, and job sharing that may give our workforce the time to go finish their degree or training to upskill. this year, govops in cooperation with cal-hr is taking a fresh look at the state's upward mobility program, and asking, is it effective in its current form? how many people are advancing into higher paying occupations? can the program be improved? we started these conversions with our office of civil rights at cal-hr, seiu local 1000, and the civil rights coalition. we also recognize the employee development requires a plan. and while almost every employee should have an individual development plan or idp, we have found that unfortunately, this isn't always the case. individual development plan tools are used by managers to help employees enhance their skills, pursue their department's mission and reach career goals. done well, these plans signal then employs professional development is a priority. it can improve an employee's effectiveness and productivity and self worth. idps are a key component of successful upper mobility efforts and talent management. so we have training, we have offer mobility programs and we have idp' s but they aren't used enough. initial barriers in under 70,000 classifications are ones we can all imagine, transportation, time, child care and other resources. we have to make opportunities more readily available to initial employees who are interested in moving up the ranks. whether that be bringing classes to them. allowing them to take classes during the day. or assisting in gaining access to transportation or child care. we are currently working with our los rios community college district to develope curriculum that will accelerate entry into civil service or give additional coursework to employees. we are also excited about working working with sciu local 1000 on a program that we provide an opportunity for employees to participate in a state sponsored college. or university courses for up to 20 hours per week without loss of compensation, were employees would otherwise be scheduled for work. another initiative that is part of our civil service improvement is class consolidation. now while on the phase, it may not seem to directly tie to this issue. it is our expectation that reducing a number of classes will create more defined career ladders for employees to follow. this effort which is already seen the reduction of more than 600 classes. will help employees find classes to move into. in addition we are working to simplify job titles. something that will allow people both in and out of state government to have a better understanding of their positions that are available to them. all of these efforts will require continue work. both by the departments and by cal hr and our other partners in order to effectuate this change. at govops we want to make california an employer of choice. and one that reflects the diversity and strength of our state. and look forward to continuing to work with all of you to make that a reality. i thank you for your time.
[{'start': 53, 'end': 72, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 186, 'end': 192, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 371, 'end': 394, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 466, 'end': 483, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 575, 'end': 590, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Richard Gillihan: Thank you. Good morning, respective chairs, caucus chair, and the members that are here today. Richard Gillihan with Cal HR and look forward to having a discussion. I met with some of you ahead of time but I want to frame it a little different than perhaps it's been discussed so far today. Our story's a little different and I think it's important to understand that. Thank you. Good morning, respective chairs, caucus chair, and the members that are here today. Richard Gillihan with Cal HR and look forward to having a discussion. I met with some of you ahead of time but I want to frame it a little different than perhaps it's been discussed so far today. Our story's a little different and I think it's important to understand that. First, a little bit about Cal HR. We have several roles. One of our chief roles is we service the employer of state employees on behalf of the Governor. We execute that through our labor relations function. And also in that function we negotiate labor contracts with our union partners for our rank and file employees. We also provide sort of oversight and state level guidance in the areas of EEO and civil rights. A oversight of the state's classification and compensation plan which also is a piece of this discussion. Our selections division oversees state examination is required to get a state job or to promote. We have a unit that focuses on workforce planning. A unit that handles benefits including vision and dental benefit administration for state employees. Our savings plus program is a supplemental retirement savings program that serves about 200,000 participants with about $12 billion in assets under management. And we have a large legal function that represents the administration and many departments and personnel matters. To the topic of labor these state sours are generally set through collective bargaining as the deals act. I always assumed when it was put into the statute and that's where Salaries are primarily negotiated. For non representive employees we have the authority to set those salaries. But our state salary structure sets that there's one salary scale per classification. We don't have a gender based salary system. So we don't pay a correctional officer male higher than we pay a correctional officer female. Furthermore in state government per the constitution, our civil service system is based on the merit principle. The merit principle says in simple terms that hiring and promotional decisions have to be based on merit which is ascertained through competitive examination. And cannot be made based on any protected characteristic. All of those things combined with the fact that what we have in our workforce is under representation of women in higher earning career professions generally. A particularly in public safety and over-representation of some of the under, lower earning classifications. And when you net that out that's what gets us our gender parity gap of 20.5%. That number's been improving steadily but certainly not a pace that any of us are proud of. And it's certainly not anything we're going to say here today and take credit for because we need to find ways to make that move the needle faster and achieve parody in a more reasonable time frame. It's important to also note that the State of California has a work force of nearly a quarter of a million employees spread across over probably 130 departments. With north of 3000 job classifications. So its hard to find reforms that are on such that we can accelerate the change. But we're working on it as my colleague Mrs. Webb said. So what we can do given the given the constraints of the existing civil service system is we can do targeted recruiting. Where we can reach out to underrepresented populations. And encourage them and educate them about not only careers in state government. But the process to go through sort of demystify the process and help them understand how they go about getting careers. And in our most recent women centers report we included some of these strategies. For guidance to our departments to help implement some of these things. Another thing as an employer, that we need to be mindful of is sort of our public posture. Are we a welcoming employer to women into these public safety categories? Are we showing women successfully doing this? Of course we have women Highway Patrol officers and we have women fire fighters. And they do a fantastic job. So and we're doing this both at Cal HR with our web presence and our publications and other recruitment materials. And encouraging our departments to do the same. But the focus on showing women and people of color in these occupation groups where they're traditionally under-represented. So they can see people like themselves in these roles. And another topic that was touched on by the earlier panel and Miss Webb touched on it as well is the process to how we go about hiring and unconscious bias. And the way we attack that is through diverse hiring panels. Both on initial hiring and promotional panels in state departments and that's guidance we give departments repeatedly. It's in our best practice, best hiring practice training we deliver. But the evidence shows that diverse hiring panels lead to more diverse hiring results and promotional results. So these efforts and others that have been mentioned and things that we're yet to learn about are all in a table for us. We don't, we have. We don't have a has to be invented here mentality when it comes to continuous improvement. We know we have to work to do, we know we need to do a better job. And interested in hearing the discussion today and other ideas that folks may have, as well as the Commission we heard from earlier. To better inform our future practices. As I said the 20.5% is unacceptable to all of us and a. Thank you for your time and I look forward to taking any questions.
[{'start': 95, 'end': 111, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 464, 'end': 480, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 764, 'end': 770, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3584, 'end': 3588, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4853, 'end': 4862, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
David Keenan: chairpersons, assemblymembers, i'm david kathleen keenan. i'm the chief for human resources with the department of motor vehicles. on behalf of the department of motor vehicles, i thank you for the opportunity to provide you with information about our department's upward mobility efforts. also as a private citizen, i also want to thank you on behalf of my daughter who is 21 and is graduating from cal poly san luis obispo with a degree in philosophy this june, graduating after only four years i might add. i think that may be a subject for another hearing four year graduation rates. but she, and all of california's daughters are directly impacted by the issue of pay equity both in the public and private sectors. so thank you for examining this issue. the department of motor vehicles has a workforce that reflects the diversity of the sate of california. women make up 70% of our workforce. it includes 35% hispanic, 19% african american, and 16% of staff self identify as having a disability. over 5,300 of our 8,800 staff are in clerical and allied services classification. as such upward mobility is extremely important, and a high priority for the dmv. through various upward mobility initiatives the department as been succesful in providing employment opportunities into higher level classifications. and into a supervisor, managerial, and executive ranks. as was mentioned earlier, the dmv housing executive team in which ceas, women represent 55% of the ceas in the department. even more important, approximately 80% of the individuals who are field office leaders, the people who are actually in charge of our field offices are women. so what i'd like to do today is to just provide you with sort of a nuts and bolts look at what's the department of motor vehicle does with regard to upward mobility. so we are currently or will be piloting this year approximately 15 different programs that'll address work force succession in upward mobility. these are both department based and divisions specific efforts. we have a dmv leadership academy and we have established a partnership with the university of california davis extension to develop leaders for the future of the dmv. this academy is based upon the leadership competency model that was developed by cal hr. it consists of four distinct programs. there's an executive, a mid manager, a supervisory, and a non-supervisory. each program is tailored for and made available to a specific and appropriate set of job classifications. every classification used by dmv is eligible to participant in one of our leadership development academies. over the past 5 years since the inception of the academy approximately 400 staff have attended one of the sessions. and these are multiday sessions that extent over a multimonth period, 65% have been women. the executive program began in february is designed to expand the leadership skills of newly appointed executives and senior level managers, middle manager program began in january of 2006. participants are selected through a competitive application process and is designed to develop middle manager's leadership competencies and enhance potential to move to higher levels of management. our supervisory program began in december of 2008, once again it is a competitive application process. they are screened actually by former leadership development academy graduates. and it's designed to develop leadership at competencies for first level supervisors and managers. what is really important to us is our non supervisory program. that began five years ago and participants are selected, once again through a competitive application process. and what's unique to our non supervisory program, we have sessions in both northern and southern california because as you know the dmv of we reach from the california mexico border all the way up to oregon california border. this allows an extended availability to our diverse work place or, excuse me, work force. and minimizes obviously the impact of travel expenses. this program is designed to develop competencies early in the careers of our future leaders. so in addition to our ldls as we call it, which has those four components, we also have analyst and supervisor training program. we partnership with los rios community college with our analyst training program, and it's available to all classifications. emphasizes the skills necessary for upward mobility, including essential analytical skills, critical thinking, completed staff work, presentation skills, those types of things. we also have an analytical concepts and tools for supervisors, which was launched in 2011. this series is designed to provide tools for managers and supervisors to enhance their analytical skills. these two trainings which began in 2009 to 2011. we have 350 staff go through this trainings and they are multiday, multimonths trainings with 62% being women. there's some other things that we do more traditional things, the human resource branchs itself. provides a career counseling, one on one career counseling to staff on an appointment basis. we can talk about career ladders and specific classifications, they'd like to get into. when examinations are going to be held, so they'll know to take the examinations that have been left out in the cold and the next exam does not occur for another year. we also have training and development opportunities. the dmv advertises virtually all of its job bulletins as training and development and opportunities. this enables employees to apply for positions in order to improve their upward mobility. we also have an upward mobility guide. this guide is available to all employees. its topics include career development, how to write a good resume, information about job classifications, examinations etc. those are the things that occurring in sort of the departmental level. in addition, we have division specific initiatives. our registration operations division which is basically as you would imagine it's how you register your car. since 2012 has a plan called achieving career success. and once again, a multiday, multiweek or month program. and it's open to everyone in rod, our registration operations division. we had 136 graduates and 49% have achieved the promotion after they've gone through the rod achieving success program. we also have a manager development series with in the registration operations divisions. which does essentially some other thing for other classes, i just reference with the achieving career success. we also have a licensing operations division, the registrations and licences, right? so lod which we call our licensing operations division, recently completed the division specific work force and succession plan. we're actually looking to have each division have it's own work force succession plan and then have a department wide succession plan. they are the first one out of the gate, we do have the succession plan at department level we're working on replacing it. they completed their work force and succession plan and it incorporates an upward mobility program within the workforce and succession plan and this is a very traditional plan. it's a development of a program. basically, the elements include an application process, development of a program orientation and career development action plan, provides individual career counselling with a licensing operation divisions staff and human resource branch staff and ultimately there's five or six workshops in various areas and then employees receive the certificate of completion at the end. our pilot launch is scheduled for september of 2017. we also have lod also has two more plans will be rolling out this year. when is the mentoring program? it'll link rank and file staff, to mentors, to assistant and plan to develop there and achieve their career goals. and then a talent pool program which is going to be interesting, because it'll provide a process for employees to establish career goals, and a career path, and get the necessary training and development. so we're really looking forward to lod, launching these, seeing how they work, and then possibly expanding them to the rest of the department, in addition to the ones that we already have. now, field operations that's basically our field offices. we conduct after hours upward mobility workshops for employees in field locations throughout the state because you can be isolated out there in these field offices out in el centro or brolly or falls river mills or so we offer upward mobility workshops for those employees. so some numbers, in terms of our upward mobility and succession planing formal programs for 2015, which is the last year. we're currently collecting numbers for 2016, but 2015 is the last year we have numbers for 192 staff participated in one of these types of programs. of those 192, 63% were women. it was asked that i provide some information about low paying classifications and upward mobility classifications. the department has 33 low paying classifications. a lot of the department classifications are entry level and low paying. that's why upper mobility is so important to us and we have 16 upper mobility classifications. some examples of our low paying classifications are the office technician, the key data operator, the motor vehicle representative, that's the person you're most likely to encounter at a field office. senior motor vehicle technician, some of our upward mobility classifications include the personnel specialists. these are the people who provide the pay and benefits to employees, management services tech, licensing registration examiner, this is the person who would give you your drive test, and then staff services analyst which speaks for itself and she's quite widely in state service. so to give you an even more detailed picture of what we look like, we have 1,356 men in our lower paying classification. and i'll compare that to 4,069 women in our low-paying classifications. so 75% of our women are in low-paying classifications. and in our upper mobility classifications, we have 540 men and approximately 1,000 women. so it was about 66% of the people who are in our upwardly mobile classifications. they've moved from a lower paying into an upwardly mobile class. 66% of those people are women. so how do the employees find out about all this? how do they know about these 15 things that we do on a regular basis? well, we have multiple channels for communicating our upward mobility program. we maintain a career opportunity and upward mobility internet webpage with resources listed for all employees. the department training branch advertises these training academies on a regular basis. our individual divisions have maintained divisional information on their internet sites. managers and supervisors are also a resource for employees to tap. in addition, it was mentioned earlier about individual development plans. well, one of our performance measures is completing 95% of our idps on an annual basis. and last time i looked, we had reached that performance measure. so, during the idp employees are encouraged to use that process to identify their career goals. so how do we do this for women well, specifically the same channels are used? this information goes out to all employees. we think that we have a solid track record of promoting women to higher positions. as i said, 55% of our executives are women, 80% of field offices are women. we also have regional administrators and these are people who manage our region of field offices. up until last year, seven of our eight regional administrators were women. several are retired and we're filling those positions now. and last but not the least, two of the last three directors of the dmv have been women including the current director. so, in summary, the dmv is committed to providing formal effort of support upon mobility, we've been doing so for some time, these are kind of the nuts and bolt programs that we have. we have, as i said the departmental level and the divisional level. however, we do recognize that there's always room for improvement. so we intend to improve our overall coordination at our various programs. we have these 15 programs and we'd like to put in place sort of an oversight coordination of them all and it's very helpful that calhr recently released a personal management liaison which identifies new guidelines for administering departmental upper mobility programs. so our intent is to follow those new guidelines and bring, i hesitate to use the word coherence because our programs work so well but get them all in one place and measure them a little bit better and then maybe promote them in a more comprehensive manner. once again, thank you for the opportunity to discuss dmv's effort in this area.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Desmond: Good morning Madam Chair and Mr. Chair and community member Ms. Kelly. My name is Richard Desmond, I'm the special representative to the Legislature for the Highway Patrol. Thank you very much for inviting us to participate in this hearing today. Commissioner Farrell wanted me to pass along his regrets and not being able to be here himself. This is certainly a very important topic for our department. I'm going to provide some information, it will be some of the very similar information that DMV provided about current programs and current employees. Lieutenant Reggie Williams who also works in the legislative office with me was formerly a recruiter in our border division in San Diego area, and your point as we were walking up the table is well taken, Madame Chair and we had the discussion about bringing some women officers in to have this discussion. And Lieutenant Williams because of his recruiting background, I thought that would be a good choice. But I certainly would like to be happy to follow up with you and maybe meet with some women officers to hear first hand some of their perspectives maybe in your office or something. I think that would be instructive. And whomever else would be interested in doing that. But I know that the recruitment challenges is really going to take up the bulk of this presentation.
[{'start': 64, 'end': 69, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 82, 'end': 97, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 260, 'end': 267, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 566, 'end': 581, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 877, 'end': 885, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Reggie Williams: Thank you for inviting us to be at this hearing this morning. Once again, I'm Lieutenant Reggie Williams, I work in the Legislative Office with Captain Desmond, and like he said, I did previously serve as recruiter for about 45 years on the department so I'm very familiar with the challenges that we face, when we go out and we try to recruit individuals to come into this uniform category or become an officer. So I want to start by saying that a law enforcement throughout the nation including the CHP, we all face challenges when it comes to recruiting diverse and qualified candidates. And then, of course, when you do the deeper dive, it's additional challenge when it, when you try recruit women and individuals with different ethnicities. So it's definitely a challenge for all of us not just the Highway Patrol. However, with that being said, the CHP has experienced what we consider a great success and a consistent level of interest from female applicants who want to come into a law enforcement initially. And we've also seen an improvement in females actually making it through the process and graduating from the academy. So I think that's a good thing for us as a beginning start. So some of the challenges that we face during the recruitment process itself. Specifically when it comes to women wanting to continue to process, is sometimes they lose the support or they don't have the support of their family or friends and that's a big deal for individuals. Anyone trying to come through our academy you have to have support from your family to make it through that academy, you can't do that by yourself. There's a lengthy examination process, so normally when people submit an application, they're looking for work. Our hiring process takes about 8 to 12 months to complete, so during that process sometimes individuals will find work else where. And now they drop out unto the hiring process. There's concerned about a very intrusive background, we are really going to dive into every individual who submits an application, who wants to be a police officer. We going to dive into their background and try and make sure that they are fit and qualify to perform the duties of a CHP officer. So those are concerns where people will drop out of the process. Of course, it's a male dominated career field so women have concerns about that. The concern over being involved in physical confrontations and having to carry a gun and maybe even being involved in an incident where either one they have to take someone's life or their life is on the line. And that's a concern for everyone. Not just women but it might be more so from a female's view point. Separation from their children or family members to attend the academy. That is an inherent challenge. I mean it's a 6.5 month, 28 week, live-in academy. That is one of the challenges that is unique to the Highway Patrol as far as law enforcement is concerned. Many other agencies have a local or regional academy. Individuals will show up eight to five and go home at the end of the night. Where ours, you live there five days a week, and you can go home on the weekends. And sometimes that is very difficult to do if you have small children and a significant other that's they are trying to hold down the fort while you're gone. The unknown assignment Rich touched on the fact that we had 100 and so offices throughout the state and you're going to be placed at one of those offices and we don't know when you submit that application we don't know which one of those offices is going to be available to you upon graduation. And that's all decided about you know 16 and 17 weeks into the academy where you going to be any where you going to be actually work at. So the thought of having to relocate or move. I mean all of you're significant other family members are kind of invaded where you are. That's going to be difficult for any individual loose so we will inherently lose people in the process in that way. Some of the things that we are doing, as far as outreach to applicants and females. We generally attend events and set up recruitment or informational booths at community events where there will be multiple groups of people, large amounts of women at any community events. We set up recruitment tables at malls, college campuses, we try to get create in the things that we do. We attend criminal justice programs and give classroom seminars, things like that. We maintain a very good working relationship with the military. We continuously attend their military transition assistance program courses. Then, we reach out to the individuals who are transitioning out the military to provide information on a career with the CHP. And, of course, females are attending those transition assistance programs as well. We post recruitment pamphlets at locations that may be frequented by females where ever those may be. We try to provide information to different locations. We conduct informational seminars and at these seminars we invite the applicants. We have the applicants maybe bring their significant others or family members to sit in on the seminar so they can also learn about the hiring process and things like that. And we'll also provide communication with a female officer, if it's requested, we'll provide that avenue if one's not there already we will provide an avenue for that. And facilitate an office visit or ride-alongs. And even so again with like you mentioned earlier, with the female officers so they can see the challenges themselves. And we also have an Explore Program. So this program is designed to try and reach the individuals as they're young, to gain their interest in law enforcement, so all of our offices, or a majority of our offices, have an Explorer Program. And we really count on the current Explorers to take that information back to their school and talk to their friends about it. And our PIOs public information officers they also spread the word at all the local schools trying to get the young high school students involved early so they can understand what is going to be expected of them if they wish to achieve as a career in law enforcement. I will say that one of the things that was said earlier, that normally individuals will kind of lean towards the things that they're familiar with. And having individuals in the uniform, which is our best recruitment tool, is our officers themselves reaching out to friends and family members, telling them about the job and maybe taking them on ride alongs and things like that. Word of mouth is our largest and most effective recruitment tool and if individuals are introduced or kind of affiliated with law enforcement as they are growing up, then that will give them more insight to the job itself and maybe influence them to come into law enforcement as well. Some of the changes we are doing to the recruitment program. We're kind of moving from applicant sourcing to applicant development. And that means, basically, recruiting not just to the test, but through the process. And how we're going to do that is we want our recruiters to engage the applicants more. Educate them on the process itself, educate them on the duties of the position, educate them on the Highway Patrol and the expectations of them. Encourage them, kind of serve as a mentor through the process. Not necessarily hold their hand but at least be that support structure for them if they don't have one or just serve as an additional support structure for them as they are going through the process. So there's no surprises so to speak. And then is political basically build loyalty and ensure that they understand what they are about to become a part of the CHP team environment. So they understand what that really means and talk about the professionalism of the agency and ensure that they understand that. We're going to be providing additional training to our recruiters. And how to communicate with this current generation. To give them a better tools to do that. We'll use social media, because that's the big thing now. So social media will be use by us and of course our website has a plethora of information about the department. We also conduct what we consider the Applicant Preparation Program. In this program basically, our recruiters, they provide test preparation resources because once an individual submits an application, normally they don't really know what to expect next. Or how to prepare for the written exam or the physical abilities test or things like that. So our recruiters have created a program where they will reach out to these individuals once they submitted application. Send them an e-mail, make telephone contact, and invite them to this preparation event so they can prepare for the physical workouts and things like that as they work through the hardening process. Our recruitment efforts do not exist in a vacuum. They are complemented by our department's larger public trust initiative, and one of the walls that might be put up is individuals lose the support structure because of the perception of the law enforcement in general. And we want to insure like Captain Desmond said that we are reflective of the communities that we serve and the communities have a large level of trust in us performing our duties. So, we definitely want to improve the relationship with the communities that we serve and we are doing our best to do that. Overall it was like at 17% attrition rate for men so, but it used to be higher as well for them. In 2016 we had, let me just give some accurate numbers here. We had over 20 females that graduated from the academy. Some of our progress, I think the captain touched on it a little bit, our academy itself, we have restructured our academy. Where as we have separated the post, training requirements, from the Department of training requirements. So, everyone will complete the post training requirements first. Which can alleviate some level of stress of trying to figure out both things at once. So with that we have seen a lower attrition rate recently since we've done that particular change. We use to see anywhere from a 30 to 70% attrition rate in our females and we are below 20% attrition rate now in our academy.
[{'start': 89, 'end': 104, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 152, 'end': 159, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 9156, 'end': 9163, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mario Gallego: Good afternoon at this point. Mario Gallego on behalf of SEUI Local 1000. Local 1000 is the largest union representing state employees, a majority of our members are women. We do have some of the lowest paid classifications. Our leadership, our President, and our three vice presidents all are women and one of our vice presidents Tamika Robinson sits on the Pay Equity Task Force on the, for the California Commission on the Status of Women and Girls alongside Assembly Member Garcia. So as you can see, this is an extremely important issue for our union and so we thank you for the hearing today. We want to thank Assembly Member Rodriguez and his comment and just say that from our perspective there is a gap in today's agenda and that is the voice of the rank-in-file employees. We hope the future hearings will include Include those voices and we would absolutely love to partner with you on that, but I do want to provide just a little bit of what I think some of our members would have shared with you today. First, some of the research from our local shows that, and this is a secret, the state has some real problems filling certain classifications. At the same time, from our perspective, unions have a desire to help their members go up the. Move up the chain. Move up the chain, right? Make more money.  So what we found was that, local 1,000 represents about 33,202 employees who earn less than $35,000 a year. And so it's hard to be an individual and survive on that much less a family. At the same time, we've found that there were 6,252 vacant state jobs. We feel that with some education, possibly through an apprenticeship, they can be available for these employees to move up and again, many of our members are women, so naturally this would go a long way to helping current female civil servants. Will provide more, hopefully, future hearings. Another program that was discussed earlier was a 20 20 program. Local 1000 has that in our contract and that's a program that allows employees to work half time, go to school half time. There was a program mentioned I'll be into RN program, that's actually in your district to some number augment and the interesting thing there that was left out is local 1000 took the lead in creating that program. There were state funds, local 1000 approached the state to partner with the community colleges, with the California Correctional Health Care Services and we said, hey you have all, you have a need to fill in our impositions, let's partner, let's do this. We have this in our contract and so you ask some member Rodriguez asked about the numbers there. This is a pilot program, we have 33 apprentices, 25 of them are women. So that's roughly 76% are women. 60% of those are women of color, that's 11 are API, five are African American, four are Latino-Hispanic, and the other five are white. There was mention about other programs as well. Lastly, upward mobility was discussed a number of times and I think there were discussions bout leadership trading and other things, but what wasn't discussed was the core of what's needed to move up, which is classes, certifications and that requires funding and from what I know and what we know at Local 1000, it is that these programs aren't funded to the extent to really make a dent in the pay gap that we're discussing today. So you know, to in my comments, I just want to add that you know, upward mobility programs are great, but they work the best when you partner with the unions that represents these employees. So we hope that as we work with the state and apprenticeship programs or whether these future hearings that the voices of employees are included at every single level. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 331, 'end': 346, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 478, 'end': 484, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 632, 'end': 641, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2575, 'end': 2584, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mia Downs: hi, i have some information that i feel has not been touched on today, so i'd like to share with you. my name is mia david downs, i'm a state civil servant and a member of ask me local 2620. there's evidence to suggest that government sanctioned gender discrimination is occurring in state civil service. i have over 20 years experience as an adoption specialist. we help create stable and loving adoptive families for california's most at risk youth. our adoption program generates revenue for the state through fees charged to adopting parents. legislators, please order an audit of calhr's compliance of government code 19827.2, a law that addresses the problem of occupational segregation. the law instructs kelly charge you asses its salary sitting practices based on the value of the work. adoption specialists are the poster child regarding this law. it's an under valued occupation where wages have been depressed and those who are effected are minority and older women. there are 48 adoption specialists and all of us are women. all of my coworkers in my office are women of color except for me. we are required to have a master degree in social work and specialized skill level yet we earn 38% less than our county employees counterpart. we also earn less than many state employed males with jobs where the education requirement is a high school diploma. upper mobility programs are great but they do not help professional women like me or my co worker who is a single mum who needs to have a second job in order to make end meet. there are many professional direct service jobs where upward mobility is not available,and anyway that is beside the point. the point is,that salary ranges should be analyzed and adjusted per this law. the 2014 gender earnings report has been cited repeatedly. the report is supposed to describe how calhr is implementing this law. yet there is no mention about the adjustment of salary ranges for female-dominated classifications. in the report, calhr passes the buck onto the unions. however, calhr state labor relations should have been bringing pay equity proposals to the bargaining table. i have a strong suspicion that this has never happened. rather, state labor relations rejected gender pay equity proposals brought to them by our union. we need your help. we need a champion. california has a record of being on the leading edge of progressive change. california should lead by example and implement its gender laws for state civil servants especially in light of the current global women's movement. please order an audit of calhr regarding government code 19827.2. thank you.
[{'start': 113, 'end': 128, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 712, 'end': 717, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Amico Taci: hi, my name is amico mia taci and i'm a registered dietitian, rd, with the department of state hospitals, dsh. in my profession, 95% are women, according to the survey from academy of nutrition and dietetics in 2015, dsh, it is presently about 97%. historically, the state dietitians were not under valued among allied health professionals. more recent lawsuit coleman and porter, have bumped up similar clinical position's salary, but others were left behind. after failed attempts to challenge the state adherence to its own personal policies, the rds asked me 2620 for help. equity adjustment for the rdu pursuit at the last two contract negotiation with inadequate result. even with the state own findings of significant disparity. furthermore the discrimination gets worst as you promote the management or the positions or director and napa manages a budget of 3.5 million? and is responsible for 184 employees in her department yet her salary is 28% below the salary of the program director with similar administrative duties minus the budget. another issue is the calhr classification code for the rd. we have repeatedly requested to be moved from the custodial food service code to the allied health professionals which best matches our job duties. the current code echoes back to the thing color mentality, devaluing women's contribution in the workplace. they are facing ways disparity and are being denied the ability to promote to higher ways positions due to gender bias. calhr does not follow its own policies on equitable pay. we are a discipline that should be protected by the provision of the sb 358, the california fair pay act, and used to bring up our salary by at least 20%. thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Belinda Gilmore: Hi, my name is Belinda Gilmore and I am a licensing program analyst with the Department of Social Services division of community care licensing and I'm here today to illicit your support to help us put an end into the pay inequity in women classifications. As a licensing program analyst, my primary responsibility is to ensure that the children who are placed in the licensed facility are in a safe and healthy environment and this is done by inspecting the homes to ensure that they are operating within Title 22 compliance and another thing that we do, we require that every adult that's living in the home or in a home have a criminal record clearance through the Department of Justice, FBI, child abuse, and the child abuse is so that we can use it as a safety net to ensure or to verify that there is no registered sexual offender living in our homes. And there have been times when we come back and we find that you have a sexual offender that's living in a home and when we find that, the LPAs, who predominately are women, all class, we have to go out to the home, so now we are acting in a role as a police officer to meet with the licensee to discuss having a sexual offender in the home. So we are like putting ourself in jeopardy because we have no weapons, we have no guns, we can't have pepper spray or anything. So we're going in a home with potential sexual offenders and putting us at risk. So we're asking that you look into the LPA code and look at our salary adjustment that needs to be done. Thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Donna Keg: hello, my name is donna amico keg and i'm one of approximately 55 child nutrition consultants that work at the california department of education. we are responsible for conducting administrative reviews of the federally funded child nutrition programs like the national school lunch program, the childhood care food program and the summer food program. 100% of funding is from federal dollars from the us department of agriculture. in our role we evaluate, analyze and audit financial records, food service systems, wellness policies and nutritional quality standards of food served to children and senior adults to determine compliance with state and federal regs. we are instrumental in identifying tens of millions of dollars yearly, which are mandated to be paid back to school food service programs, cde, and usda. we provide consultation and recommendations to school superintendents, chief business officers, school fees service directors, school boards and chief executive officers. to my knowledge, there has never been a male child nutrition consultant since inception of the jobs back in 1977. i have been a cnc for nearly 24 years. the job has also changed tremendously over the years, with greater and more complex consulting, auditing, and project management duties required. in table one that i have, our child nutrition consultant class is compared to non-female state civil service dominated classes with similar consulting project management and auditing tasks. the salary disparity range is between 18 and 47% higher, and the average salary scale is 32% higher for the cncs. today i counseled my daughters not to go into female dominated careers because of the equity disparity. i hope i do not have the same conversation with my granddaughters some day. i urge you to make gender equity salary increases to resolve the salary gap of female-dominated state civil service positions, such as the child nutrition consultant position. thank you for allowing me to share today.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carol Cole: hi, good morning honorable susan eggman, christina garcia, and freddie rodriguez. my name is carol donna cole, i'm an individual program coordinator. i work for the department of developmental services. i am also a chair, for afscme 2620. i was involved in a content negotiations, which was quite interesting. the gender pay did not come up as part of the topic in our discussions. we were told that the department of developmental services because of their closure plan, that the monies were functioning and have a different fund. so we weren't able to discuss that fact. as an ipc, which is the acronym for individual program coordinator,  for the developmental center, we work in the secure treatment setting, which is much like the present it's a forensic setting where we work with individuals who are duly diagnosed. they are coming from the jails or correctional centers. they are 1370, which we have prepared for competency to go to court usually they're committed to us as 6500 may stay with us as a treatment plan. the ipc state service is predominantly female. we have one male that works as a ipc. i think there's one and maybe one in fairview, but the classification itself will mirror exactly the correctional counselor one, which is a custody requirement imposed in the inmate population. additionally, the counselor one, requires the same amount of schooling. we have a four year degree, usually in human services or psychology. our pay is an average from 3195 to 4195,which is barely above a typist which requires no schooling, an interesting, talked about the idp which is our annual plan for to move forward and move upward. i have that every year and its, it acts in different positions to get more training when my time comes up i never afforded the opportunity to act in positions. who gets those positions, i'll put down only the younger female or a male that is wanting to move out. so i personally have had that experience for many years now. i have over 40 years of state service. the correctional counselor officer's compensated at 55 85 to 83 80, so that's almost double the amount that we are doing the same work, it's almost parity.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 39, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 41, 'end': 57, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 63, 'end': 80, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 93, 'end': 109, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vanessa Perez: hello, my name is vanessa carol perez and i'm a state employee and alumna of sacramento state university where i got my masters in social work. growing up i had the belief that a higher education would result in a higher salary, but that is not the case because i chose a female dominated position. i'm a latina, and the bread winner of my family and my husband and i have two young children. prior to working for the state i was employed with sacramento county child protective services, but i accepted a position with the state of california, and with that i did take a pay cut. i love my job and it is my career as an adoption specialist, but i am disgusted with my salary. there are numerous state classifications that pay significantly more than what i receive and my fellow 47 female adoption specialists, and they only require high school education. today i'm hearing a great deal of great ideas to bridge the gap, out reach education, employment development for women, but what is happening for my fellow 47 female state auction specialist and me in the state of california to have already attained our masters level education. we do our ongoing education and we have the skills and we receive pay that is lower than an secretarial position. again, i love my career as a state adoption's specialist serving at-risk youth and their family. and assisting them in becoming recognized legally as a family through adoption but keep in mind, my job is not always happy and is not simple. my job comes with many risks. i work with both parents with untreated mental health, current alcohol and other drug or substance abuse, extensive criminal history, which is many times of violent and i meet them in the public and i have no mace, no pepper spray, no weapons. it is me and my pen and my clipboard to keep myself protected and i hope i get to go home to my family at the end of the day. another part of my responsibilities is to visit children throughout the state of california to ensure their safety and that means many miles on the road and many hours in my car. last year i was in two car accidents, that was over $20,000 in damages to my car and i can't even put a price on what it has done to my body and my health. i want to thank you for taking the time to hear what my colleagues and i have presented and i hope this gap in pay can be attained now and this is an issue that is something that my 4 year old daughter does not to fight for when she enters the work force. thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kim Arikawa: Hi, my name's Kim Arikawa and I am also an adoption specialist like my fellow co-workers that you've heard here. So I've been a social worker for about 20 years prior to Working for the State as an adoption specialist, I was also a top protective services worker for the county and then early childhood educator before that. So I think at one point I just wanted to make an additional to the numerous comments is that I think some of the issues that we'll address here today focused on recruiting and retention of women in traditionally male dominated perception. And I think the third is a vital and important thing to look at, then I also don't want to lose side of the fact that the jobs that we do perform that are female dominated. I don't want that to be overlooked because I feel like some our abilities and skills set might be whether has been historically and institutionally discriminatory against women. So I feel like trying to shift women into a male dominated positions does not address the historical and institutional discrimination that faces women in female occupations today. And also does not address the fact that while we may want to increase diversity for occupations that are historically male dominated, we do also want to attract males to occupations that are traditionally female dominated. As adoption specialists, when we work with children and families, we don't have any males in our classifications. It is important for us, I believe to attract and retain males in our field. The children do not have male specialist and social workers that they have to look at to our male parents don't have that quarter also to work with, but I don't feel like that is going to happen is wages are historically oppressed in a discriminatory manner. So I just hope that that's something that is not also lost in the focus when you're looking at closing the gender pick up.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lauri Damrell: Great. Well, good morning. Committee chairs and Assembly members, my name is Lauri Damrell. And I am the second Vice Chair of the California Commission on The Status of Women and Girls. I'm also the Co-Chair of the California Pay Equity Task Force with California Labor Commissioner and Statutory Member of the Women's Commission Julie Su. The California Labor Commissioner's Office is the administrative agency that enforces the Equal Pay Act. I should also mention that I'm a partner at Orrick, Herrington, and Sutcliffe in their Employment Law Group, and regularly litigate these issues and advise employers on these issues as well. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today regarding the gender wage gap in the US and California. And specifically to provide you with an overview of the California Pay Equity Task Force's goals and objectives supporting meaningful compliance with the California Fair Pay Act, or SB 358. Authored by Senator Hannah Beth Jackson and signed into law by Governor Brown on October 7th of 2015. It's good to see Commission First Chair, First Vice Chair in Legislators' Women's Caucus Christina Garcia here. The Commission benefits every day from her leadership and passionate commitment to creating opportunities for California's women and girls. I also want to say how honored I am to be here today with the team from Secretary of Government Operations Marybel Batjer's office. I know she's spent much of her career in senior government positions while simultaneously striving for gender equity. And I know she's passionately committed to leading our state government forward on this issue as well. Despite Congress not yet passing the Paycheck Fairness Act, equal pay has emerged as an issue front and center in our national consciousness, and is gaining in momentum at the state and local levels. California, as you may know, has been a big player in this movement; enacting SB 358, the Fair Pay Act. Which is widely recognized as perhaps the most aggressive equal pay legislation in the country. Even now, as Massachusetts, New York, and Maryland follow suit with their own legislation aimed at eliminating the gender pay gap. And more recently as big city mayors are proactively working to close the gender pay gap in their communities. California continues its leadership by bringing together a multi-stakeholder Task Force that includes representatives from the public and private sectors as well as from employee and employer groups. In California the Task Force is looking for the best ways to address a pay gap that not only varies by gender, but also by ethnic and race categories. According to the Institute for Women's Policy Research, $41,486, that is the median annual pay for women of any color who hold a full-time job year round. This is 84 cents to every dollar earned by a man. For Asian women, the median is 72 cents for every dollar. For African-American women, the median is 63 cents for every dollar. And for Latinos, it's 43 cents. In addition, there are 1.75 million women heads of households in California, to your point, Ms. Eggman. Close to 500,000, or almost 30%, who have incomes that fall below the federal poverty line. The factors that contribute to the pay gap are complex and nuanced and require close attention. With the strongest pay equity legislation in the country enacted by our state, and a pay gap that has remained relatively stable. The Commission decided in January 2016 to make supporting the sound implementation of that law a priority. It was with an eye toward continuing the bipartisan work that went into the Fair Pay Act. And including employee and employer advocates, as well as government agency representatives, that we conducted an open application process. And then selected Task Force members from a distinguished group of applicants. A few short months later, the California Commission on the Status of Women and Girls convened the first meeting of the California Pay Equity Task Force in late July. Since that time we've held four full Task Force meetings, and at least six publicly noticed Subcommittee meetings. Commissioner Su and I view the Task Force as a forum for bringing together diverse interests with a common goal of proactive compliance. And we believe that to move the needle forward, it's crucial for those impacted to collaborate. Our work challenges the assumption that employees and employers are on the opposite sides of this issue. Whether you're a business looking to reach the top of the Fortune 500, a Silicon Valley tech leader, or an employee working or looking for a job. We all want to see the gender pay gap close once and for all. Collaboration is already fostering deeper understanding of the challenges faced by all stakeholders. By convening enforcement agencies, employers, and employees, as well as their advocates. Research experts, labor economists, and human resource practitioners. The Task Force is creating practical, thorough, and widely applicable guidelines for proactive compliance. We find that employees need guidance to make informed choices about their careers. And employers need guidance to create workplace policies and procedures that promote gender pay equity and compliance with the Fair Pay Act. We are developing tools to assist all stakeholders in this effort. We brought for you today a draft of our interim report which will be released on April 4th, 2017, which is Equal Pay Day. It provides a summary of our work so far and what we aim to accomplish in 2017. We are creating tool kits for employers, employees, and employer organizations. Some highlights include our work to define legal concepts in the Fair Pay Act. Such as the term substantially similar work which is different than the previous term equal pay for equal work. Which data employers should maintain about employee wages, how to analyze that data and how to remedy pay gaps that they find. The toolkits for employers will be tailored for small and large employers to accommodate differences in budgets, staff sizes, and available resources, such as Human Resource Departments. For employees, we will offer guidance about how to file a claim, where to go, and what to consider when looking for a job. And for employee organizations, we will provide sample contract language and information requests. Finally, our primary goals in 2017 are to bring all of the pieces together in one place on the web, to convene business leaders, to discuss guidelines, inform employees about equal pay protections and their rights under the law through outreach, and prepare a plan for ongoing future guidance. Our task force is confident that the results of our collaborative efforts will provide well drawn roadmaps for effective implementation of the Fair Pay Act, while simultaneously demonstrating successful approaches for government enforcement, transparency, and collaboration. Thank you, and I'm happy to answer any questions you have.
[{'start': 77, 'end': 90, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 330, 'end': 338, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 489, 'end': 495, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 497, 'end': 507, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 513, 'end': 522, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 949, 'end': 968, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1120, 'end': 1136, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1390, 'end': 1404, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3089, 'end': 3095, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4125, 'end': 4127, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kathleen Webb: Good morning chair and Committee Members. My name is Kathleen Webb and I am an assistant secretary for innovation and accountability of the government operations agency. Secretary Batjer her deepest regrets that she couldn't be here today and I know she's looking forward to meeting with all of you soon. As I begin, I especially want to acknowledge Assemblymember Susan Talamantes Eggman, Committee on accountability and administrative review. Assemblymember Freddie Rodriguez, chair of the Committee on public employees retirement Social Security. And Assemblymember Cristina Garcia, chair of the California Legislative Women's Caucus. Thank you so much for the opportunity to testify before you today on a very important subject of gender pay equity in state civil service. As you've noted, California State government, while having made significant improvements, still has a gender pay gap of 20.5%. GovOps shares your concerns that this is too high and we are working on a variety of fronts to lower this number. One of the first initiatives we tackled when the Governor operations agency was created several years ago was civil service improvement. Our state civil service is complicated, inflexible and highly bureaucratic set of rules, regulations, and policies, that had been slow to adapt to generational, and demographic changes in the work force, and to the emerging trends in the work place. We're working in concert with our partners CalHR, the State Personnel Board, the Department of Finance and the governor's office and of course our union partners, to make changes to our system that will allow California to become an employer of choice. Through the process we're also making changes that will hopefully continue to make improvements in our pay equity numbers. I want to talk about those numbers a little bit more. And then I will share in more detail about our efforts to date. First, I want to note good news in one area of state service. And that is in our career executive assignment, or CEA class. As you may know, CEA's are our top manager in state service. There are a total of 1,351 CEA's in the state. Represented by 675 men and 676 women in these classifications. So at least in this area we have achieved gender pay parity. You will hear more news in this area from our friends in the Department of vehicle a little later. But there is more to this story. Because there are three different levels of CEAs each with a different pay range. And at the top pay scale, in the CEA level C, there are 36 more men than women. So while the gender composition of the executive workforce has gender parity. There is still work to be done to reach parity at the most senior level. To this end we have been working on the issues of unconscious bias and hiring and promoting in our supervisory training with a focus on talent management. We don't want to just train people when they start their job, but develop them throughout their career. Their perspective, duties and issues may all change and our training should speak to that. In response, we've created the California Statewide Leadership Training and Developement Program which serves as the cornerstone for developing leaders across the state. With the skills and competencies they need to succeed in a leadership position. Guided by our leadership philosophy, that our leaders develop and inspire our workforce, deliver great results for Californians, and our values. We are designing programs that address the knowledge required to lead the civil service workforce. The talent management skills to recruit, hire, train, develop, and retain a diverse and dynamic workforce. And the organizational capabilities and tools to achieve those results. At the heart of this effort, is a full order stating that our people are our greatest resource. That our workforce must be represented of Californians, and we must welcome our best and our brightest to achieve great results for the people of our state. Our leaders set the tone for creating a diverse and dynamic workforce. And our training program will provide them with the knowledge, skills, tools, to cultivate a diverse workforce and mitigate biases, conscious and unconscious. Training and developing our leaders is a step in the right direction. But it won't address where our greatest gender paid disparity exist. And we have found that is in our paid classifications under 70,000. We know that 61% of the men in the state workforce make more than 70,000 as opposed to just 39% of women. There are also a higher portion of people of color who make below 70,000. Through our civil service improvement initiative, we have launched several initiatives to make improvements in this area. We are currently developing an Information Technology Apprenticeship Program with our partners at SCIU local 1000. This program will be geared towards individuals in lower pay critical occupations that will teach them the skills to successfully move into higher paying IT jobs. Recently we've held several state job fairs at communities of color to attract more diverse workforce. This speaks to a larger recruitment strategy to focus our outreach and attract women to traditional male dominated occupations like law enforcement and fire fighting. You will hear more about this from our friends at the California Highway Patrol. We also acknowledge that creating more access to services and opportunity for women will help with parity. According to McKinsey and company, unpaid work is one factor that can hold women back from educational and promotional opportunities. To that end Cal-HR is planning to release a policy statement encouraging agencies to use flexible work hours, telework, and job sharing that may give our workforce the time to go finish their degree or training to upskill. This year, GovOps in cooperation with Cal-HR is taking a fresh look at the state's upward mobility program, and asking, is it effective in its current form? How many people are advancing into higher paying occupations? Can the program be improved? We started these conversions with our office of civil rights at Cal-HR, SEIU Local 1000, and the civil rights coalition. We also recognize the Employee Development requires a plan. And while almost every employee should have an Individual Development Plan or IDP, we have found that unfortunately, this isn't always the case. Individual Development Plan tools are used by managers to help employees enhance their skills, pursue their department's mission and reach career goals. Done well, these plans signal then employs professional development is a priority. It can improve an employee's effectiveness and productivity and self worth. IDPs are a key component of successful upper mobility efforts and talent management. So we have training, we have offer mobility programs and we have IDP' s but they aren't used enough. Initial barriers in under 70,000 classifications are ones we can all imagine, transportation, time, child care and other resources. We have to make opportunities more readily available to initial employees who are interested in moving up the ranks. Whether that be bringing classes to them. Allowing them to take classes during the day. Or assisting in gaining access to transportation or child care. We are currently working with our Los Rios Community College district to develope curriculum that will accelerate entry into civil service or give additional coursework to employees. We are also excited about working Working with SCIU local 1000 on a program that we provide an opportunity for employees to participate in a state sponsored college. Or University courses for up to 20 hours per week without loss of compensation, were employees would otherwise be scheduled for work. Another initiative that is part of our civil service improvement is class consolidation. Now while on the phase, it may not seem to directly tie to this issue. It is our expectation that reducing a number of classes will create more defined career ladders for employees to follow. This effort which is already seen the reduction of more than 600 classes. Will help employees find classes to move into. In addition we are working to simplify job titles. Something that will allow people both in and out of state government to have a better understanding of their positions that are available to them. All of these efforts will require continue work. Both by the departments and by Cal HR and our other partners in order to effectuate this change. At GovOps we want to make California an employer of choice. And one that reflects the diversity and strength of our state. And look forward to continuing to work with all of you to make that a reality. I thank you for your time.
[{'start': 53, 'end': 66, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 180, 'end': 186, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 365, 'end': 388, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 460, 'end': 477, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 569, 'end': 584, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Richard Gillihan: Thank you. Good morning, respective chairs, caucus chair, and the members that are here today. Richard Gillihan with Cal HR and look forward to having a discussion. I met with some of you ahead of time but I want to frame it a little different than perhaps it's been discussed so far today. Our story's a little different and I think it's important to understand that. Thank you. Good morning, respective chairs, caucus chair, and the members that are here today. Richard Gillihan with Cal HR and look forward to having a discussion. I met with some of you ahead of time but I want to frame it a little different than perhaps it's been discussed so far today. Our story's a little different and I think it's important to understand that. First, a little bit about Cal HR. We have several roles. One of our chief roles is we service the employer of state employees on behalf of the Governor. We execute that through our labor relations function. And also in that function we negotiate labor contracts with our union partners for our rank and file employees. We also provide sort of oversight and state level guidance in the areas of EEO and civil rights. A oversight of the state's classification and compensation plan which also is a piece of this discussion. Our selections division oversees state examination is required to get a state job or to promote. We have a unit that focuses on workforce planning. A unit that handles benefits including vision and dental benefit administration for state employees. Our savings plus program is a supplemental retirement savings program that serves about 200,000 participants with about $12 billion in assets under management. And we have a large legal function that represents the administration and many departments and personnel matters. To the topic of labor these state sours are generally set through collective bargaining as the deals act. I always assumed when it was put into the statute and that's where Salaries are primarily negotiated. For non representive employees we have the authority to set those salaries. But our state salary structure sets that there's one salary scale per classification. We don't have a gender based salary system. So we don't pay a correctional officer male higher than we pay a correctional officer female. Furthermore in state government per the constitution, our civil service system is based on the merit principle. The merit principle says in simple terms that hiring and promotional decisions have to be based on merit which is ascertained through competitive examination. And cannot be made based on any protected characteristic. All of those things combined with the fact that what we have in our workforce is under representation of women in higher earning career professions generally. A particularly in public safety and over-representation of some of the under, lower earning classifications. And when you net that out that's what gets us our gender parity gap of 20.5%. That number's been improving steadily but certainly not a pace that any of us are proud of. And it's certainly not anything we're going to say here today and take credit for because we need to find ways to make that move the needle faster and achieve parody in a more reasonable time frame. It's important to also note that the State of California has a work force of nearly a quarter of a million employees spread across over probably 130 departments. With north of 3000 job classifications. So its hard to find reforms that are on such that we can accelerate the change. But we're working on it as my colleague Mrs. Webb said. So what we can do given the given the constraints of the existing civil service system is we can do targeted recruiting. Where we can reach out to underrepresented populations. And encourage them and educate them about not only careers in state government. But the process to go through sort of demystify the process and help them understand how they go about getting careers. And in our most recent women centers report we included some of these strategies. For guidance to our departments to help implement some of these things. Another thing as an employer, that we need to be mindful of is sort of our public posture. Are we a welcoming employer to women into these public safety categories? Are we showing women successfully doing this? Of course we have women Highway Patrol officers and we have women fire fighters. And they do a fantastic job. So and we're doing this both at Cal HR with our web presence and our publications and other recruitment materials. And encouraging our departments to do the same. But the focus on showing women and people of color in these occupation groups where they're traditionally under-represented. So they can see people like themselves in these roles. And another topic that was touched on by the earlier panel and Miss Webb touched on it as well is the process to how we go about hiring and unconscious bias. And the way we attack that is through diverse hiring panels. Both on initial hiring and promotional panels in state departments and that's guidance we give departments repeatedly. It's in our best practice, best hiring practice training we deliver. But the evidence shows that diverse hiring panels lead to more diverse hiring results and promotional results. So these efforts and others that have been mentioned and things that we're yet to learn about are all in a table for us. We don't, we have. We don't have a has to be invented here mentality when it comes to continuous improvement. We know we have to work to do, we know we need to do a better job. And interested in hearing the discussion today and other ideas that folks may have, as well as the Commission we heard from earlier. To better inform our future practices. As I said the 20.5% is unacceptable to all of us and a. Thank you for your time and I look forward to taking any questions.
[{'start': 95, 'end': 111, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 464, 'end': 480, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 764, 'end': 770, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3584, 'end': 3588, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4853, 'end': 4862, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
David Keenan: Chairpersons, Assemblymembers, I'm David Keenan. I'm the Chief for Human Resources with the Department of Motor Vehicles. On behalf of the Department of Motor Vehicles, I thank you for the opportunity to provide you with information about our department's upward mobility efforts. Also as a private citizen, I also want to thank you on behalf of my daughter who is 21 and is graduating from Cal Poly San Luis Obispo with a degree in Philosophy this June, graduating after only four years I might add. I think that may be a subject for another hearing four year graduation rates. But she, and all of California's daughters are directly impacted by the issue of pay equity both in the public and private sectors. So thank you for examining this issue. The Department of Motor Vehicles has a workforce that reflects the diversity of the Sate of California. Women make up 70% of our workforce. It includes 35% Hispanic, 19% African American, and 16% of staff self identify as having a disability. Over 5,300 of our 8,800 staff are in clerical and allied services classification. As such upward mobility is extremely important, and a high priority for the DMV. Through various upward mobility initiatives the department as been succesful in providing employment opportunities into higher level classifications. And into a supervisor, managerial, and executive ranks. As was mentioned earlier, the DMV housing executive team in which CEAs, women represent 55% of the CEAs in the department. Even more important, approximately 80% of the individuals who are field office leaders, the people who are actually in charge of our field offices are women. So what I'd like to do today is to just provide you with sort of a nuts and bolts look at what's the Department of motor vehicle does with regard to upward mobility. So we are currently or will be piloting this year approximately 15 different programs that'll address work force succession in upward mobility. These are both department based and divisions specific efforts. We have a DMV Leadership Academy and we have established a partnership with the University of California Davis Extension to develop leaders for the future of the DMV. This academy is based upon the leadership competency model that was developed by Cal HR. It consists of four distinct programs. There's an executive, a mid manager, a supervisory, and a non-supervisory. Each program is tailored for and made available to a specific and appropriate set of job classifications. Every classification used by DMV is eligible to participant in one of our leadership development academies. Over the past 5 years since the inception of the academy approximately 400 staff have attended one of the sessions. And these are multiday sessions that extent over a multimonth period, 65% have been women. The executive program began in February is designed to expand the leadership skills of newly appointed executives and senior level managers, middle manager program began in January of 2006. Participants are selected through a competitive application process and is designed to develop middle manager's leadership competencies and enhance potential to move to higher levels of management. Our supervisory program began in December of 2008, once again it is a competitive application process. They are screened actually by former leadership development academy graduates. And it's designed to develop leadership at competencies for first level supervisors and managers. What is really important to us is our non supervisory program. That began five years ago and participants are selected, once again through a competitive application process. And what's unique to our non supervisory program, we have sessions in both Northern and Southern California because as you know the DMV of we reach from the California Mexico border all the way up to Oregon California Border. This allows an extended availability to our diverse work place or, excuse me, work force. And minimizes obviously the impact of travel expenses. This program is designed to develop competencies early in the careers of our future leaders. So in addition to our LDLs as we call it, which has those four components, we also have analyst and supervisor training program. We partnership with Los Rios Community College with our analyst training program, and it's available to all classifications. Emphasizes the skills necessary for upward mobility, including essential analytical skills, critical thinking, completed staff work, presentation skills, those types of things. We also have an analytical concepts and tools for supervisors, which was launched in 2011. This series is designed to provide tools for managers and supervisors to enhance their analytical skills. These two trainings which began in 2009 to 2011. We have 350 staff go through this trainings and they are multiday, multimonths trainings with 62% being women. There's some other things that we do more traditional things, the human resource branchs itself. Provides a career counseling, one on one career counseling to staff on an appointment basis. We can talk about career ladders and specific classifications, they'd like to get into. When examinations are going to be held, so they'll know to take the examinations that have been left out in the cold and the next exam does not occur for another year. We also have training and development opportunities. The DMV advertises virtually all of its job bulletins as training and development and opportunities. This enables employees to apply for positions in order to improve their upward mobility. We also have an upward mobility guide. This guide is available to all employees. Its topics include career development, how to write a good resume, information about job classifications, examinations etc. Those are the things that occurring in sort of the departmental level. In addition, we have division specific initiatives. Our registration operations division which is basically as you would imagine it's how you register your car. Since 2012 has a plan called Achieving Career Success. And once again, a multiday, multiweek or month program. And it's open to everyone in ROD, our Registration Operations Division. We had 136 graduates and 49% have achieved the promotion after they've gone through the ROD achieving success program. We also have a manager development series with in the registration operations divisions. Which does essentially some other thing for other classes, I just reference with the achieving career success. We also have a Licensing Operations Division, the registrations and licences, right? So LOD which we call our Licensing Operations Division, recently completed the division specific work force and succession plan. We're actually looking to have each division have it's own work force succession plan and then have a department wide succession plan. They are the first one out of the gate, we do have the succession plan at department level we're working on replacing it. They completed their work force and succession plan and it incorporates an upward mobility program within the workforce and succession plan and this is a very traditional plan. It's a development of a program. Basically, the elements include an application process, development of a program orientation and career development action plan, provides individual career counselling with a licensing operation divisions staff and human resource branch staff and ultimately there's five or six workshops in various areas and then employees receive the certificate of completion at the end. Our pilot launch is scheduled for September of 2017. We also have LOD also has two more plans will be rolling out this year. When is the mentoring program? It'll link rank and file staff, to mentors, to assistant and plan to develop there and achieve their career goals. And then a talent pool program which is going to be interesting, because it'll provide a process for employees to establish career goals, and a career path, and get the necessary training and development. So we're really looking forward to LOD, launching these, seeing how they work, and then possibly expanding them to the rest of the department, in addition to the ones that we already have. Now, field operations that's basically our field offices. We conduct after hours upward mobility workshops for employees in field locations throughout the state because you can be isolated out there in these field offices out in El Centro or Brolly or Falls River Mills or so we offer upward mobility workshops for those employees. So some numbers, in terms of our upward mobility and succession planing formal programs for 2015, which is the last year. We're currently collecting numbers for 2016, but 2015 is the last year we have numbers for 192 staff participated in one of these types of programs. Of those 192, 63% were women. It was asked that I provide some information about low paying classifications and upward mobility classifications. The department has 33 low paying classifications. A lot of the department classifications are entry level and low paying. That's why upper mobility is so important to us and we have 16 upper mobility classifications. Some examples of our low paying classifications are the office technician, the key data operator, the motor vehicle representative, that's the person you're most likely to encounter at a field office. Senior motor vehicle technician, some of our upward mobility classifications include the personnel specialists. These are the people who provide the pay and benefits to employees, management services tech, licensing registration examiner, this is the person who would give you your drive test, and then staff services analyst which speaks for itself and she's quite widely in state service. So to give you an even more detailed picture of what we look like, we have 1,356 men in our lower paying classification. And I'll compare that to 4,069 women in our low-paying classifications. So 75% of our women are in low-paying classifications. And in our upper mobility classifications, we have 540 men and approximately 1,000 women. So it was about 66% of the people who are in our upwardly mobile classifications. They've moved from a lower paying into an upwardly mobile class. 66% of those people are women. So how do the employees find out about all this? How do they know about these 15 things that we do on a regular basis? Well, we have multiple channels for communicating our upward mobility program. We maintain a career opportunity and upward mobility internet webpage with resources listed for all employees. The department training branch advertises these training academies on a regular basis. Our individual divisions have maintained divisional information on their internet sites. Managers and supervisors are also a resource for employees to tap. In addition, it was mentioned earlier about individual development plans. Well, one of our performance measures is completing 95% of our IDPs on an annual basis. And last time I looked, we had reached that performance measure. So, during the IDP Employees are encouraged to use that process to identify their career goals. So how do we do this for women well, specifically the same channels are used? This information goes out to all employees. We think that we have a solid track record of promoting women to higher positions. As I said, 55% of our executives are women, 80% of field offices are women. We also have regional administrators and these are people who manage our region of field offices. Up until last year, seven of our eight regional administrators were women. Several are retired and we're filling those positions now. And last but not the least, two of the last three directors of the DMV have been women including the current director. So, in summary, the DMV is committed to providing formal effort of support upon mobility, we've been doing so for some time, these are kind of the nuts and bolt programs that we have. We have, as I said the departmental level and the divisional level. However, we do recognize that there's always room for improvement. So we intend to improve our overall coordination at our various programs. We have these 15 programs and we'd like to put in place sort of an oversight coordination of them all and it's very helpful that CalHR recently released a personal management liaison which identifies new guidelines for administering departmental upper mobility programs. So our intent is to follow those new guidelines and bring, I hesitate to use the word coherence because our programs work so well but get them all in one place and measure them a little bit better and then maybe promote them in a more comprehensive manner. Once again, thank you for the opportunity to discuss DMV's effort in this area.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Desmond: good morning madam chair and mr. chair and community member ms. kelly. my name is richard jonah desmond, i'm the special representative to the legislature for the highway patrol. thank you very much for inviting us to participate in this hearing today. commissioner farrell wanted me to pass along his regrets and not being able to be here himself. this is certainly a very important topic for our department. i'm going to provide some information, it will be some of the very similar information that dmv provided about current programs and current employees. lieutenant reggie williams who also works in the legislative office with me was formerly a recruiter in our border division in san diego area, and your point as we were walking up the table is well taken, madame chair and we had the discussion about bringing some women officers in to have this discussion. and lieutenant williams because of his recruiting background, i thought that would be a good choice. but i certainly would like to be happy to follow up with you and maybe meet with some women officers to hear first hand some of their perspectives maybe in your office or something. i think that would be instructive. and whomever else would be interested in doing that. but i know that the recruitment challenges is really going to take up the bulk of this presentation.
[{'start': 64, 'end': 69, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 82, 'end': 103, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 266, 'end': 273, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 572, 'end': 587, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 883, 'end': 891, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Reggie Williams: Thank you for inviting us to be at this hearing this morning. Once again, I'm Lieutenant Reggie Williams, I work in the Legislative Office with Captain Desmond, and like he said, I did previously serve as recruiter for about 45 years on the department so I'm very familiar with the challenges that we face, when we go out and we try to recruit individuals to come into this uniform category or become an officer. So I want to start by saying that a law enforcement throughout the nation including the CHP, we all face challenges when it comes to recruiting diverse and qualified candidates. And then, of course, when you do the deeper dive, it's additional challenge when it, when you try recruit women and individuals with different ethnicities. So it's definitely a challenge for all of us not just the Highway Patrol. However, with that being said, the CHP has experienced what we consider a great success and a consistent level of interest from female applicants who want to come into a law enforcement initially. And we've also seen an improvement in females actually making it through the process and graduating from the academy. So I think that's a good thing for us as a beginning start. So some of the challenges that we face during the recruitment process itself. Specifically when it comes to women wanting to continue to process, is sometimes they lose the support or they don't have the support of their family or friends and that's a big deal for individuals. Anyone trying to come through our academy you have to have support from your family to make it through that academy, you can't do that by yourself. There's a lengthy examination process, so normally when people submit an application, they're looking for work. Our hiring process takes about 8 to 12 months to complete, so during that process sometimes individuals will find work else where. And now they drop out unto the hiring process. There's concerned about a very intrusive background, we are really going to dive into every individual who submits an application, who wants to be a police officer. We going to dive into their background and try and make sure that they are fit and qualify to perform the duties of a CHP officer. So those are concerns where people will drop out of the process. Of course, it's a male dominated career field so women have concerns about that. The concern over being involved in physical confrontations and having to carry a gun and maybe even being involved in an incident where either one they have to take someone's life or their life is on the line. And that's a concern for everyone. Not just women but it might be more so from a female's view point. Separation from their children or family members to attend the academy. That is an inherent challenge. I mean it's a 6.5 month, 28 week, live-in academy. That is one of the challenges that is unique to the Highway Patrol as far as law enforcement is concerned. Many other agencies have a local or regional academy. Individuals will show up eight to five and go home at the end of the night. Where ours, you live there five days a week, and you can go home on the weekends. And sometimes that is very difficult to do if you have small children and a significant other that's they are trying to hold down the fort while you're gone. The unknown assignment Rich touched on the fact that we had 100 and so offices throughout the state and you're going to be placed at one of those offices and we don't know when you submit that application we don't know which one of those offices is going to be available to you upon graduation. And that's all decided about you know 16 and 17 weeks into the academy where you going to be any where you going to be actually work at. So the thought of having to relocate or move. I mean all of you're significant other family members are kind of invaded where you are. That's going to be difficult for any individual loose so we will inherently lose people in the process in that way. Some of the things that we are doing, as far as outreach to applicants and females. We generally attend events and set up recruitment or informational booths at community events where there will be multiple groups of people, large amounts of women at any community events. We set up recruitment tables at malls, college campuses, we try to get create in the things that we do. We attend criminal justice programs and give classroom seminars, things like that. We maintain a very good working relationship with the military. We continuously attend their military transition assistance program courses. Then, we reach out to the individuals who are transitioning out the military to provide information on a career with the CHP. And, of course, females are attending those transition assistance programs as well. We post recruitment pamphlets at locations that may be frequented by females where ever those may be. We try to provide information to different locations. We conduct informational seminars and at these seminars we invite the applicants. We have the applicants maybe bring their significant others or family members to sit in on the seminar so they can also learn about the hiring process and things like that. And we'll also provide communication with a female officer, if it's requested, we'll provide that avenue if one's not there already we will provide an avenue for that. And facilitate an office visit or ride-alongs. And even so again with like you mentioned earlier, with the female officers so they can see the challenges themselves. And we also have an Explore Program. So this program is designed to try and reach the individuals as they're young, to gain their interest in law enforcement, so all of our offices, or a majority of our offices, have an Explorer Program. And we really count on the current Explorers to take that information back to their school and talk to their friends about it. And our PIOs public information officers they also spread the word at all the local schools trying to get the young high school students involved early so they can understand what is going to be expected of them if they wish to achieve as a career in law enforcement. I will say that one of the things that was said earlier, that normally individuals will kind of lean towards the things that they're familiar with. And having individuals in the uniform, which is our best recruitment tool, is our officers themselves reaching out to friends and family members, telling them about the job and maybe taking them on ride alongs and things like that. Word of mouth is our largest and most effective recruitment tool and if individuals are introduced or kind of affiliated with law enforcement as they are growing up, then that will give them more insight to the job itself and maybe influence them to come into law enforcement as well. Some of the changes we are doing to the recruitment program. We're kind of moving from applicant sourcing to applicant development. And that means, basically, recruiting not just to the test, but through the process. And how we're going to do that is we want our recruiters to engage the applicants more. Educate them on the process itself, educate them on the duties of the position, educate them on the Highway Patrol and the expectations of them. Encourage them, kind of serve as a mentor through the process. Not necessarily hold their hand but at least be that support structure for them if they don't have one or just serve as an additional support structure for them as they are going through the process. So there's no surprises so to speak. And then is political basically build loyalty and ensure that they understand what they are about to become a part of the CHP team environment. So they understand what that really means and talk about the professionalism of the agency and ensure that they understand that. We're going to be providing additional training to our recruiters. And how to communicate with this current generation. To give them a better tools to do that. We'll use social media, because that's the big thing now. So social media will be use by us and of course our website has a plethora of information about the department. We also conduct what we consider the Applicant Preparation Program. In this program basically, our recruiters, they provide test preparation resources because once an individual submits an application, normally they don't really know what to expect next. Or how to prepare for the written exam or the physical abilities test or things like that. So our recruiters have created a program where they will reach out to these individuals once they submitted application. Send them an e-mail, make telephone contact, and invite them to this preparation event so they can prepare for the physical workouts and things like that as they work through the hardening process. Our recruitment efforts do not exist in a vacuum. They are complemented by our department's larger public trust initiative, and one of the walls that might be put up is individuals lose the support structure because of the perception of the law enforcement in general. And we want to insure like Captain Desmond said that we are reflective of the communities that we serve and the communities have a large level of trust in us performing our duties. So, we definitely want to improve the relationship with the communities that we serve and we are doing our best to do that. Overall it was like at 17% attrition rate for men so, but it used to be higher as well for them. In 2016 we had, let me just give some accurate numbers here. We had over 20 females that graduated from the academy. Some of our progress, I think the captain touched on it a little bit, our academy itself, we have restructured our academy. Where as we have separated the post, training requirements, from the Department of training requirements. So, everyone will complete the post training requirements first. Which can alleviate some level of stress of trying to figure out both things at once. So with that we have seen a lower attrition rate recently since we've done that particular change. We use to see anywhere from a 30 to 70% attrition rate in our females and we are below 20% attrition rate now in our academy.
[{'start': 89, 'end': 104, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 152, 'end': 159, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 9156, 'end': 9163, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mario Gallego: good afternoon at this point. mario richard gallego on behalf of seui local 1000. local 1000 is the largest union representing state employees, a majority of our members are women. we do have some of the lowest paid classifications. our leadership, our president, and our three vice presidents all are women and one of our vice presidents tamika robinson sits on the pay equity task force on the, for the california commission on the status of women and girls alongside assembly member garcia. so as you can see, this is an extremely important issue for our union and so we thank you for the hearing today. we want to thank assembly member rodriguez and his comment and just say that from our perspective there is a gap in today's agenda and that is the voice of the rank-in-file employees. we hope the future hearings will include include those voices and we would absolutely love to partner with you on that, but i do want to provide just a little bit of what i think some of our members would have shared with you today. first, some of the research from our local shows that, and this is a secret, the state has some real problems filling certain classifications. at the same time, from our perspective, unions have a desire to help their members go up the. move up the chain. move up the chain, right? make more money.  so what we found was that, local 1,000 represents about 33,202 employees who earn less than $35,000 a year. and so it's hard to be an individual and survive on that much less a family. at the same time, we've found that there were 6,252 vacant state jobs. we feel that with some education, possibly through an apprenticeship, they can be available for these employees to move up and again, many of our members are women, so naturally this would go a long way to helping current female civil servants. will provide more, hopefully, future hearings. another program that was discussed earlier was a 20 20 program. local 1000 has that in our contract and that's a program that allows employees to work half time, go to school half time. there was a program mentioned i'll be into rn program, that's actually in your district to some number augment and the interesting thing there that was left out is local 1000 took the lead in creating that program. there were state funds, local 1000 approached the state to partner with the community colleges, with the california correctional health care services and we said, hey you have all, you have a need to fill in our impositions, let's partner, let's do this. we have this in our contract and so you ask some member rodriguez asked about the numbers there. this is a pilot program, we have 33 apprentices, 25 of them are women. so that's roughly 76% are women. 60% of those are women of color, that's 11 are api, five are african american, four are latino-hispanic, and the other five are white. there was mention about other programs as well. lastly, upward mobility was discussed a number of times and i think there were discussions bout leadership trading and other things, but what wasn't discussed was the core of what's needed to move up, which is classes, certifications and that requires funding and from what i know and what we know at local 1000, it is that these programs aren't funded to the extent to really make a dent in the pay gap that we're discussing today. so you know, to in my comments, i just want to add that you know, upward mobility programs are great, but they work the best when you partner with the unions that represents these employees. so we hope that as we work with the state and apprenticeship programs or whether these future hearings that the voices of employees are included at every single level. thank you very much.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 339, 'end': 354, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 486, 'end': 492, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 640, 'end': 649, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2583, 'end': 2592, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mia Downs: Hi, I have some information that I feel has not been touched on today, so I'd like to share with you. My name is Mia Downs, I'm a state civil servant and a member of ask me local 2620. There's evidence to suggest that government sanctioned gender discrimination is occurring in state civil service. I have over 20 years experience as an adoption specialist. We help create stable and loving adoptive families for California's most at risk youth. Our adoption program generates revenue for the state through fees charged to adopting parents. Legislators, please order an audit of CalHR's compliance of government code 19827.2, a law that addresses the problem of occupational segregation. The law instructs Kelly charge you asses its salary sitting practices based on the value of the work. Adoption specialists are the poster child regarding this law. It's an under valued occupation where wages have been depressed and those who are effected are minority and older women. There are 48 adoption specialists and all of us are women. All of my coworkers in my office are women of color except for me. We are required to have a master degree in social work and specialized skill level yet we earn 38% less than our county employees counterpart. We also earn less than many state employed males with jobs where the education requirement is a high school diploma. Upper mobility programs are great but they do not help professional women like me or my co worker who is a single mum who needs to have a second job in order to make end meet. There are many professional direct service jobs where upward mobility is not available,and anyway that is beside the point. The point is,that salary ranges should be analyzed and adjusted per this law. The 2014 gender earnings report has been cited repeatedly. The report is supposed to describe how CalHR is implementing this law. Yet there is no mention about the adjustment of salary ranges for female-dominated classifications. In the report, CalHR passes the buck onto the unions. However, CalHR State Labor Relations should have been bringing pay equity proposals to the bargaining table. I have a strong suspicion that this has never happened. Rather, State Labor Relations rejected gender pay equity proposals brought to them by our union. We need your help. We need a champion. California has a record of being on the leading edge of progressive change. California should lead by example and implement its gender laws for state civil servants especially in light of the current global women's movement. Please order an audit of CalHR regarding government code 19827.2. Thank you.
[{'start': 113, 'end': 122, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 706, 'end': 711, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Amico Taci: hi, my name is amico mario taci and i'm a registered dietitian, rd, with the department of state hospitals, dsh. in my profession, 95% are women, according to the survey from academy of nutrition and dietetics in 2015, dsh, it is presently about 97%. historically, the state dietitians were not under valued among allied health professionals. more recent lawsuit coleman and porter, have bumped up similar clinical position's salary, but others were left behind. after failed attempts to challenge the state adherence to its own personal policies, the rds asked me 2620 for help. equity adjustment for the rdu pursuit at the last two contract negotiation with inadequate result. even with the state own findings of significant disparity. furthermore the discrimination gets worst as you promote the management or the positions or director and napa manages a budget of 3.5 million? and is responsible for 184 employees in her department yet her salary is 28% below the salary of the program director with similar administrative duties minus the budget. another issue is the calhr classification code for the rd. we have repeatedly requested to be moved from the custodial food service code to the allied health professionals which best matches our job duties. the current code echoes back to the thing color mentality, devaluing women's contribution in the workplace. they are facing ways disparity and are being denied the ability to promote to higher ways positions due to gender bias. calhr does not follow its own policies on equitable pay. we are a discipline that should be protected by the provision of the sb 358, the california fair pay act, and used to bring up our salary by at least 20%. thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Belinda Gilmore: hi, my name is belinda amico gilmore and i am a licensing program analyst with the department of social services division of community care licensing and i'm here today to illicit your support to help us put an end into the pay inequity in women classifications. as a licensing program analyst, my primary responsibility is to ensure that the children who are placed in the licensed facility are in a safe and healthy environment and this is done by inspecting the homes to ensure that they are operating within title 22 compliance and another thing that we do, we require that every adult that's living in the home or in a home have a criminal record clearance through the department of justice, fbi, child abuse, and the child abuse is so that we can use it as a safety net to ensure or to verify that there is no registered sexual offender living in our homes. and there have been times when we come back and we find that you have a sexual offender that's living in a home and when we find that, the lpas, who predominately are women, all class, we have to go out to the home, so now we are acting in a role as a police officer to meet with the licensee to discuss having a sexual offender in the home. so we are like putting ourself in jeopardy because we have no weapons, we have no guns, we can't have pepper spray or anything. so we're going in a home with potential sexual offenders and putting us at risk. so we're asking that you look into the lpa code and look at our salary adjustment that needs to be done. thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Donna Keg: hello, my name is donna belinda keg and i'm one of approximately 55 child nutrition consultants that work at the california department of education. we are responsible for conducting administrative reviews of the federally funded child nutrition programs like the national school lunch program, the childhood care food program and the summer food program. 100% of funding is from federal dollars from the us department of agriculture. in our role we evaluate, analyze and audit financial records, food service systems, wellness policies and nutritional quality standards of food served to children and senior adults to determine compliance with state and federal regs. we are instrumental in identifying tens of millions of dollars yearly, which are mandated to be paid back to school food service programs, cde, and usda. we provide consultation and recommendations to school superintendents, chief business officers, school fees service directors, school boards and chief executive officers. to my knowledge, there has never been a male child nutrition consultant since inception of the jobs back in 1977. i have been a cnc for nearly 24 years. the job has also changed tremendously over the years, with greater and more complex consulting, auditing, and project management duties required. in table one that i have, our child nutrition consultant class is compared to non-female state civil service dominated classes with similar consulting project management and auditing tasks. the salary disparity range is between 18 and 47% higher, and the average salary scale is 32% higher for the cncs. today i counseled my daughters not to go into female dominated careers because of the equity disparity. i hope i do not have the same conversation with my granddaughters some day. i urge you to make gender equity salary increases to resolve the salary gap of female-dominated state civil service positions, such as the child nutrition consultant position. thank you for allowing me to share today.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carol Cole: Hi, good morning honorable Susan Eggman, Christina Garcia, and Freddie Rodriguez. My name is Carol Cole, I'm an individual program coordinator. I work for the Department of Developmental Services. I am also a chair, for AFSCME 2620. I was involved in a content negotiations, which was quite interesting. The gender pay did not come up as part of the topic in our discussions. We were told that the Department of Developmental Services because of their closure plan, that the monies were functioning and have a different fund. So we weren't able to discuss that fact. As an IPC, which is the acronym for Individual Program Coordinator,  for the developmental center, we work in the secure treatment setting, which is much like the present It's a forensic setting where we work with individuals who are duly diagnosed. They are coming from the jails or correctional centers. They are 1370, which we have prepared for competency to go to court usually they're committed to us as 6500 may stay with us as a treatment plan. The IPC state service is predominantly female. We have one male that works as a IPC. I think there's one and maybe one in Fairview, but the classification itself will mirror exactly the correctional counselor one, which is a custody requirement imposed in the inmate population. Additionally, the counselor one, requires the same amount of schooling. We have a four year degree, usually in human services or psychology. Our pay is an average from 3195 to 4195,which is barely above a typist which requires no schooling, an interesting, talked about the IDP which is our annual plan for to move forward and move upward. I have that every year and its, it acts in different positions to get more training when my time comes up I never afforded the opportunity to act in positions. Who gets those positions, I'll put down only the younger female or a male that is wanting to move out. So I personally have had that experience for many years now. I have over 40 years of state service. The correctional counselor officer's compensated at 55 85 to 83 80, so that's almost double the amount that we are doing the same work, it's almost parity.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 39, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 41, 'end': 57, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 63, 'end': 80, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 93, 'end': 103, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vanessa Perez: Hello, my name is Vanessa Perez and I'm a state employee and alumna of Sacramento State University where I got my Masters in Social Work. Growing up I had the belief that a higher education would result in a higher salary, but that is not the case because I chose a female dominated position. I'm a Latina, and the bread winner of my family and my husband and I have two young children. Prior to working for the state I was employed with Sacramento County Child Protective Services, but I accepted a position with the State of California, and with that I did take a pay cut. I love my job and it is my career as an adoption specialist, but I am disgusted with my salary. There are numerous state classifications that pay significantly more than what I receive and my fellow 47 female adoption specialists, and they only require high school education. Today I'm hearing a great deal of great ideas to bridge the gap, out reach education, employment development for women, but what is happening for my fellow 47 female state auction specialist and me in the State of California to have already attained our masters level education. We do our ongoing education and we have the skills and we receive pay that is lower than an secretarial position. Again, I love my career as a state adoption's specialist serving at-risk youth and their family. And assisting them in becoming recognized legally as a family through adoption but keep in mind, my job is not always happy and is not simple. My job comes with many risks. I work with both parents with untreated mental health, current alcohol and other drug or substance abuse, extensive criminal history, which is many times of violent and I meet them in the public and I have no mace, no pepper spray, no weapons. It is me and my pen and my clipboard to keep myself protected and I hope I get to go home to my family at the end of the day. Another part of my responsibilities is to visit children throughout the State of California to ensure their safety and that means many miles on the road and many hours in my car. Last year I was in two car accidents, that was over $20,000 in damages to my car and I can't even put a price on what it has done to my body and my health. I want to thank you for taking the time to hear what my colleagues and I have presented and I hope this gap in pay can be attained now and this is an issue that is something that my 4 year old daughter does not to fight for when she enters the work force. Thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kim Arikawa: hi, my name's kim donna arikawa and i am also an adoption specialist like my fellow co-workers that you've heard here. so i've been a social worker for about 20 years prior to working for the state as an adoption specialist, i was also a top protective services worker for the county and then early childhood educator before that. so i think at one point i just wanted to make an additional to the numerous comments is that i think some of the issues that we'll address here today focused on recruiting and retention of women in traditionally male dominated perception. and i think the third is a vital and important thing to look at, then i also don't want to lose side of the fact that the jobs that we do perform that are female dominated. i don't want that to be overlooked because i feel like some our abilities and skills set might be whether has been historically and institutionally discriminatory against women. so i feel like trying to shift women into a male dominated positions does not address the historical and institutional discrimination that faces women in female occupations today. and also does not address the fact that while we may want to increase diversity for occupations that are historically male dominated, we do also want to attract males to occupations that are traditionally female dominated. as adoption specialists, when we work with children and families, we don't have any males in our classifications. it is important for us, i believe to attract and retain males in our field. the children do not have male specialist and social workers that they have to look at to our male parents don't have that quarter also to work with, but i don't feel like that is going to happen is wages are historically oppressed in a discriminatory manner. so i just hope that that's something that is not also lost in the focus when you're looking at closing the gender pick up.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Will Kempton: thank you mr. chairman and members. kempton. retired. and i'm here at the invitation of the chair to talk about something that i had the pleasure in my career to have experienced in orange county as a way of explaining what sp1 is trying to do with respect to advance mitigation, and i think as we look at this bill and as you have the difficult task as members of the senate. considering what we're going to do, and how we're going to pay for this. we do know that we have to include reforms and efficiencies in the bill as well. people are going to be asked to dig into their pockets for more money, we're going to have to make sure they have the assurance there's going to be protection and dedication of the funds. that there's going to be accountability and transparency. and that we're going to have ways of doing things more efficiently, and i think that's what the advanced mitigation program provides. now, i had the privilege of serving as the ceo of the orange country transportation committee, for approximately four years from 2009 to 2013, and during that period while i did not develop this program, i was able to participate in the implementation and it was a very, very positive thing. i've had, i've been involved in a number of things in my 43 and a half year career. that i'm particularly proud of in terms of successes, the admin of self help counties, the proposition 1b, and the accountability, and transparency that went along with that program. but here in orange county, is a result of their local sales tax measure aim, there was a piece of that program that set aside $300 million out of the measure to pay for advance medication for the 13 free way projects that we're going to be build. and senator bates was very engage in this effort, and was in fact largely contributed to it's success. and while i am not representing orange county or the orange county transportation commission on this point. i just didn't want to relate my experience to you. so in 2005 in order to gain broad support for the local sales tax measure and to gain the engagement of the environmental community there was a proposal to create an advance mitigation proposal and the orange county officials including senator, bates, work with the coalition that represented more than 30 local state national environmental organizations. to provide upfront and key comprehensive mitigation for the effects of highway projects in exchange for a green light on permitting, and certainty in project scheduling, and implementation, and that is really something that is very important. so when we talk about reforms and efficiencies this is my view is not a reform, because reform implies there's something wrong and needs to be fixed. this is clearly an efficiency, a better way of doing business that's going to achieve better mitigation for project impacts, and the keys to the success of this program, or engaging stakeholders, or key stakeholders early in the process. and this approach in orange county, including the state, and federal wildlife agencies, a coalition representing 30 plus environmental groups, as well as elected officials. the program provided tangible results by acquiring conservation properties and funding habitat, restoration projects. the program has acquired to date over 13,00 acres of conservation properties, connecting wildlife corridors. and providing a key projection for properties around orange county. and this wasn't just a developer slipping off a piece of property that they wanted this was science based. and i know senator bates, will appreciate this, because she wanted the results science based. is this property, that we're thinking about purchasing as a mitigation, going to meet the test of providing mitigation for the specific project that we're looking at, and that, i believe, was achieved the program has also funded over 350 acres of habitat restoration projects. and it's the investments are protected in perpetuity by developing a conservation plan, which again analyzes those freeway projects to determine which of the projects deserve which mitigation. on a science based approach a demonstrating that the investments do, in fact offset environmental impacts. and it established an endowment to permanently funds stewardship of the preserves. so when you look at the kind of mitigation program we have an effect today in our environmental processes i call them piece meal. so you may have a wet land impact on a project that requires maybe a placement on a two-for-one or four-to-one basis. so if you've got an acre of wetlands what do you end up with? you end up with some set aside in the middle of a golf course with orange tape around it. and that to me is not necessarily effective mitigation. you provided a habitat, a refuge for animals and species. but these kind of investments that are being made in orange county really have a meaningful large scale impact. and that's the kind of program that's being proposed here in sb1. and i think it a truly is a win-win approach that serves the environment well provides the appropriate mitigation. and provides the community with a sustained of habitat protection are going forward.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1729, 'end': 1734, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2224, 'end': 2229, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3560, 'end': 3565, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Pat Proano: Good morning Mr Chairman, Members of the Committee. My name is Pat Proano. I'm Deputy Director of Public Works for LA County. And I'm pleased to have the opportunity to speak to you today and share information about LA County. Our Board of Supervisors voted in support of SB1 because it provides a comprehensive solution to transportation shortfalls of the county. And other local jurisdiction across the states are experiencing. And it enhances our ability to plan and collaborate with our cities. And other transportation agencies to meet the transportation needs of today as well as the challenges that we face in the future. As you know here in California transportation funding relies on the gas tax that's in use. And it's been in decline for many, many years. The declines of being particularly devastating to counties and cities. In LA County our revenues are projector revenues for fiscal years 16, 17 have decreased by approximately $46 million which a 25% decline. And this has been going on for the last five years. So the short falling funding has created the back log of payment maintenance and rehabilitation projects. And we've had to defer in LA County over $74 million of projects and system preservational work. In addition to this backlog there are numerous other enhancements to our local transportation system that are being placed on hold. Improvements that are vital to the safety and quality of life of our communities. We have many county wide initiatives to reduce emissions in traffic. Promote active transportation, and enhance the safety and efficiency across all modes of transportation. But this efforts are hampered because of the lack of funding. Some of the efforts are include Vision Zero, is an initiative that the county and Board of Supervisors has approved to strive towards zero deaths from fatalities. And to protect pedestrians and bicyclists. Green Streets Projects, which incorporated water capture, a pollution control infrastructure along with sustainable landscaping in our streets. We have a traffic signal synchronization project which uses new technology to reduce congestion and associated fossil fuel consumption and greenhouse gas emissions. Enhancing our urban forest with the drought we've lost a lot of trees as you've probably heard. And we do have a committment to replace those trees and enhance our urban forest. Community based act to trust petition projects. We have a pedestrian bicycle safety projects, transit facilities. You know the MTA has about 11 major transit projects with Measure M. But it's on us to tie in the local streets to the big transportation infrastructure. In additional to significant environmental benefits, the benefits to the local job creation are substantial. And we think that with an influence on transportational funding we'll be able to create a lot of jobs and put people back to work. This will help us expand our apprenticeship program. That we have in place and encourage local kids to come in and get jobs that are public works and construction related jobs. So on behalf of LA County I'd like to show our appreciation to all of you. And Governor Brown and the Assembly on your commitment to pass a transportation- We're the Senate. The Senate and the Assembly. So we fully support SB1 and I respectfully request your support of the bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 63, 'end': 73, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 3147, 'end': 3152, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Joshua Shaw: Mr. Chair and members, Joshua Shaw Executive Director of the California Transit Association representing all your local and regional public transportation agencies. Strong support of the bill for the reasons that Senator Beall answered in response to the Chair's questions. Thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 221, 'end': 226, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Chris Lee: chris jonah lee on behalf of the california state association of counties in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alex Gibbs: Hi Alex Gibbs, towns and public affairs. On behalf of the cities of Oakland, Walnut Creek, San Leandro, Carson, Heyward, Pismo Beach, Tulare, Dinuba. The counties of Imperial and Mariposa, the North Country Transit District, and the Merced Country Association of Governments in strong support.
[{'start': 3, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ed Berens: Ed Berens on behalf of the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Arriaga: Yes, I John Arriaga on behalf of the Transportation Agency of Monterey County. The County of Monterey, the cities of Watsonville, Salinas, Seaside, and Soledad. And also the league of California cities Latino caucus in support the bill.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Steve Baker: Steve Baker Aaron Read & Associates for the Professional Engineers in California Government in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 12, 'end': 22, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Quigley: Michael Quigley on behalf of the California Alliance For Jobs in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Jones: David Jones on behalf of Stockton, Glendale, and the cities of Marin county support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Shaw: Tim Shaw on behalf of the San Francisco Bay Area Rapid Transit District. BART does not have a position yet on the bill. We greatly appreciate the Senators inclusion of transit funding in this proposal. But we strongly feel that additional fundings is required to meet our public transportation needs. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 73, 'end': 77, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kirk Blackburn: Kirk Blackburn on behalf of the Western States Trucking Association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lucinda Wilcox: Lucinda Wilcox on behalf of the City of Sacramento in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Grace Childs: grace chris childs on behalf of urban counties of california in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Teresa Cooke: Good afternoon, Teresa Cooke on behalf of County of Alameda in support. On behalf of IOW Local 13-63-94, the Workers for the Ports of Long Beach and Los Angeles in Support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Filipe Fuentes: Filipe Fuentess on behalf of the Associated General Contractors of California in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Richard Markuson: Good morning, Richard Markuson for the American Society of Civil Engineers. 19,000 civil engineers in public and private practice in strong support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Watts: good morning chairmembers, mark grace watts on behalf of transportation california coalition of contractors in allied labor. sacramento regional transit district. the contra costa county and contra costa county transportation authority, finally on behalf of metrolink where they have a work with other as we try to refine that extra 5% for trans. thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roxanne Miller: roxanne mark miller on behalf of mayor sam liccardo our full council in san jose in full support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 39, 'end': 51, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Viviana Becerra: mr. chair, members, viviana on behalf of the santa clara valley transportation authority and san mateo county in strong support. thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Todd Bloomstine: Thank you Mr. Chair, Todd Bloomstine for the Southern California Contractors Association in support.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Moira Topp: Thank you Mr. Chairman and members. Moira Topp on behalf of Orange County Business Council in support.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrew Antwih: mister chairman and members, andrew roxanne antwih here on behalf of los angeles mayor eric garcetti and also on behalf of the los angeles county metropolitan transportation authority, both in support.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 87, 'end': 100, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Eric Thronson: thronson on behalf of the california transportation commission in support of this bill.
[]
Jeanie Ward-Waller: There we go. Jeanie Ward-Waller with the California Bicycle Coalition. I'm also here on behalf of about 75 other organizations that signed on to a letter that I think you all have received with some concerns on the bill. I want to say first that we thank Senator Bell and his staff and the Committee for working with us. It has been a long slog. We've been part of this conversation for about two years and would really like to get to a support place. We love that this bill includes ATP money. We also are in support of fixing our roads but I think we have some outstanding concerns with the vision that this bill sets for investing in transportation over the next 10 years. And the need to balance significant investment in roads, both in maintaining and in potentially building new roads with other needs such as air quality, which you just spent an hour and a half talking about, and other community concerns. Public health for low-income communities, their affordability and accessibility to transportation, and also how we're addressing climate change. We have five sort of outstanding principles that we're concerned with. And I'll just quickly go through them. I have some other colleagues here that will touch on some of those aspects as well. But I want to be clear about the five main things that we are concerned with. The first and most important is social justice. We want to ensure both that low income folks are benefiting from transportation and these investments. But also that we're reducing harms on those communities. Communities that are burdened by significant air quality, traffic, safety issues on our transportation system and we don't think that they're receiving enough of a priority, with how this funding will be spent. Certainly public transit has already been discussed. I think, not only are we concerned with investing in new transit capital, we're also concerned with continuing to maintain and operate the service we have. And just purely maintaining our transit systems, which also have a huge maintenance back-log, as the roads do. Tying these funds to climate change particularly where we're investing a goods movement core doors, places where we're going to see the biggest submissions freeways. I think we want to make sure that we're tracking those and meeting our climate targets to more accountability and expertise in our transportation decision making specially at the state Transportation Commission as one of our big concerns. And then you've talked about already about protecting CEQA is something that we are all in support of. Thank you.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 263, 'end': 267, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2529, 'end': 2533, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michelle Pariset: Hi! My name is Michelle Pariset. I'm with Public Advocates. Thank you very much. Thank you, Senator Beall for all of your hard work on this bill. Public Advocates is a nonprofit civil rights and advocacy organization. That's been working since 1978, one to among other things; increased equity in the build environment and advocate for public transit. We support the focus of SB1 on Fix It First and believe this should also apply to transit. We've heard from the California transit Association and others about the tremendous need for maintenance on our existing transit system on the order of $40 billion. Further, we believe that the uncertainty at the federal level around the Highway Trust Fund and whether transit will continue to see dollars from it should give us all pos. We've heard about that federal funds were cut to Caltrain for the electrification project, and we anticipate that we'll be seeing more cuts like this from the federal level. And we think that we should increase the transit funding in this bill to meet those needs. We propose amending SB1 to increase the vehicle license fee from 0.65 to 1%, thereby creating approximately $650 million additional that can be used for transit. We're not going to meet our climate goals unless we can get people out of their cars and the growth of our cities will be stifled without greater transit investment. We appreciate the tremendous amount of work that's already gone into this bill. And I know my organization or our partners have been working on it for over two years now and we look forward to supporting it with just a few amendments. Thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 100, 'end': 105, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
David Wolfe: It's not, Mr. Chairman, but I mean, that's always a discussion worth having. So Mr. Chairman, good morning. David Wolfe with the Howard Jarvis Taxpayers Association opposed SB1. And members, allow me to reiterate what I said last week in Senate transportation. And I know a number of you, including the Chairman, were in that Committee. Our message here is simple. And that's no new taxes, without necessary reforms. And by reforms, we don't mean the half [UNKNOWN] reforms found in SB1, necessarily. We don't want half the fees that truckers' pay going to road repair, we want all of it. We don't want some of the cap and trade fees motorists pay going to road repair, we want all of it. We want [UNKNOWN] environmental exemptions for existing road maintenance projects and eliminating redundant red tape. We want $9 billion of transportation bond funding going to constructing road projects and not to high speed rail which a majority of voters have proven that they don't want. And shown through any number of different polls. We want those things. Taxpayers demand these common sense solutions be taken seriously. And to this point, those reforms, that hasn't occurred. Those reforms just aren't present. Members, I think it's important to focus on how SB1 will harm taxpayers. The trade of permanent gas and car tax increases they get in exchange for largely ineffective spending reforms is far from equal. Renters in California spend 36% of their income on housing. 20% of the state lives at or below the poverty line. A third of the state is poor enough to qualify for medical. 11% of Californians, over 2 million people want a full-time job and for whatever reason can't get one. 10% of workers over the age of 16 in this state drive more than 60 minutes to get to work. Members, are these really the people we want to punish within each 12 cents a gallon gas tank when we already have the highest gas taxes in the nation? We owe it to the tax payers of California to do more than just pay [UNKNOWN] service to transportation spending reforms. We need real quality solutions first, as I said last week. Not new taxes and we do need those solutions protected by way of a constitutional amendment. And members again also as I said last week, don't just take my word for it but look at recent polling done by the California Chamber of Commerce where 80% of people surveyed said they wanted no new taxes without spending reforms first. Taxpayers must be met halfway. They deserve quality solutions that this Legislature can vote on today. And everything I mentioned can indeed be voted on today. These solutions that will get taxpayers home to their families faster, and not just at a greater quantity of new and aggressive taxes to the table. I ask for a no vote.
[{'start': 108, 'end': 119, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bonnie Holmes-Gen: mr chair, members, bonnie andrew holmes-gen with the american lung association in california. we appreciate the hard work of senator beall in this very complex bill and we appreciate the act of transportation, investments, and transit improvements that can be made with this funding. but as you know, there's a critical nexus between transportation and air quality. and we some opportunities here to better align transportation investments to our air quality and green house gas reduction goals. we're asking specifically for a change to eliminate the flat fee on [unknown] in the bill, because that is the discouragement to consumer purchases of electric vehicles. and to instead replace that with another provision that would extend fuel taxes on an energy equivalent basis to all transportation fuels. this is something that i think you could quickly work with uc davis. and other groups, similar groups to craft this provision, and it's not a huge change to the goals in the bill. it would accomplish the funding goals, but in a way that is spreading the fuel taxes across all fuel types and incentivizing the purchase of the most fuel efficient vehicles. secondly, we would appreciate a more clear language in the bill to align investments from this bill to our 2030 and 2050 greenhouse goals in air quality standards.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 133, 'end': 138, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dan Allison: my name is dan bonnie allison. i'm from sacramento. start with a personal story. i grew up in southern california at a time when we could not play outside in the afternoon. the air quality was so bad. and what changed in southern california is cleaning up cars and moving power plants out of the air basin. and you spent a lot of time this morning about the issue of cleaning up cars. but despite all that we've done, which is remarkable, we still don't meet air quality standards. why? it's in part because we have a transportation system that encourages driving. it encourages long distance freight hauling. it encourages freight on roadways instead of on rail. we've created a system that doesn't work for the state, and simply cleaning up cars is not going to make it work for us. we need a different vision. i don't see much of a vision in the bill. it starts out with a lot of things about, we'll make this a little better, we'll make that a little better, and there's a lot of things, and it does make better. but there's no real vision for changing our transportation system. to what we need to see in the future and i'd like to see that show up in the bill. where are we going with our investments and transportation? that's it.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Magavern: Thank you. Bill. Mr. Chairman and Members, Bill Magavern at the Coalition for Clean Air. We appreciate Senator Beall's commitment to public transit and to active transportation. But we support the amendments that have been recommended by the Bike Coalition and the Lung Association. And we also suggest that the bill be amended so that the Trade Corridor funding be contingent on adherence to the guiding principles of the Sustainable Freight Action Plan, which was published by the administration last year. Thank you
[{'start': 11, 'end': 15, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 43, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 111, 'end': 116, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Don Anaire: hi, don dan anaire with the union of concerned scientists. also wanted to raise a concern about the proposed flat fee for electric vehicles. we support long term funding solutions for the highway and road funding and as well as having all vehicle users contribute to funding. we think the current proposal addresses the inflation issue for funding long term. but there's two other issues where modifications could support a long term solution. one is indexing the vehicle fuel fee to overall vehicle efficiency, as our vehicles get more efficient to meet our oil savings and climate goals. we want to keep our road funding intact and also to set the fee based on oil fuels and energy equivalent basis, so all vehicle fuels are treated equally.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Jay: Thank you. Good afternoon Mr. Chairman, Mike Jay with Pacific Merchant Shipping Association, represent Ocean Marine Terminal Operators of California's public ports. We'd be here in support, but we have major concern with an amendment to the programming language of the trade quarter infrastructure fund. Which will effectively reduce or eliminate most port funding out of that funding source. It's predicated on operational change and the language, which will,not allow, any future displacement of jobs, from efficiency improvements, which is really, quite vague and problematic. We've spoken with the author and he has offered to help, but that language unfortunately is the one that's present version of the bill. And we like this have that taken care of going forward. It will restrict our ability to both make investments and infrastructure but also in a lot of different environmental improvements including zero emission technology infrastructure equipment.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Phoebe Seaton: thanks, phoebe don seaton north leadership counsel for justice accountability based on san joaquin valley, coachella valley representing lower income californians committed to addressing climate, environmental, and transit and transportation deficits align our comments with california by coalition. we oppose unless amend. i'm also here on behalf of other organizations who have signed onto this letter cortiva la salut catholic charities. several others throughout the state and clcd. thanks so much. thank you.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: Good afternoon. Kyle Jones here from Sierra Club California would also like to lend our comments about the letter that Phoebe just mentioned. But also strongly echoed the comments made by UCS regarding the fee structure for fuels. Thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 119, 'end': 125, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 188, 'end': 191, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kula Koenig: good afternoon, good morning actually, i am actually here in support of the bill, i missed the supporting comments earlier. my name is kula phoebe koenig with the american heart association, the american shock association, we support the bill and we are happy to see the funding [unknown]active transportation program. understand the importance of promoting biking and walking as we're wanting people to live hard, healthy lives. obviously, we'd like to see more funding for public transit in there, as some of their opposition as said. but we're here in support of the bill.
[{'start': 135, 'end': 153, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kurt Karperos: Good morning Chairman Weickowski, Senators. I'm Kurt Karperos. I'm Deputy Executive Officer of the California Air Resources Board. To follow Professor Frank's comprehensive background in history of the Clean Air Act and its waiver and authorization provisions. I'll provide a brief overview of CARB's mandates, the state's air quality policy portfolio and a path forward. The Legislature established CARB in 1967 as the first air agency of its kind predating the EPA. Over our 50 year history, California has been at the forefront of air pollution control in the nation. Today the Legislature has tasked CARB with three key mandates. Achieving health based air quality standards for ozone particulate matter and other air pollutants under the state and federal clean air acts. Reducing public exposure to toxic air contaminants such as diesel particulate matter and reducing greenhouse gas emissions to 1990 levels by 2020. And further reductions to 40% below 1990 levels by 2020 and then 40% below 1990 levels by 2030. In my testimony today I'll focus on the work to meet federal quality standards. However it's important to note that CARB is working to develop programs simultaneously, reduce smog forming, diesel particulate and greenhouse gas emissions. The Clean Air Act directs EPA to set health based standards and review them regularly to ensure they're based on the latest science and remain health protective. This has lead EPA to set a series of increasingly stringent health protective standards over time. CARB's current plan in focus is on meeting the federal ozone standard and the annual fine particulate matter of PM 2.5 standard. California has a long and successful history of meeting these health based standards. Of the state's 19 areas, the 160 to the one hour and original eight hours on standards. Only four exceed those standards today. Still, the South Coast and the San Joaquin Valley are the two areas of the state that face the nation's most critical air quality challenges. These regions are the only two areas in the nation within extreme non attainment classification for ozone, and they also record some of the nation's highest PM 2.5 levels. However even these areas have made notable progress. The valley now meets the one hour ozone standard and is making significant progress towards attaining the eight hour ozone standard. Fine particulate pollution levels in the valley have dropped 20% since 2001. The South Cost one's majored one hour ozone values above the standard on over 200 days per year. Today it is dropped to less than 20. Similarly the number of days over the eight hour standards has been cut in half since 1990. This progress is occurred at the same time the California's population has increased by 25% and the States' economy has continued to grow and prosper. Our economy is now the world's sixth largest and job growth in the States has out paced the national rate. This while pursuing the nation's most aggressive air quality and climate policies. Looking forward, EPA estimates the new 70 parts per billion ozone standard would save Californians an estimated $0.4 to $1.4 billion per year when accounting for both the costs of reducing emissions, and the avoided costs of health care, lost work days, and low productivity, and other impacts of pollution. EPA's estimates for attaining the annual PM 2.5 standard are even more compelling, showing a net benefit in 2020 of at least $3.3 billion in California, with over 90% of the benefit coming from fewer premature deaths. With its health based standards, meaningful deadlines and requirements for comprehensive plans, the Clean Air Act, the cooperative federalism that Professor Frank described has been the key tool for achieving this combined air quality and economic success. Going forward, collective efforts involving the Legislature, air districts, environmental groups, and regulated industries will be critical to building on this success. Achieving California's multiple environmental goals will require comprehensive actions to transform the technologies and fuels we use, the design of our communities, and the way we move people and freight throughout the state. In partnership with the Legislature, these efforts will continue California's leadership role both nationally and internationally. As Professor Frank outlined, while EPA has primary authority over new engines for cars, trucks, locomotives, and some farm and construction equipment, the Clean Air Act allows California to seek a waiver from the EPA to enact more stringent standards from these large pollution sources. Many, though not all, of CARB's activities rely on existing waivers. And the future application of this authority will continue to be critical to California's continued progress towards clean air. Next month CARB will consider adoption of a mobile source strategy that outlines the coordinated suit of actions to meet federal quality standards. And at the same time achieve greenhouse emission targets, reduce petroleum consumption, decrease toxic health risks from transportation emissions. This strategy maps out a mobile source regulatory agenda to support the multiple planning efforts currently under way in response to state and federal directives. These efforts include the state implementation plan, which includes elements in the mobile source strategy necessary to meet Clean Air Act requirements and to achieve an 80% reduction in smog form in particulate emissions. The 2030 target scoping plan update charts the state's pathway to achieve the 2030 greenhouse gas reduction target in SP32. These actions will also establish a trajectory for meeting the longer term 2050 targets. The short-lived climate pollutant reduction strategy establishes the plan to reach the goals for reduction of black carbon, methane, and fluorinated gases as directed in SB604 and SB1383. And finally, the California Sustainable Freight Action Plan is a multi agency effort to improve freight efficiency, transition to zero emission technologies, and increase the competitiveness of the California's freight system. The work ahead is to implement these plans over the coming years. Since while we've accomplished a great deal already. Approximately one-third of California's 38 million residents still live in communities that exceed the Federal ozone and PM 2.5 standards. And the public's exposure to toxic diesel particular matter is too high, especially in disadvantaged communities near freight facilities such as ports, rail yards, and distribution centers. So what are the elements of a path forward? It's critical that California ensures that regulated vehicles and non-road engines and equipment are fully compliant with applicable standards from the time they are first sold and throughout their life as they are driven and operated in the state. The Volkswagen incident has highlighted the need for us to remain alert and to vigorously administer and, as needed, modify our certification and compliance programs to discover and remedy, quickly, situations that can have significant adverse air quality impacts. And while the state may not receive the same degree of collaboration in the near term, as Professor Frank explained, we anticipate that our existing waivers, those are already granted for us to enforce existing California emission standards, will not be significantly compromised. Consequently, California's current on and off-road vehicle emission regulations, which set standards many years into the future, should remain into effect. The regulatory actions and the plans I spoke of previously, namely the mobile source strategy, the state implementation plan, the scoping plan. The short lived Climate Pollutant Plan and The Sustainable Freight Action Plan will keep California on the path toward healthful air and continue to provide national and international climate leadership. The scientific, technical, and regulatory capacity of CARB and the air districts developed through decades of implementing the Clean Air Act will provide the foundation for moving forward and the clear arguments for future waivers. And partnerships with states that it can opt in to California's vehicle standards will continue to provide national support for California's actions. California's own Clean Air Act, adopted by the Legislature in 1988, became a model for amendments to the federal act in 1990. Today, the California's legislatures leadership in integrating the state's climate and air quality efforts is a path towards the future that can be copied elsewhere. Starting with a waiver authority first given in the 1967 under quality act to today's zero emission program with its growing number of ZEV's nationally and internationally, California has led the way. And we are fully committed to continuing to work with you to provide the same ongoing leadership and address our state's air quality challenges. Thank you and I'd be happy to answer any questions
[{'start': 22, 'end': 32, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 48, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 151, 'end': 156, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1284, 'end': 1287, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3689, 'end': 3694, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4329, 'end': 4334, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7215, 'end': 7220, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Philip Fine: thank you chairman, members of the committee. my name is philip kula fine. i'm the deputy executive officer at south coast air quality management district for the planning and rule making division. and the importance of the federal approval of the california's clean air act waivers needs to be viewed in terms of the significant air quality challenges and health challenges facing californians and specifically the south coast air basin's residents, which make up over 40% of the state's population. it would be the fifth largest state in the us if you just look within the south coast air basin. and as you heard earlier, between 3 and 4000 premature deaths are caused every year by poor air quality in our basin, plus hundreds of thousands of hospital visits and lost work days and lost school days. as a local air district, we continue to do everything within our primary authority to reduce emissions from the stationary sources. but between 80 to 90% of our air quality problems come from emissions outside of our direct authority which are mobile sources. thus, it is impossible to achieve these federal ambient clean air standards and provide healthful air to our residents without significant emissions reductions from those mobile sources. the federal clean air act gives primary jurisdiction over most of those sources to the federal government. but the waiver process has allowed california to be more aggressive to address the most significant of these mobile sources and right now the most significant of those are heavy duty trucks. california's actions under the waivers have not only achieved accelerated and necessary emission reductions in california and in south coast, they have driven technological development for low emitting vehicles that, in turn, drive national standards that further reduce emissions within california from such sources as trucks coming in from out of state that would be subject to federal regulation. but without approval of the california waiver, the most important tool, the clean air act waiver, the most important tool california has in our fight for clean air will be taken away. our air quality management plans continue to include measures with significant emissions reductions that will require existing approval of waivers, as well as potential new federal approvals of waivers for california regulations. i do want to note though, that even with these approved waivers and state regulations, the air quality challenge is still daunting and state regulations will not be enough. we will still need actions from the federal government to reduce emissions that are solely under their control. that are not even subject to these waivers, such as trains, and planes, and ships. we recently petitioned along with many other states. we petitioned epa to initiate rule making for a national ultra clean low-nox standard for heavy duty trucks. and they responded affirmatively, committing to begin the rule making process in the near future. we sincerely hope the epa fulfills this commitment. as our current aqnp demonstrates, we will also need significant funding to accelerate the deployment of clean technologies in a way that cannot be be achieved quickly enough through regulatory actions alone, both for the california waiver sources as well as the federal sources. so we look forward to working with the legislature to identify sources of funding that are not born disproportionately by californians, especially those that can at least afford it within california. for example, our entire country benefits greatly from the goods movement through our region, but we suffer in southern california and around our ports, the impacts to our health. concepts such as a container fee on imports can help internalize these external costs that are not currently being properly accounted for in the price of goods in other areas of the country. i want to emphasize the air quality in the most populated areas of california is still the worst in the nation. and it is clearly unfair to expect california to achieve federal standards while further limiting the authority we have to do so. and if we don't meet those federal standards by the deadlines that are set up under the federal clean air act. we are subject to federal sanctions, including the loss of billions of dollars in transportation funding. so in closing, our local and state tools for achieving federal standards are already reaching their limitations. we need to be adding tools to the toolbox, not taking them away.
[{'start': 57, 'end': 73, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Afif El-Hasan: Good morning, how are you today? I am well. All right. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee for having me here today. My name is Afif El-Hasan, I'm a pediatrician. I'm also on the governing board of the American Lung Association. I'm an asthma Doctor and I also am on the Environmental Justice Advisory Group with the Air Quality Management District, the South Coast Air Quality Management District. I have a lot of passion for air. I was born here in California and in reference to Senator Stone's comment about the smog days. I remember smog alerts and I brought a picture which I think has already been passed around of what our childhood looked like for anyone who is native of the LA area. I was from Hawthorne, so I have a great deal of passion in wanting clean air. Good news is that 70% that as opposed to the 70s, we are down to half the ozone levels that we used to have at that time. And that's even despite the increased traffic and population, so that's very heartening but we certainly have a long way to go. According to the American Lung Association's State of the Air report, we still have 32 million Californians and that's 84% of the population still living in counties where at least part of the year is spent with a poor air quality. Very unfortunate but it has a huge impact because such a large population still lives in areas that are classified as having bad air either particulate or from ozone. This covers about 7,300 deaths that we see in the state because of fine particulate metal pollution. And if we want to talk about numbers in terms of what we need to get to for healthy air, we would probably estimate that we would need an 80% decrease in the amount of particulate pollution we have now in the LA area. And about a 50% decrease in pollution in the San Joaquin Valley area in order to reach levels of air that are considered healthy and sustainable for our bodies. Kudos to AB 32. By 2020, I think that our estimates are that about there'll be a $4.2 billion savings in terms of health savings because of legislation and the improvement of air and that also comes out to about 770 fewer deaths from pollution and about 76,000 less sick days from pollution as well. I am an asthma Doctor. There are 2 point million asthmatics in California, 700,000 of which are children. This is not the kind of job security I was hoping for. I'd prefer not to have that problem. I'd prefer that they all be healthy. In a shout out to my adult colleagues, I will mention that there are 16,500 lung cancer cases per year in California, and about 13,500 deaths from lung cancer. Of special note and this is very important most lung cancer is not from smoking and obviously pollution plays a huge part in that, and a lot of people that we see in our clinic, in our practice, since I do work with my adult medicine colleagues, they are people who do not smoke. And actually they bear a stigma because it's assumed that they do smoke and unfortunately the way people perceive things, there is less sympathy for that group of people which obviously is unjustified. And we also have 1.4 million COPD patients in those state as well. Also, many of whom have never smoked. The only other pollution is our other culprit with all of that. Going through in terms, the best thing that I could really talk about is my observations, my personal observations. In terms of what I see and I am an asthma Doctor. I obviously do a lot of general pediatrics as well. But one of the biggest concerns that I have is a USC study that was done over a 20 year period which actually showed that people who live or children who live in bad areas or bad pollution areas have less lung development than children who live in areas with healthy air. This is of huge issue. In your 20s and 30s you may not feel it, just like you wouldn't feel if your kidneys were slightly incapacitated. But as a person grows older you start to feel this more and more because our lungs naturally degenerate over time, a little bit as we age. Now, we are hailing all the medical technology miracles that are making are lives longer, and it will become a very serious public health issue if children are sitting in bad air. Not developing their lungs completely and then we have to deal with that in capacity. Their inability to get a good breath in in their 70s, 80s as we notice that they grow older. So it is imperative that a child be allowed to have their lungs growth to their capacity, incredibly important. We will feel the devastation now in their lives and I'll talk about that in a minute. But we also have to look to the future and we will see problems 70, 80 years from now. Because those children could not grow up in areas where there were healthy air. I will bring to you an example of an eight year old asthmatic that's in my clinic. And this is not a unique case, this is something that I see every day, this is an eight year old who is an asthmatic, who lives next to the freeway. He wants to walk to school with his friends, but the dilemma is that he can't walk to school. Because if he walks along the road, he's going to get an asthma attack. And kids walk to school between usually 7 and 8 in the morning which happens to also be the high traffic times on the roads. So it's very unfortunate for him from a social level and from a fitness level in that he can't walk to school. A very simple act, something we all remember doing as children. But is for him, a potential risk of an asthma attack and other problems. This same patient who once again lives next to the freeway wants to do sports in the evenings. He wants to play soccer, he also likes to do track and field. And this same patient actually cannot do that as well, because when do kids play sports? They do it after school, until sundown which is also high traffic times unfortunately. So this is someone who has to pick an indoor sport or do nothing at all. Confound out with the fact that right now our best asthma medications are inhaled steroids which we used to manage chronic asthma are non generic. So huge cost, in this particular kid, I'm not going to say that pollution lead to his asthma. But the pollution that lays made it worse, and has lead to the point where I have to put him on a chronic medication. And that becomes quite a cost burden for this family. And then I've had the family come up and tell me, well we have to turn our air conditioner on in the summer, because we'd like to leave our windows open. But we can't, because our son will get an asthma attack. And the hottest days of the year are often some of the high pollution days as well. So we very often find they're paying extra for the medication, paying extra to keep a child indoor and use the air conditioner which is not cheap. And very often have to make sure both members of the family have a car. Figure out a way to drive them to school, so they don't walk down the road and get an asthma attack. As a pediatrician, I'm also dealing with obesity. It's a huge problem in this country both for adults and with children. And what do we tell our obese patients, we tell them eat healthy and exercise. What if you can realistically exercise and outside, in a safe manner without compromising the lungs? And this isn't one case, this is something I see a lot of. And I see it not just in areas next to the freeway, but anywhere, since air doesn't just linger in one place, it goes throughout. So parents are forced to find them to modulate when their children can go out if they can go out at all. And make a lot of other lifestyle and economic choices in order to accommodate the disease. Which doesn't need to be bad as it is had the air been healthier unfortunately. One of the other issues that has been brought up before is also the particulate matter that's being inhaled. Specifically, the PM 2.5, which are particles that are 2.5 millionths of a meter in size. And the problem with these particles is they actually can get pass the bodies natural defences or the lung's natural defences. So they can get into the very bottom, the very end of the lungs or the alveoli are, which is also where the bloodstream is exposed to the lungs. That's how oxygen and air flow is managed back and forth with the body. And those particles all of a sudden get into their bloodstream and into the rest of the body. So when we talk about air quality and the lungs. We're actually talking about the rest of the body as well. Because once these particles get into the blood stream, you actually can get increase incidents of cardio vascular disease. Diabetes, and different kinds of cancers besides just the lung cancer. So that is a serious and legitimate concern, there are plenty of public health studies to correlate high levels of pollution in areas within those populations. We'll also have high levels of cardio vascular disease and cancer rates that go beyond just the regular lung cancer rates. So very significant and costly public health issues as well. Fortunately, we are seeing improvements of the Clear Air Act, has certainly been a blessing that has already been discussed. AB32, SB32, and SB1383 have certainly been very instrumental in improving our health, certainly much better than what that picture is showing. But as I mentioned, we certainly have a way to go. The clean air future report that was put out by the American Lung Association, I believe was given to you. It does mention in the report that the environmental and health economic burden from smog in 2015 was about $15 billion. And if we quantify that, if you have a car which takes a 16 gallon capacity for fuel, that comes out to about $18.42 per fill up of gas. In climate change, health issues, any damage that has done that is how much damage a tank of gas cause us. $18.42 for a 16 gallons, so if you have an SUV, it's certainly more unfortunately. The zero emissions report that was also put out by the American Lung Association, I believe that was sent as well. If not, we'll certainly get it to you. Hopes to by 2050, make most of our vehicles zero emission. And with that, we actually do expect a 90% reduction in emissions and 85% reduction in health impact because by 2050, by changing over to zero emission vehicles. And we believe the 10 states that are moving in that direction, if all of them were to achieve coal by 2050. We would actually see a $33 billion yearly savings in health and climate savings about 20 billion of which would be in health savings alone. So I come here today and I'm basically giving witness to what I'm seeing and then dilemas that my colleagues are also seeing on a daily basis. Obviously for adults and children, it does start at birth, and we are seeing effects and are worried all the way through. To the elderly and certainly are worried about all of the Californians to reach face off their lives. And certainly we want to support anything we can do to maintain and prove upon the clean air act and upon air quality in the state. And I'd like to thank you very much for letting me talk.
[{'start': 155, 'end': 168, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 517, 'end': 522, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kevin Hamilton: Good morning members of Committee, Mr. Chair, my name is Kevin Hamilton, I am the chief Executive Officer from Central California Asthma Collaborative. I'm also a registered respiratory therapist and have worked with asthmatic patients for most of my career. For 17 years, I spent in Trauma and Intensive Care in South County in Los Angeles, the County Hospital and in County Hospital in Fresno. And then since 1991, running asthma programs that actually send community health workers into homes to translate what their Doctor has told them in the Doctor's office where they often don't quite understand instructions they've been given. Especially for environmental justice communities who often experience various disparities in health and both in language barriers as well. I'm also on the ARB's environmental justice Advisory Committee working n the 2030 scoping plan. I was on the Committee as well for the 2020 scoping plan. And I sit on the San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District's Environmental Justice Advisory Group as well and was a founding member of that and have been on that Committee now for nine years. And I am Fresno county's environmental rep to the Community Advisory Committee for the San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District since 2001. CCAC a little bit about us. We envision the San Joaquin Valley and like you California where the health of every resident is our foremost concern. We envision environments and systems of support for health that are reflected in the resources, information, activities and policies of every community. And that's our mission and that's what we do. We use tools. We accomplish this primarily through the intelligent and expeditious use of tools. And that's the way I think of this whole thing. From very simple tools such as spacers and inhalers that help control the scourge of asthma that's spreading through our environmental injustice in low income communities of color. To complex tools of government that ensure the same communities a voice at the very highest level of government that allow me to sit here and talk to you today. That brings us to today's topic. California's right to submit and receive waivers to the clean air act is enshrined in almost 50 years of history. Its existence recognizes the state's leadership both in the arena of air quality and climate change while respecting its long struggle to balance. One of the largest economies of the world against the potential negative health impacts such an economy can inadvertently create. These health impacts are primarily born by the workers and their families, without who, this economy would not exist. People who despite the good work and intentions of its government, often do not equally share in all the benefits this economy produces for our state and the nation. People who often lived adjacent to and are clustered around main transportation conduits, through which the goods and services needed to support this economy must pass. Often bearing the largest health and subsequent economic burden. Of its air pollution. So the California Waiver Right is one of several rights through the smog and haze of that pollution. Slowly transforming our air from the dirtiest in the nation to the cleanest. Without that waiver, we wouldn't have made the progress that we've made today. So through the [UNKNOWN] use of this way of process and the aggressive leadership of government in all levels and partnerships with the private sector in choice and community members which I have experience personally at the ARB. And in other sectors working now with transportation and energy, we find that these relationships are absolutely critical to moving this ball forward. And the fact that community members are invited to that table and working actively in this processes is a huge benefit to all of us. So, some of these impacts are slowly, but surely, not only being mitigated but reversed. Pass waiver submissions have been directly responsible for dramatically decreasing automobile and diesel tailpipe emissions in proving vehicle technology, and ushering in the first decade of viable zero and near zero emission transportation alternatives. That's a huge thing. That's just an amazing mark in history that history will note 50 to 100 years form now and say they did that then because that is remarkable. I'm 63 years old. When I look back at transportation when I got my first car, a 1965 Ford Galaxy. It looked a lot differently that a car that I drove here today, a Ford Edge. So, maybe not the most emission clean car in the world but a hell of a lot cleaner than that Galaxy was, I'll tell you right now. And it's because of the progress that was made right here in this state. Starting with Tom Cahill over at UC Davis with the catalytic converter and moving forward using this waiver to clean up diesel and vehicle gasoline emissions in the state from transportation. So we have to protect that right. And this is not to say the work is anywhere near complete. In fact, we have far to go before we can stand before our communities and say, you're save from pollution generated by massive transportation needs. That you can, you look forward to actively and equally and participate in this new technology future. So this is our challenge before us and before you folks here today in government. How do we bring these communities to the point where they can all participate in this clean air future we envision? How can they all have an electric vehicle parked in their parking lot? Or near zero vehicle in their garage, in their apartment building? That's the challenge, I think, we're facing right now, as we work through this scoping plan. And that you will never again, we want to promise them, that they will never again have to sacrifice their health or that of their loved ones in order to house, clothe or feed them. There are people, right now, working in jobs where the emissions from that work are actually negatively impacting their health. That needs to stop, we have the technology to do that. We need to move that ball forward. We can honestly state though, that through this process we are changing the character and toxicity of transportation related emissions and aggressively moving toward a clean air future for all Californians. In closing, I want to thank the Committee and it's members for your hard work and dedication to all Californians. And ask you continue to fight for our right to clean air and health for all.
[{'start': 57, 'end': 71, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 4746, 'end': 4756, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bill Magavern: good morning mr. chairman and members bill philip magavern with the coalition for clean air. i want to thank the committee for paying attention to this really important issue. you had some excellent testimony this morning, so i just want to make some brief suggestions on where we go from here. i think first of all this legislature should call on california's congressional delegation to make it an urgent priority to preserve california's authority under the clean air act to set standards that are tougher than the federal standard. we know there are those who would like to take that away. so it's very important that we defend that authority. secondly i think the air resources board and the air districts should continue to call on usepa to set strong national standards. i completely agree with the testimony of mr fine from south coast. we actually have supported their petition for a low-emission truck standard. and we do need federal help to control some of these sources of emissions that the federal government can best address. but thirdly and finally, we need to be ready for the very real possibility that this administration will not be providing the help that we need. and in that case, this legislature in the air resources board needs to be ready to fill the void left if the federal government retreats from clean air and we need to then set our own tougher standards, for trucks, for cars, for off road engines. and also be ready with the attorney general to go to court, to defend our right to set those standards.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 822, 'end': 826, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Justin Chang: all right, good morning mr chairman and committee members. my name is justin jonah chang and i'm a senior, and the student board member at san marino high school which is located near pasadena, california.
[{'start': 70, 'end': 88, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Kang: Good morning, my name is Amy Kang and I'm a senior at Troy High School which is located in Fullerton joint union High School District in Fullerton, California.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shayma Yallapragada: Good morning as well. My name is Shayma Yallapragada, I'm senior at Torrey Pines High School in the San Diego unified High School District which is located in San Diego, California.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maya Giant: Good morning honorable Chairman Allen and Committee. My name is Maya Giant and I am a senior at Mira Loma High School from the San Juan Unified School District in Sacramento, California. Aside from education being one of my major passions, I hope to study mechanical engineering at a four year University. And my name is What year are you in high school? I'm a senior. A senior, okay.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 37, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 64, 'end': 74, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Safuon Khan: And my name is Safuon Khan and I'm a senior at Troy High School in the Fullerton Joint Union High School District in Fullerton California. I plan on majoring in business administration with an emphasis on marketing, and eventually earning a masters in business administration.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Devia Bott: good morning, mr chairman and distinguished committee members. my name is devia justin bott and i am from mira loma high school in sacramento. in the future i would like to continue my education in college and obtain a master's degree but i am still exploring different job and major options.
[{'start': 74, 'end': 91, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gopika Elpercada: my name is gopika devia elpercada, and i am a freshman at torrey pines high school in san diego. and i would hope to become a lawyer someday, and hopefully have a law firm of my own.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Miley Hu: my name is miley. i am from shasta high school in redding. and in the future i hope to study both biomedical engineering, and global studies because i envision a future for myself where i can unify science, and entrepreneurship with philanthropy. i would like to personally and for my group thank each of you for granting us your time to consider our position.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rachelle Lu: Good morning, Mister Chairman, esteemed Senators and honored guests. My name is Rachelle Lu, I'm a sophomore at South Pasadena High School.
[{'start': 80, 'end': 91, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Para Rallen: And I'm Para Rallen, also from South Pasadena High School. I hope to be a number of things, but I want to major in public health, and I'm also sick, so please bear with me.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Aurille Adams: it is in, it's by fresno so it's an hour away. okay. i live in porterville, so. porterville, great. good morning to our honorable chairman and committee members. thank you in advance for listening to our proposal for a bill. my name is aurille gopika adams. i'm from porterville, california i attend harmony magnet academy. and in the future i would like to pursue a career in administration, business or marketing. and i'm in district 14. i am annie hu. who's do the senator? actually, andy.
[{'start': 236, 'end': 256, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 445, 'end': 453, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 487, 'end': 491, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Annie Hu: I am Annie Hu, a junior from Diamond Bar High School, Senate District 29 in Walnut Valley Unified High School District
[{'start': 5, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christa Hoo: good morning my name is christa i am a citizen from china and i currently go to school in aorist school located at bucks county pennsylvania. the. wow. i'm not lost and the reason for me to be at this conference is not only for my passion to voice student input on education. but also for this opportunity being one of the kind that couldn't find else where in this nation or even in the rest of the world.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nandeeni Patel: My name is Nandeeni Patel. I am a senior at Vista Murrieta High School in Murrieta, California. And I'm also the state President of the California Association of Student Councils.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julia Greensfelder: And good morning, Esteemed Chair and Committee Members. My name is Julia Greensfelder, and I'm the governmental affairs policy director for the California Association of Student Councils. I am a senior at Albany High School in Albany, California. And I plan to major in public policy in college.
[{'start': 67, 'end': 85, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Blade Oestreich: good afternoon and thank you for holding today's hearing and listening to my testimony. my name is blade jonah oestreich, i'm 24 years old. currently i hold position as a policy assistant at california youth connection and also run my own business and a father of two and i'm married already. my future goals are to move up in my organization that i'm working in right now. and yeah, that's it on my intro. today is the first time i have ever shared my experience of being placed in the juvenile justice system from kinship care. i think there are things that are different about my experience from many other foster youth but also some things in common that you have the future, the power to change. and that i hope you will take action on. i know my life has turned out well but a lot of that is because of my own advocacy and focus, and it doesn't turn out that way for most youth. i grew up in kinship care living with different relatives. i did not have a lot of support. i never really received parenting. i only saw a social worker twice over all the years that i was in kinship. my relatives only worried that i would come home by curfew, but often i didn't get support or guidance i needed. i didn't have anyone to teach me self sacrifice or self discipline. and so i started trying to fill the void with making people like me. i was eager and hungry to be liked and to prove myself as being the strongest and the best. i didn't have anyone who i felt saw me as the best. like i do for my son today, i always support and try to get him to the place that i wasn't as a youth. i didn't have anyone who i've felt supported all my decisions. i tried to fill my emptiness with people. this resulted in behaviors that weren't normal for me and hanging out with the wrong people. eventually, i ended up getting a year for someone else's crime. i didn't want to talk to anyone about it. and i didn't want to share the real story, i just decided to take the punishment. i felt that even if i was honest, the result would be the same. i spent six months in juvenile hall while my case was in court, and then i served an extra six months on top of that when it was finished. it was pretty scary being in juvenile hall. i would go to sleep having vivid dreams and being out and having fun with my family and siblings, waking up to the same brick wall every single day. the feeling of having nothing of your own there, not having your own clothes, not your shoes, not your underwear, toothpaste, or your food. you having to turn into a drone having to listen to all the mindless tasks all the time. i tried to make the best of my experience and sought out help. this was different from almost all the youth around me. i sought out what i needed: medic time to deal with health issues, school support so that i got teaching that matched how i learn, and individual time with staff. i was able to get what i needed but the only reason i got help was because i advocated for myself. that's not realistic for most youth. almost all the youth around me did not have the same experience because they did not seek out anything, so they didn't get anything. most children, even adults, can't seek this kind of help out. i'm a dad now and i wouldn't expect this from my own child. finally at 18, i was exited to a program in an ankle bracelet. i graduated high school a month after i got out. i attended a mandatory program that provided me transportation to and from school. so i was never really alone unless i was at my house. my probation officer stereotyped me as being the same as the rest of his cases. he required me to have proof of everything i did. if i went to a job interview, i needed to get a note to prove that i was there. that was so hard because it would have let everyone know that i was on probation. i wouldn't even get that job, completely wasting my time for that interview in the first place. i am lucky because i had plenty of support from my family, they offered me forgiveness and understanding, they helped me get a job and what i needed, many youth do not have this type of support. while my situation turned out well, it could have been, this support could have been offered before i went to juvenile home and would have prevented me from ever going. here are some ideas i hope you will take action on for other youth. number one, when it comes to our foster youth and teens in general, the only way to combat the problem is to stop using law enforcement and juvenile hall as the first step. too often when a problem with a youth happens, that's the only way the system response. but, most of the time when someone is acting out, they want attention, social workers need to take extra steps to make sure the youth are not locked away. number two, the youth need the support before there is contact with juvenile justice system. i only got support after. social workers and teachers need to understand youth stories, understand how their different experiences can impact behavior and give support to ones who need it before there's a problem. number three, programs need to be in place to support extracurricular activities and healthy friendships for youth. like many youth, i tried to fill my emptiness with the wrong people because i didn't have the activities and healthy friendships. not everyone gets the support they need from a parent and so they look for it. funding should be provided to support extra activities at school and policies should support youth participating in social activities and places to find healthy relationships. it is so important to be able to meet youth who have been in the same situation to build and find support with. experiences like participating in the california youth connection can support youth so they don't have to teach the rights and wrongs of the world to themselves. number four, where youth lives matters. some group homes and staff are just clocking in and out. they are paid very little and care very little. those staff are the ones that will place the immediate call to the police and give seven days notice to a youth. they are getting paid minimum wage to sit eight hours, so their care is not there. if they got training, it might not be this way. families would care and spend more time. there's going to be substantially more care and more thought put into the youth in the family that are not supported by staff. but they have to be families that want to be family, not just getting by. number five, running away should never be disciplined and result in police being called and youth going to juvenile hall. running away is really an opportunity to train families and social workers about responding appropriately rather than sending to juvenile hall. the reasons youth run away need to be dealt with. when youth run away they have to survive, survival is going to land them in juvenile hall. thank you for listening to my ideas today. my experience turned out good, but it is not the case for 90% of other youths who cross over. but if you take action by creating new policy that stops juvenile hall from being used as a first stop, providing new funding for normal activities and programs that support healthy relationships and making sure youth are treated differently by professionals. then the youth experiences will end differently and more positively too.
[{'start': 99, 'end': 120, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Rodriguez: Good afternoon. Thank you Assembly members for caring about this issue and for allowing us to testify today. My name is Jennifer Rodriguez, I am a lawyer and Executive Director of the Youth Law Center. And we're an advocacy organization that focuses on system change in both the child welfare and the juvenile justice system. And the reason I think that's important is because we see both sides of this issue, we see both the cause and why young people are pushed into the juvenile justice system. And then we see the impact once we have young people in detention and exiting and returning back to the community. My own personal background on this particular issue, I have actually been doing advocacy on issues related to youth who move into the juvenile justice system for over 20 years because I myself spent all of my teenage years bouncing between group homes and juvenile hall. And although we've made a surprising amount of progress, particularly in the juvenile justice system and the way that we see that system responding to young people as well as our child welfare system, for this group of young people who is caught in the middle of the two, who are in virtually the same place we were when I was in care. I want to talk a little bit about what we know related to youth who cross over and what we don't know. What we do know at this point is we know some of the data. We know some of the numbers of young people who moved from once system to another, how many young people end up being, continuing to be served by both child welfare and juvenile justice, how many young people move over and are exclusively served by the juvenile justice system. And we even know some of the reasons. We have an idea around some of the characteristics for young people that make them most likely and make them most vulnerable to juvenile justice system involvement. We do know quite a bit about the harm that's caused to young people by moving into the juvenile justice system from foster care. We have statistics that tell us that this group of young people does far worse than either child welfare supervised or probation supervised youth and a whole and I know just Jessica's going to talk with you in more detail about that information. We know concretely about the harm that is placed by to young people related to juvenile justice system involvement, the stigma that they experience, the potential immigration consequences, the loss of permanency, and other transition services as they transition to adulthood. We also know that even one brief touch with the juvenile justice system and as brief as one night in detention results in a whole myriad of other consequences for youth. Like much greater chance at further juvenile justice system involvement, lower educational outcomes, challenges in meeting all of the developmental milestones that we'd like to see teens growing up. We also know that our policies and practices do not ensure that young people who are in the juvenile justice system get access to the same supports and services that they would have if they turned 18 or 16 in our child welfare system. What we don't know is why this pipeline has been created. We spend a lot of time I think in California and across the country talking about the school to prison pipeline, however we've spent shockingly little time talking about the direct pipeline we've created from the child welfare system to the juvenile justice system. We also don't know what the effects are on young people, either short term or long term. We don't know a lot about what this does to young people as they are thinking of their opportunities for their future, as they are thinking about themselves as parents, as they're evaluating what their opportunities are. And lastly what we don't know, is we don't know what it will take to move our system to understand that this is really not a story. The data is not telling us the story of individual youth and their behavior and their challenges, that's really telling us a story about our own system and our own policies. We don't know what it will take to move to that recognition. To me this particular issue around young people who cross over, it is really a canary in the coal mine issue. The number of young people that we have from foster care who have interaction with our juvenile justice system is a perfect indicator of the overall health of our child welfare system. And the ability of our system to provide nurturing safe and stable supports to children and child welfare. It is our child welfare system's responsibility to provide adults who are loving and caring and to give children an environment that can create safety, stability and healing. We know anytime that a young person has contact with the juvenile justice system, that likely we have failed in some regard. And too often we interpret the data and we tell the system, the story of what's happening, as a story of young people who are seriously disturbed, or having behavior problems, or acting out. We could take a different perspective and when we look at the data that tells us multiple placements make it more likely that a young person will have juvenile justice involvement. That being placed in a group home makes it more likely the a young person will have juvenile justice involvement, that running away makes it more likely. We could look at that then as a story about our ability as a system to serve those young people rather than the young people themselves. And how damaged they might be. The juvenile justice system as I mentioned before had some major changes and one of the most significant that I want to talk about is really moving the system towards diversion. And that's been an acknowledgement of all of the data that I mentioned earlier about how harmful and damaging even one touch with being in detention or with law enforcement is. So in just about every situation possible, and here in California, you see extraordinary changes in our juvenile halls with populations in many of the facilities down to less than half of what they were several years ago. We are moving towards making sure that young people at all costs do not have to be incarcerated. However, the experience of youth from foster care is much, much different. Often times when the young person from foster care is referred to the juvenile justice system. The same risk assessment instrument that is used to divert most young people is bypassed and that young person is taken into juvenile hall. The irony of this is that of course because they are in foster care, we have an automatic assurance that they have 24 hour care and supervision. And a place to live, where for most young people who are living at home with their parents that is a primary deciding factor. And whether or not public safety will allow them to remain in the community rather than incarcerated. But in fact, it has the opposite effect for many of our foster youth and they are automatically taken into detention, and this is not a small issue. We over the past two years have been looking in detail at several of our congregate care facilities across California. And I'm going to tell you a little bit about one of the facilities, we've been looking at. Because although it's an outlier, it's very telling. One county operated shelter in the central valley who then public record acts request and looked at the data on this facility. In the first 6 months of last year, they called law enforcement nearly 1,700 times on the young people who are in this home. It is a 40 bed facility, you really have to work in order to call the police that many times on the youth in the home. In looking at the type of things that the police were called on for young people was normal teenage behaviours. In fact, it was behaviours that are the very work of the teenage sort of develop, healthy development. Getting in to fights with their peers, talking back to staff members, consensual sex between residence, use of alcohol. A good number of these calls to law enforcement had to do with young people running away. When we talked with young people who lived in this facility, the primary reason for them running away was that there was no Internet access in this particular shelter. So they were running away across the street to the hospital, so they could use the Internet hotspot. And to me this is a great example, because it tells us where the disconnect is between what we know to be true, as everything we know what it takes to raise a healthy young person to adulthood. And our policies and practices inside of many of our child welfare congregate care facilities and our system as a whole. This is one facility where we see a huge disconnect, many of these young people were not detained indefinitely. Most of them were either cited and released or taken to juvenile hall for a time out and brought back to the facility. But what is happening in this particular facility is telling of the way that law enforcement is being used in many facilities in California. Which is they're stepping in as a substitute for a parent. And in fact, the facility is turning over part of their care into provision responsibilities to law enforcement. So for those of us who are parents, I know Blade and I are both. I'm a mommy, he's a daddy. We both do everything possible to shield our children from the impacts of law enforcement. I do not feel safe and comfortable calling the police when my child talks back to me, because I worry about what the police will do to my child. And now with a child who's entering the teenage years, I am even more conscious of the way that my child looks in the eyes of law enforcement. So it is absolutely a crisis that we are using law enforcement in this way to deal and to take over the with part of the parenting with our young people. Although this particular facility is egregious and it really is an outlier. The same story that is told day after day on a smaller scale in many of our conversation facilities particularly those where young people come in crisis. Our shelters in California, a place where young people are coming in either having just been removed or in between placements. It is a place where we should be prepared for behaviors that result from the trauma that they've experienced where we should be prepared because there's a large population of teenagers that they will be doing what healthy teenagers do. Which is testing limits, challenge authorities, look for social activities. And if they can't find those healthy developmental experiences in the facility, they will leave the facility to go get them or they will make them there. I can't underscore enough how important what the recommendations that Blade made around extracurricular activities, social experiences, and friendships. If our system simply focused on those as prevention, I truly believe we'd see an entirely different response. In closing, I just want to ask a few questions. As you are listening to the rest of the testimony today. What protections exist to protect against children becoming either dual status or crossing over for behavior that would not result in juvenile court action for children in the community? And as the authority to reject inappropriate cases and probation clearly delineated. What criteria gets used to determine whether juvenile justice or dual jurisdiction is appropriate? And what criteria is used to determine whether it's inappropriate? So for example, the question that I always think of is, what is it that's available in the juvenile justice system that you cannot get in the dependency system? We hear too many social workers and congregate care facilities saying, we had to call in the juvenile justice system or probation to get the youth the services they needed. There is never a time that anybody should be saying that. If we do not have the services and the support in the child welfare system to meet the needs of young people, then we need to build those. So we need put in place the resources and policies that make those appropriate. What services were supposed to be provided to that youth in the dependency case, where they actually provide? And is there some sort of a process for investigating whether problems at that group home or foster home. The staff abuse bullying by other residents, inadequate activities and supports. Or in the childs trajectory in the system, multiple placements, long periods in the shelter, poor unification systems contributed to the delinquent behavior. What crisis and respite services were available to those caregivers or providers that would have alleviated the need to proceed with delinquency proceedings? Should the system have alternatives in place to calling law enforcement to deal with problems that might arise in the congregate care facility or the resource family? Who provides reasonable efforts, reunification services, permanency supports, and other transition services when youth are moved over to the juvenile justice system, and how do those get coordinated? Too many young people are like Blade and that in the juvenile justice system and then release with the foster care system never stepping back again. To offer any support. This results in young people losing eligibility for extended foster care, being unable to get Medi-Cal to 26 and many of the other really critical supports that help youth transition to adulthood, successfully. What, if anything, is done to address the child's needs that resulted in their initial removal from their home while that young person is in the juvenile justice system? And do our data requirements assure that a meaningful evaluation of dual jurisdiction and of youth who cross over is possible? Shouldn't we be requiring counties at the very least to collect data on the nature of the offense, who requested the petition? Was it the caregiver, was it law enforcement, what the placement was immediately prior, what the placement history was, the mental health, education and service history, the length of time that young people spend in secure confinement, the length of time that they spend in their delinquent status, the services that are provided in the delinquency system and whether the child has been returned to the dependent status. From the system's point of view, shouldn't counties also collect data on the cost to each system of services and placements? So the last thing I want to leave you with is that the majority of these questions and recommendations were actually developed by the Youth Loss Center in 2005. So we are 12 years from the time that we first asked these questions of the system. And during that time countless young people have been dumped into a system that disposes of them. And I don't think it is inappropriate to say that the majority of those young people are Black and Latino. And so at a time in child welfare and in the juvenile justice system where we are increasingly aware of the impact of our disparate policies and practices and where we need to be taking extra steps to ensure that these young people are treated equally, it seems to me that over a decade is too long to wait to truly take action on this. Thank you so much for listening to me.
[{'start': 120, 'end': 138, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2166, 'end': 2173, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 9251, 'end': 9256, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
 : of blade the blade caretakers blade and blade preschools blade and
[{'start': 57, 'end': 62, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Will Lightbourne: thank you chair stone, chair jones, will from the california department of social services. i just want to frame a bit from the state perspective and then our county colleagues and both system will go into more details of specific practices. i'd like to touch just for a moment on the who it is we are talking about and what those numbers look like. on an annual basis, approximately 500,000 reports of child abuse are made to county child welfare agencies. those 500,000 referrals eventually turn into about 80,000 substantiations of abuse or neglect and those in turn may lead to about, annually approximately about 30,000 children entering out of home care for some period of time. at any point in time there were probably because of entries and exits about 45,000 children in out of home care, in the juvenile justice system they receive about 100,000 referrals annually of whom about half of those result. and petitions being filed. so, what's the interaction between these two sets of numbers and the people who this represents? almost just observing, its difficult to say because we have non-interactive data systems at this point. but it's also hard to say because words mean different things in whichever conversation you happen to be in. so let me just establish some basic standards. some people refer to children or youth who are known to the system. that would include the referrals that did not result in substantiation that would. refer to the referrals that do not result in petitions. it's a vast number and so most of the concentrated work we're going to do we're going to step up to a level below. there's touched by the system, so that would include the substantiating. that would probably include interviews that are done by probation related staff or law enforcement staff. there's crossover, these are the children or youth who started in one system. their case ended or suspended in that system and they entered the other system and it can go either way, but it is largely been from the child welfare system to the juvenile probation system. and with many of the characteristics that ms heldman noted on the last panel. and then there's the dual status youth. who are the youth who have cases open in both systems and in some counties that either means that one system is on hold or in other counties it means they are simply agreeing on who the lead agency is in the degree of collaboration. you'll hear from my colleagues about some of the specific approaches that have been used in different locations. but, from the state perspective, i'd observe that from what we can see from the data we do have, success can be obtained in any one of the structural environments so long as the relationship, and the practice, and the cultures, i particularly like ms heldman emphasizing that, the cultures at the ground are intentionally committed to making that work happen. so far we've been sort of primarily talking about two systems, probation and child welfare, but it's important i think that we reference two others that are integral to the possibility of success and meeting the goals that i think we all share here. and that's both the mental health system and the school systems. in terms of mental health i think the single determinant in crossover and dual cases is whether youth receive the appropriate assessments and trauma informal services at the beginning of there contact with either system. actually there was no body killed there were only youth who had not received the services they needed at the time they needed them from the education system, the identification of a child's trauma based needs and meeting those needs rather than reliance on the discipline system i think is the other key ingredient in making the connections work. and we all have to be part of that solution. i had the privileged before i was in this role of being in santa clara county and that was a county in which there was a very intentional decision by the board of supervisors to have all the systems work with schools, and what they refer to the school link services, to try to ensure that wherever the child is entering and wherever the first contacts have beening made services were getting there. but a caution that was a approach that involved the significant investment, the kind of resources. and there was a conscious choice to do it and i think it has shown in the outcome data that we can see that it's worth doing it that way. so where are we now in california and what are our critical junctures? first, as mentioned by ms rodriguez, and we do almost all of these things in really close partnership with both california youth connection and youth law center. ms rodriguez never sizes to inspire me. the continuum of care reforms charles stone authored two years ago now embodies the following qualities. assessment that are done at the beginning of a child's contact with the child welfare system integration of mental health as a proactive player with both the child welfare system and the juvenile probation system if that's where the child is being cared for at that point. the progress that's been made around that is both the assessment instruments and pilot testing in a number of counties. and the instructions for mental health services access, claiming, and the actual training around that is now underway. a comment that ms heldman raised which was an extremely important is the notion of engaging all in a teaming process to support a child in identifying their needs and resolving those. and the child family teaming system which is supported through consumer care reform is that place which is going to bring together all of those people who are part of the child's service system and life support system, including education, is their expectation. reducing the use of congregate care and emphasizing home-based care like these were the mission statement of continued care reform is, all children deserve to live with a committed, nurturing and permanent family that prepares the youth for successful transition into adulthood. so the core construct is those lifetime commitments of appropriate adults to a child. another piece that is under way at this point ab388. which was inactive several years ago. assemblyman chespera's bill, which requires the monitoring of congregate care facilities that may be doing heavy referral to law enforcement. possibly as a means of discipline and the data from the first couple of years, or at least the second year of that is either available on our website or will be in the next couple of days. the caution i would offer about looking to those facilities that use referrals to law enforcement is this. some of it is a system self-inflicted wound. and let me explain what i mean by that. we place facilities that we license under a degree of scrutiny that from the facility perspective is not always nuance. and so there is an expectation on at least the facilities believe there is that every time a child leaves the facility without permission or unaccompanied that they have to call a report to law enforcement or they are at risk of licensing violations and things like that. as part of ccr and with our partners we've been sort of working with our licensing staff to really try to nuance, how do we help this? all of the caregivers in the child welfare system move from sort of a risk averse fair based model to a prudent parenting model. where people are acting as the examples we were discussing on the last panel with the children we ourselves care for. ab 1911, which is referenced in your background package, ms eggman's bill that has the juvenile justice, that the judicial council convening work groups to look at both data collection and the definitions that go into that. just informationally, we are expecting this month to implement the first of the codes in the case management system that can start to track the dual and crossover youth. we realize there's a lot further definition to come from the judicial council work. but, we feel that having early access to information will put us in a stronger position planning for the future. and then, sba55, which was adopted a couple of years ago as part of, well, it was the state budget, included the development of the support services and interventions for commercially sexually exploited children. a key part of what that did and what that requires is the development of very active protocols at the local level between child welfare, law enforcement, probation, mental health, schools, everyone who is going to touch a child. because as we move towards the commitment of saying we are going to serve exploited trafficked children as victims, not as some part of a justice system then having all of those systems work effectively together becomes critical. so to conclude, there are a lot of sort of these initiatives which are now sort of coming to their critical points, they're somewhat overlapping, its almost like traffic management with some of it. i consider myself someone who persistently sees the world as glass half full, half empty rather. and so although things have move forward, we still have a great work to do and committed to doing it. thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 21, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 29, 'end': 34, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2111, 'end': 2118, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2781, 'end': 2788, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4551, 'end': 4560, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4690, 'end': 4699, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4757, 'end': 4770, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5362, 'end': 5369, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6258, 'end': 6266, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7603, 'end': 7609, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
David McManus: i appreciate the opportunity, thank you. yes, david  mcmanus, assistant chief of placer county and we are a dual status county. i think because a lot of others have already touched on the 241.1 process itself, i'm going to talk a little bit about creating a system of care and true integration and how that will help you be successful in implementing the 241.1 process. because in placer i have had the luxury of moving into a system that was, has been sustained for decades now. and there truly are lessons that have been learned about integration, collaboration and communication. and through cross-pollination of probation and cws staff as they co-locate and cultures change. and truly we do have a 241.1 mou and it talks about some of the best practices that have been identified such as less least restrictive level of care and family centered approach and unified case plans,which we all do. but more importantly is that our staff have evolved in change and they truly think in a different way, we have probation officers that understand trauma and form care. they understand when they're seeing certain delinquency acts and that comes from neglect and abuse. and we now have a long standing tradition of refusing to criminalize some of those acts. and one of the things i also heard earlier was the need for crisis centres and mental health response. and we do have luxury of having a crisis resolution centre in our community. so we talk about diversion and we are focussed on diversion but some of those cases are diverted from our delinquency system before they even get to us. some of those vandalism type cases, or pushing past mom in the hallway which would have been a battery, and arrest into the hall. we have a crisis resolution center that's dealing with that and we get great results from that. and also recently we developed a mobile response team for mental health response. and that goes down to even 16 year olds can benefit from this mobile response team that can divert where police when we've heard a lot about police shouldn't be doing the parenting, police shouldn't be doing the direct intervention. this allows mental health to step in and divert those cases that would typically be brought to our juvenile detention facility. another thing that we've learned, a key lesson that we've learned is the importance for some policy board to oversee all agencies and to get true buy-in. and we do have a systems management advocacy, geez, resource team, yes. and it is headed up by our juvenile judge and has the director of health human services, and the probation chief, and the office of education superintendent and that team holds staff and systems true to the culture of integration. another thing that we have had success with is blended funding when it comes to out-of-home placements. i think one of the issues with the lack of communication between systems is fiscal issues. out-of-home placement is expensive, when there is a blended part of funding for out-of-home placement that can be utilized by cws or probation. some of those turf wars are eliminated and the focus is on the family and the child and what's best and not on the system's fiscal outcome from the decision. we also have multidisciplinary teams that weigh in on decisions and are even part of the 241.1 process at times at least making a recommendation. and we've evolved that into instead of being government run by any one agency, those are not facilitated by family advocates. so families come in, they feel comfortable, they are able to share their experience, brainstorm, bring in resources, and truly help children and families be successful. a lot of what i've read about the best practices from california are things that we've already incorporated into our mou. and it really tells me that we've had the luxury being out in the front of integration and truly, i think success in a 241.1 system and being able to step back as a probation department and recommend that minor not be on probation or that he or she gets diversion from the beginning. i think, know that theres a system in place, really allows more creativity and due to respond throughout the spectrum as you should and avoid criminalizing minors that come in at least in to our system, and i will stop there.
[{'start': 46, 'end': 59, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Barbara Duey: Good afternoon Barbara Duey I'm from the Children's Loss Center of California. I'm an attorney supervisor there and a care project director and I'm also a member of the Robert F Kennedy children's action core dual status practice network, so I get to work with Jessica. It's wonderful to hear these practices, Los Angeles we struggle with our size, there is no question about that. Our offices represent 33,000 children in foster care. Alone so, somebody said something about 100 kids. We have 100 youth a month that get arrested and go through the 241.1 process every single month. Early on, we were very early dual status county as well. We started building the dual status system in 2005. In 2006, we launched it, in 2007, and it went county wide in 2012. We had all the same stakeholders from all different disciplines, the attorneys, the advocates, service providers, and all the agencies. And I think we did a very good job of identifying the youth, notifying, creating the legal process. I think our biggest challenge has been and continues to be the dual supervision piece. So you've heard about the lead agency and on hold, we are lead agency. That means when a youth is designated dual status, they have both a probation officer and a social worker working with them. Partly due to our size, but also historically in California, probation and child welfare have worked in silos. They have no history of working together, they have separate cultures and I don't want to speak for any other county but I know that in Los Angeles County and the first 18 years,I was, or at 15 years old I was at the Children Law Center, if the youths got arrested, they went to probation,there was no communication at all whatsoever between the child welfare system and the probation system. So when we became a dual status system, and these youths came out, we had their disposition they were given dual status. They were given this to a social worker and a probation officer who were just not used to talking to each other. So we saw very poor communication, we saw gaps in services. We saw delays in court, because you have a dependency court in one part of LA and a delinquency court in another, and they are trying out to find out what is happening in each other's courts. The social worker might be in the dependency court, but they do not go to delinquency court. The probation officers in the delinquency court, but they do not go to the dependency court. So, all the important people, since we have two judges and not one, the two judges don't get all the information. They get it piece mail from different people. The result was, or has been, because of all of this that the delays, the gaps, and services, and so a youth who's now been placed on probation, they're not getting linked, they don't know who's supervising them. The attorney, as the attorney for the child, I'm not sure who's supposed to link them to drug counseling, who's going to link them to therapy and who do I go to if that doesn't happen. So the result is the youth would often stumble and fall. And then they would go deeper into the juvenile justice system. They are the ones who are held accountable, not the agencies. The judge would say you have not done this. You haven't done your community service. So, they would go deeper. And so what Children Law Center did? Our answer to this problem was creating the care unit, which is a specialized unit within CLC. Originally, we wanted to just to address the gaps and improve the communication, but we reached a little higher and we decided what we really wanted to do was provide more support, direct support for the youth. And we wanted to provide empathetic support with a trauma focused lens and a clinical perspective. So what we did was we contracted with several MSW graduate schools. And we have MSW interns to come to CLC for a year. They are trained, and they are paired with the attorney, and they are paired with a dual status youth. And each Intern has two, three, to four youth that they are assigned to and they see that youth every single week. They attend every hearing whether its dependency or delinquency. Every meeting whether it's an MDT as part of the 241, or whether it's a school meeting or an IEP or just a school meeting check in. Group home meetings, CFTs, anything you can think of that the youth goes to from both sides were there with the youth. So number one the youth sees us, it's the same person or the same team, and they have that support. And also we kind of become the single point of contact for everybody. Because we are at all these things, we can provide more consistent and current information to the two judges and to the attorneys. We're the dependency attorney, but there's also a delinquency attorney and a District Attorney. And when we go to the delinquency hearing, we can give them information about what's happening on the dependency side, what service the youth is receiving or not receiving. And what's happening with their placement. That's kind of what we were going for. The number one goal is to help the foster youth navigate through and successfully complete probation at the earliest possible moment. What I've seen in the 27 years that I've been at CLC, is that foster youth, we know that they get arrested more often and detained longer. But they are on probation much longer, they linger on probation. And what I realize is, that they don't have a parent they are helping them through probation. If my daughter or your child was on probation, we would make sure they got signed up for community service, we would make sure they had transportation to do their community service that they got transportation to therapy. And that they would get up on Saturday morning. Someone would wake them up, they're teenagers and say you got to go do this. The majority of our kids, as you heard from Jennifer are living in congregate care. They don't have parents, they have staff. And it's a rotating staff and they are not there to, they don't micro manage the children in the way they should be, that the way a parent does. So the care unit tries to provide that support. With the insurance act as support, as a mentor, as someone to encourage the youth. They communicate directly and constantly with the supervising probation officer and the social worker, and the school, and the placement and make sure that everybody is kind of on the same page. We do the same thing when we go to the courts so that the judges know what's going on. The relationship that the care unit has with the youth is very unique because we can attend all the meetings. We can be a better facilitator of the youth and the agencies and between the agencies themselves. I'm often calling the social worker telling them what's happening on the probation case or vice versa. So that everybody is in, on the same page. The youth know that the attorney and their care intern keeps their confidence. So the youth are more open and willing to talk about their needs and their challenges. And then that gives us the information we need to get them into the right services. The judge and probational may not know that they have a substance abuse problem. They tell us that they do. We can get them referred to a drug council and testing program, and we can do that quickly. The contact we have with the youth I think as I said is approximately four times a week. This is something that our case carrying  attorneys couldn't dream of doing with 220 clients each and in courts every single day with anywhere from eight to 15 cases everyday, they can't even take the time off to go to the 241 hearing which I think is essential for all the attorneys to be at. So we were able to do this by securing private funding to supplement the state funding. We felt that that was essential to do because, these kids are most at risk kids. They really need the support. And we are finding that with this extra support and advocacy they are doing much better. Last year we had or in the last year we had 96 cases, 53 closed and 43 of those cases closed successfully. We saw a 44% increase in school attendance, not sure if that was kind of came out of the sky but we took it. And the other part of it that I think was unexpected but very positive outcome was we have created a great collaboration with the supervising probational officers. We work with them, we do cross trainings together. Once they have gotten to know my interns and they are used to our calls, what they will do when a youth starts to act out or show some negative behavior instead of just filing a triple seven, a probation violation, they call us. I had a probation officer stop me in the hall and ask me if a certain youth was in my care unit and I said yes and they said, this certain youth had tested positive for drugs on his drug test. Can you get him into a program? And we were able to do that. We were able to do that like the next day. And that avoided a probation violation, which I think is the type of thing that happens in smaller counties all the time, and I envy that. I think that's really wonderful, but in a county such as Los Angeles, with so many kids and so many different players, that just never used to happen. I mean, the probation officer was more of a gotcha back then. I have seen juvenile probation really turn around, I've seen the culture there. Becoming again more trauma informed and more understanding of the foster youth through this relationship they have had with the care unit. I wanted just to kind of end by saying that the intern and the care unit team is the relationship with the youth is key. And I think anything we can do to create a type of program or service where there is somebody who has that relationship with the youth. It's something that Blake said in his testimony that he never had someone tell him he could do it, never had someone tell him he was special or he was the best. And that's what we do for these kids. We tell them they can do it and that we're there to help them. We make sure they understand what they need to do on probation. We make sure there's no barriers and it they have the tools needed to be successful. So that when they go back before the delinquency judge, hopefully we can show that they've complied and get the mock probation and back to independency. So I think that ideally I think depending on the country size obviously there's different models that work. But any way, we could find a way to support the youth, the way CARE supports the youth, and focus on helping the youth succeed. Too many times I see, and again, I am just going to speak for LA, I see sometimes probation and social workers kind of, it is your job, no, it's your job. And that should not be the focus. The focus should be on making sure that you succeed. Thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 261, 'end': 268, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5875, 'end': 5883, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 9794, 'end': 9799, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 10636, 'end': 10638, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michelle Callejas: Good afternoon. Michelle Callejas, Child Welfare Director for Sacramento County. Thank you very much for focusing on this area. It is a critical issue for both child welfare and probation. So I will give you just a real brief on where we are in Sacramento. So sometime back in 2011 the decision was made to not go dual jurisdiction in our county. I came on in 2012 and there were feelings about that decision that I think were led by child welfare. And so we started having discussions about do we go that route, and instead focused on how do we serve this population better, how do we come to better understand this population regardless of whether we embark upon the dual jurisdiction work. So there was commitment from probation, child welfare education, and behavioral health initially early on. And we started with the positive youth justice initiative and did some work through 2013. But at the end of 2013, we decided that where we were headed with the particular grant we were going after and the resources we had, it just didn't feel like it was a fit for us at that time. So, Assistant Chief Shores had a great deal of contact with Georgetown University's Center for Juvenile Justice Reform and we decided to embrace a crossover youth practice model. So in 2014 we really delved into that, began to understand the model and talked openly about where we saw it fit, it didn't fit for a county, and realized that really it was a great model for what we had locally. And in November of 2014, the presiding judge, myself and Mister Shores along with our behavioral health director, County Office of Education, and County Council all flew out to Georgetown, which we thought was going to be, yay, fun! But it was just an intensive seven day course on multi-systems Integration. And it was really great and I think we came out of it, it was not only enriching, but we came out of it with stronger partnerships, relationships, personally and professionally. We realize we all really liked each other which is helpful when you are doing really difficult work. But we also came out with the renewed sense of commitment to do better by these kids and a renewed sense of urgency. So we came back and formed an executive Committee and began considering what it is, what steps we needed to put into place. We began developing our crossover youth practice model protocol that Judge Cayeti spoke to. I will not go into great detail but it really is the same type of work that we endeavored here in Sacramento County. I would say a couple of the areas of success or the areas that are needed when systems embark on this type of work is first and foremost leadership from the top. If it were not for the commitment from the judge and probation and child welfare and education and behavioral health, I don't think we would be where we are today. And we wanted to put something in place which we are still working on, that is sustainable. So that if one of us leaves, the work doesn't just crumble and I think that's a real challenge. But we really held a lot at our level as we were pushing stuff down and did a lot of the troubleshooting as an executive Committee. And then I think that really helped inform how it is we rule this out to our staff across four different major entities. So, I think we have as an executive Committee really come from a core belief that it's not your kid, it's not my kid, it's not their kid, that it's our kid, these are all our kids. As a major child serving systems, we have joint responsibility and joint accountability for better serving them in ways that will enhance child safety, community safety, enhanced emotional well-being and academic success. And as you look at those outcomes, and again, across four major systems that tend to be entrenched where we are. It is a large endeavor but it is a very worthy one, and one that we do have a responsibility to pursue. So after we developed our protocols and really kind of parallel, I think another area where we were successful was in our stakeholder engagement. And the same stakeholder groups that both judge Cayette and Ms Duey spoke to where it is child welfare probation education behavioral health. Bringing in for the child welfare side the public defender's office and District Attorney was new for us. And in the same respect for our probation partners bringing into children's law center, the attorneys that represent the kids in court was new. We had children's law center there and we had a court appointed special advocates, there were, I would say, very robust conversations, and really, it was good, because the first several meetings. And it overlapped with our work with commercially sexually exploited youths, so it is hard to kind of separate out the two, but really the cultures of each system came forth, and the rehabilitation or detention versus advocacy, there were a lot of discussions that needed to happen early on. But I think where we are so fortunate in our community is no one walked away. Everyone that hung in there through those difficult conversations to help get us to where we are today, so I think director Lightborn spoke to the importance of communication and I think out of the leadership out of the stakeholder process, that in order to make this work there has gotta be transparency and strong communication across us at the executive level team and also across our systems. We realized early on the assumptions that social workers were making about probation officers. I mean you could walk by cubicles. Why doesn't probation go do something? Why don't they go do this? And Mike can hear the same thing in his side, what is child welfare doing, they never do anything, the papers are right. And so, how we had to shift that? We have called joint management team meetings. So that we can kind of clear those urban mess, those mistaken expectations. I think our side so probation has having all this authority. And so really understanding each other scope, limitations, mandates And that has really promoted a great deal of understanding. And what we also know is being face-to face it is a little harder to send snarky emails or not respond to phone calls right? So we really wanted to help foster that and we continue with those meetings as we try to move the work forward and down to the line level. Some of the work groups that we've developed are continuing to go, we started early on with really putting together all the assessment processes that a youth go through, from child welfare to behavioral health to probation and education. we assess the heck of our kids and so really looking at, how much is too much? And I think that is a challenge that I across our state we have to come to is kind of what is the proper dosage and when are we over assessing and still under serving. So we also had a prevention and disproportionality work group where we have more work to do on that. And then the delayed data collection and data sharing. And as you can imagine when it comes to data sharing across these core systems it was complex. And what we basically did is shoved all the attorneys in one room to figure out HIPAA and FERPA and the juvenile court confidentiality and they worked their magic and then, we are now at a point where we are sharing our data across systems and with the goal of ultimately finding some type of IT system where we can house it, also that we can pull reports. I think the other success has been the teaming, and I think both LA and San Diego are doing it and the child and family team meetings, which really evolved out of the mental health world and wraparound services, are really effective practice, and I am really glad that they were included in continuum of care reform. Because right now we are required to do them only for kids receiving mental health services. But it is best practice for all kids when they are- Multiple systems surveying children and youth. So we have implemented child and family team meetings. I think for our colleagues in probation, that was just, it might can speak to the cultural shifts there. We're used to working with the families and it's just a new world for probation from that end. But that has been really successful in bringing youth and families to the table. Having youth be able to identify who they see as a support person. It could be a teacher, it could be a coach. And having the parents be able to identify who they want in the room. And it gives us an opportunity to explain, here's a role of probation, here's a role of child welfare. And to give the respect to the parents as experts on their family, regardless of the choices they've made, I think, goes really far in getting them better engaged and having buy-in to the services and case plans that are ultimately developed. The 241.1 assessments, I think, for us was a significant shift. And so and I should have started earlier our definition of crossover youth as a child with an open child welfare case who gets a citation or is arrested by law enforcement. And so there's an immediate notification process from probation, they're able to access a child welfare system. They see there's an open investigation or open case. They contact our side. We have an email that goes to, an email that checked constantly. Also includes the social worker supervisor on the case. And our protocols immediately go into place for a joint team in discussion about next steps. For the assessment determine which system is best to serve the youth, deliquency or dependency. I'm embarrassed to say this but it really was kind of a check sheet. A check list and it was sometimes a phone call or messages left or email. It was not the type of comprehensive assessment that are used to serve or that could really help inform next steps. So now they have face to face meetings. We had a recent visit from Georgetown University. And we had probation officers and social workers on a panel all talking about this process. And it was great to see and hear the success and their excitement about the process. Because both sides are getting far more information. It has helped us all see that these are the same kids. But for very few outliers, these are the same kids who many of whom have been through extreme trauma, often cumulative. And so their behaviors get manifested differently. But I think the process is so much richer and helps inform decisions to the court as well as helps inform the service plan and delivery that is going to roll out for the youth and family. And I think again the importance of these meetings is a communication and coordination of services in care. When we don't do that, kids fall through the cracks and need simply go on map. Couple of challenges. And I don't want to keep saying it but mental health, mental health, mental health, mental health. Mental health services are critical to well in a number of areas. One before kids even come into child welfare or probation. My mantra is the way to prevent kids from crossing over from child welfare to probation is keep them out of child welfare. So I'd really love being able to have the resources to serve the children and families upfront, strengthen families, keep kids home when it's safe to do so. But once we come in to our care, if we really want to realize the goals and vision by Continuum of Care Reform, we have to have the mental health services in place. Wherever the kids are placed. So if it is in a group home or a short term therapeutic residential program, when it's necessary, if we really want it to be an intervention rather than a placement then there must be the mental health services and therapeutic interventions there to meet the youth's needs to help get them stabilized, and help prepare them for transition to a family based setting. But that's the critical work is having them in the group homes while we want to reduce the use of them and we're absolutely committed to them. We also know that sometimes it's needed but it should be for short term. And so stepping them down into a foster family home to a resource parent, to a relative, you heard Mr. Oestreich talk about being with relatives, what we have done to this point is we place kids with relatives, it is core value of ours. But we find a relative and we say thank you very much and then we see them once a month. We were providing the training, the supports and the mental health services can come into their home and best meet the needs of that youth. So they are needed there and then they are also needed if we are able to transition that youth back to their family, that's a very significant time of vulnerability, as reunification. Everyone pulls out and our families are left now to negotiate this new dynamic, with their kids being home. So the mental health services, and I'll quit saying it, but they really are critical to making this all work. A couple of other challenges, collaboration's very hard, and yet so important. And so I think that it's messy, it takes time, and it takes a lot of resources from our staff. And so it's easy to work in silos and I know I have social workers who say, this is my child, I've had them, this is my family, nobody else can touch them. And it's not effective. And so helping shift the culture within to really embrace and value these team meetings, and to call the probation officers, to meet with the probation officers, to share information. It's a hard sell when they have 25, 30 other children on their caseload or youth under caseload. But it's important. So having the time and allowing them the time to do that is a significant challenge. A quick example, we had a youth who just turned 12 and he's been in our system for a while. He runs from placement frequently and he's very vulnerable. He's got mental health issues. He's got some cognitive impairments, and does not make good choices. And our law enforcement partners have been involved, probation's been involved, we've been involved. And it was last week some time, it took about seven hours of phone calls with the District Attorney. Children's law center, probation, meetings, consultations, to finally figure out how we could serve him and keep him safe. And we hope it works but the amount of time it took with so many people is just a reality from the resource perspective.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2378, 'end': 2384, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4093, 'end': 4100, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4108, 'end': 4112, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5127, 'end': 5136, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5600, 'end': 5604, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 12113, 'end': 12122, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Shores: thank you and i appreciate the opportunity to speak. my name is michael david shores. i'm the assistant chief probational officer here in sacramento county. i'm going to try to not go into some of the same detail that michelle just went over relative to some of the work that sacramento county has done and i think instead, what i'll try to do is put the probation specific approach and include some of the challenges that come with probation moving into this collaborative environment that we've engaged in. i've been with the department for 26 years. i worked in a variety of different assignments. as a line officer all the way through supervisor. so i'm bringing a perspective about how probation has worked over the years with youth that are in the dependency system. and frankly up until i got into a management position i don't know that i ever communicated with a social worker. it was something that just didn't occur. so all of the comments, all of the previous panelists that have spoken, those comments were accurate and i have that perspective as i engage on this work. one of the reasons we moved toward the cross over youth practice model was the recognition that we were working in silos. we've heard that previously and it was really accurate and i think that's really the challenge, breaking down those silos. and as i get through my comments i really want to stop and focus on the communication piece as it relates to the delinquency system and the youth as they start to move into the delinquency system. the crossover youth practice model allowed us to really establish goals, something that didn't exist with the work that we were trying to do in sacramento county and i'll go briefly over those goals because i think they are important because if you don't have goals, if you don't have outcome measures, you don't have an ability to really articulate your successes and or engage your failures. cypm allowed us to first, really focus on identifying who are crossover youth. we recognize early on in this work that we weren't doing a good job. of even identifying at the earlier age of the process who those youth were that had been involved and were currently and actively involved in the children welfare system. the second goal is sharing data and resources and i think that was really one of the biggest eye opening challenges for us was that working together we can achieve a lot more, but we never did that. and the data that we had; was again not shared. there was actually a belief i think between systems that it was probably inappropriate and potentially illegal to share data between systems. so that was something we had to overcome as well. another issue that is a huge goal is, reducing the reliance on detention for youth who but, for their dependency status may be released from the probation system. when a child presents to us at detention and we have no options for placement. when we have no licensed facilities that we have an ability to place that youth into, besides detention, we're making decisions that are based on the child's safety. that's a challenge for us and i think it's an issue that we continue to work through. it's a challenge for child welfare and it's a challenge for probation. but one of our goals is to try to create and establish alternatives to the detention facility for those youth. another goal was to reduce the reliance on out of home placement for those youth that are in probation placement to reduce our reliance on congregate care something that continued care reform is assisting us with as well. a broader goal for probation is reduce for recidivism and long term recidivism rates for those youths we're actively tracking that. for probation one of the, another big challenge was to increase family and youth in the decision-making process. again, this is a concept that i think was born out of the child welfare and behavioral health systems that was pretty foreign to the probation department and to probation systems in general. so, getting officers in the system to recognized that youth and family could, should and may, in fact, be of value in the decision-making process is also something that's new and it's a concept that i think probation is continuing to understand. that is one of our goals. we want to increase the satisfaction with our county process. i think that's a simple one to achieve if we can achieve all of the others. and last we wanted to increase the quality of our joint assessments i think something that director pay has spoke to our joint assessments met the mandate of the law but they didn't do more than that we really met the minimum standard of what was expected and there is a lot more that can be done through good communication and good collaboration. as director callejas said we implemented in october of 2016. our implementation efforts are early, our outcomes are still evolving, we're starting to recognize some very early successes, i'll talk about that here briefly in a second, but currently we have 41 youth in sacramento county that are being jointly supervised by a social worker and a probation officer. those youth are dualy involved. they remain in the dependency system and they're actively on some form of either court diversion or probation diversion that allows us to keep them in the dependency system while we work with them and support the social workers in their care. some of the things that are working. i mentioned some of the child welfare practices the use of child and family team meetings, a concept that probation abrupt practice that we didn't utilize. but we now in sacramento county have trained all of our probation officers in the cft process and not only where we'll be participating, we'll be actually facilitating the cft as we move into the future. that's something as well that continue of care reform has helped push us towards. there's been some funding to help with the training and there's been a mandate that cfts will be a part of the process. fortunately for us with cross over youth practice model we were a little bit ahead of some of those mandates. the use of multidisciplinary team meetings, that is another. a huge practice for us that we know will have a huge impact and particularly working with these youths. so we've implemented mdt's that are working with these youths at a variety of stages. i think judge will talk about that and some of c-sec work. all of our staff have been trained on trauma, and so. another area that we're recognizing is critically important, whether the youth is in the dependency system or whatever youth that comes into the delinquency system. every officer in the sacramento county probation department has been trained on at least understanding the basics of trauma, but we've brought in a local provider that's helping us with some ongoing training efforts around that as well. with training comes joint training. we're training with social workers, we're training with behavioral health staff, and we're training with some of our community based organizations, so the training is really a collaborative approach. in communication again i wanted to really talk a bit about that, i understand we're short on time, i'll try to make that brief, but communication, it's been said multiple times and the different panels it's really critically the most important aspect of this work. and when you talk about a youth that's coming into the delinquency system, whether it's via citation or custodial arrest, there are different points of contact that allow for us to communicate with our partners in the child welfare system and start to make decisions that are really in the best interest of the child. and i could cite examples of each of those points of contact that we have circumvented or prevented the youth from coming into the delinquency system because of that communication. so i just wanted to highlight again that communication is really the critical aspect of the work that we're doing. whatever model that you wish to pursue, i think communication is really the key component of that and we've seen that that's the greatest challenge and probably the area of our greatest success. i mentioned working with families to maintain the protective factors, we're doing more of that, that's going to be a work in progress for us on the probation side and it will continue with support from our child welfare partners. i move briefly into some of the challenges that we have before i close. the ability to use relative placements on the delinquency side is, again, new to us. we have historically not done a lot of family finding, we haven't done a lot of alternative to group home care sort of placements. again, ab-403 has allowed us to start to explore that. and some of the funding that has come with that has allowed us to generate some contracts in sacramento county that will assist with that family finding. and we actively now have 14 youth that have been referred, and we're hoping to find families to place them with in order to not use congregate cares, is that option. so we're seeing some progress there. but it remains a challenge, families are not often jumping up and down to accept our youth into their homes. and so there's a lot of work and engagement that needs to go with that practice and with those processes. resources, and not specifically county resources, but the use of youth advocates, youth mentors and others to work with our youth is, again, there's a shortage of those that available to us. that's an area that we need to work collectivity to build up a pool and a group of people that are willing to come back and work on the delinquency side. i think oftentimes when youth age out or move out of the delinquency system and they've been involved in the dependency system, they're more willing to go back to the dependency system and do work versus come back to the delinquency system. and i think that's more of a recognition that delinquency hasn't welcomed that, and so that's an area that we need to improve on and we need to build those resources. i mentioned earlier the lack of alternatives to detention, so i won't talk much about that but it is a big issue, and something that we need to continue to look for options. director callejas house mentioned data sharing, the input and the access to the cws/cms system by probation remains a challenge, it requires basically duplicate efforts. we have our own case management systems. and when we have to enter data into the cws/cms system, it requires officers to do that work twice. with large case loads and challenging and complex cases that becomes an issue as well. case management, i mentioned earlier case management is changing. how we managed these case loads is a little different. our mandates aren't the same as child welfares. however, we're starting to understand that we have common goals and collectively working together, the way we manage these cases can be a little different than how we manage a high-risk case out in the community. so i'll close with, i think it's that common goal that continues to pull us together. it's the common goal that pulls us together at an executive level, and as we continue to move forward with our implementation efforts, we're seeing our officers and our social workers really gravitate towards that. and i am really eager, i'm excited to see what the future years bring in terms of the outcomes that we can generate, and i thank you today for the time to talk about this issue.
[{'start': 64, 'end': 84, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 218, 'end': 226, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4781, 'end': 4789, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Blade Oestreich: Good afternoon and thank you for holding today's hearing and listening to my testimony. My name is Blade Oestreich, I'm 24 years old. Currently I hold position as a policy assistant at California Youth Connection and also run my own business and a father of two and I'm married already. My future goals are to move up in my organization that I'm working in right now. And yeah, that's it on my intro. Today is the first time I have ever shared my experience of being placed in the juvenile justice system from kinship care. I think there are things that are different about my experience from many other foster youth but also some things in common that you have the future, the power to change. And that I hope you will take action on. I know my life has turned out well but a lot of that is because of my own advocacy and focus, and it doesn't turn out that way for most youth. I grew up in kinship care living with different relatives. I did not have a lot of support. I never really received parenting. I only saw a social worker twice over all the years that I was in kinship. My relatives only worried that I would come home by curfew, but often I didn't get support or guidance I needed. I didn't have anyone to teach me self sacrifice or self discipline. And so I started trying to fill the void with making people like me. I was eager and hungry to be liked and to prove myself as being the strongest and the best. I didn't have anyone who I felt saw me as the best. Like I do for my son today, I always support and try to get him to the place that I wasn't as a youth. I didn't have anyone who I've felt supported all my decisions. I tried to fill my emptiness with people. This resulted in behaviors that weren't normal for me and hanging out with the wrong people. Eventually, I ended up getting a year for someone else's crime. I didn't want to talk to anyone about it. And I didn't want to share the real story, I just decided to take the punishment. I felt that even if I was honest, the result would be the same. I spent six months in juvenile hall while my case was in court, and then I served an extra six months on top of that when it was finished. It was pretty scary being in juvenile hall. I would go to sleep having vivid dreams and being out and having fun with my family and siblings, waking up to the same brick wall every single day. The feeling of having nothing of your own there, not having your own clothes, not your shoes, not your underwear, toothpaste, or your food. You having to turn into a drone having to listen to all the mindless tasks all the time. I tried to make the best of my experience and sought out help. This was different from almost all the youth around me. I sought out what I needed: medic time to deal with health issues, school support so that I got teaching that matched how I learn, and individual time with staff. I was able to get what I needed but the only reason I got help was because I advocated for myself. That's not realistic for most youth. Almost all the youth around me did not have the same experience because they did not seek out anything, so they didn't get anything. Most children, even adults, can't seek this kind of help out. I'm a dad now and I wouldn't expect this from my own child. Finally at 18, I was exited to a program in an ankle bracelet. I graduated high school a month after I got out. I attended a mandatory program that provided me transportation to and from school. So I was never really alone unless I was at my house. My probation officer stereotyped me as being the same as the rest of his cases. He required me to have proof of everything I did. If I went to a job interview, I needed to get a note to prove that I was there. That was so hard because it would have let everyone know that I was on probation. I wouldn't even get that job, completely wasting my time for that interview in the first place. I am lucky because I had plenty of support from my family, they offered me forgiveness and understanding, they helped me get a job and what I needed, many youth do not have this type of support. While my situation turned out well, it could have been, this support could have been offered before I went to juvenile home and would have prevented me from ever going. Here are some ideas I hope you will take action on for other youth. Number one, when it comes to our foster youth and teens in general, the only way to combat the problem is to stop using law enforcement and juvenile hall as the first step. Too often when a problem with a youth happens, that's the only way the system response. But, most of the time when someone is acting out, they want attention, social workers need to take extra steps to make sure the youth are not locked away. Number two, the youth need the support before there is contact with juvenile justice system. I only got support after. Social workers and teachers need to understand youth stories, understand how their different experiences can impact behavior and give support to ones who need it before there's a problem. Number three, programs need to be in place to support extracurricular activities and healthy friendships for youth. Like many youth, I tried to fill my emptiness with the wrong people because I didn't have the activities and healthy friendships. Not everyone gets the support they need from a parent and so they look for it. Funding should be provided to support extra activities at school and policies should support youth participating in social activities and places to find healthy relationships. It is so important to be able to meet youth who have been in the same situation to build and find support with. Experiences like participating in the California Youth Connection can support youth so they don't have to teach the rights and wrongs of the world to themselves. Number four, where youth lives matters. Some group homes and staff are just clocking in and out. They are paid very little and care very little. Those staff are the ones that will place the immediate call to the police and give seven days notice to a youth. They are getting paid minimum wage to sit eight hours, so their care is not there. If they got training, it might not be this way. Families would care and spend more time. There's going to be substantially more care and more thought put into the youth in the family that are not supported by staff. But they have to be families that want to be family, not just getting by. Number five, running away should never be disciplined and result in police being called and youth going to juvenile hall. Running away is really an opportunity to train families and social workers about responding appropriately rather than sending to juvenile hall. The reasons youth run away need to be dealt with. When youth run away they have to survive, survival is going to land them in juvenile hall. Thank you for listening to my ideas today. My experience turned out good, but it is not the case for 90% of other youths who cross over. But if you take action by creating new policy that stops juvenile hall from being used as a first stop, providing new funding for normal activities and programs that support healthy relationships and making sure youth are treated differently by professionals. Then the youth experiences will end differently and more positively too.
[{'start': 99, 'end': 114, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Rodriguez: good afternoon. thank you assembly members for caring about this issue and for allowing us to testify today. my name is rodriguez, i am a lawyer and executive director of the youth law center. and we're an advocacy organization that focuses on system change in both the child welfare and the juvenile justice system. and the reason i think that's important is because we see both sides of this issue, we see both the cause and why young people are pushed into the juvenile justice system. and then we see the impact once we have young people in detention and exiting and returning back to the community. my own personal background on this particular issue, i have actually been doing advocacy on issues related to youth who move into the juvenile justice system for over 20 years because i myself spent all of my teenage years bouncing between group homes and juvenile hall. and although we've made a surprising amount of progress, particularly in the juvenile justice system and the way that we see that system responding to young people as well as our child welfare system, for this group of young people who is caught in the middle of the two, who are in virtually the same place we were when i was in care. i want to talk a little bit about what we know related to youth who cross over and what we don't know. what we do know at this point is we know some of the data. we know some of the numbers of young people who moved from once system to another, how many young people end up being, continuing to be served by both child welfare and juvenile justice, how many young people move over and are exclusively served by the juvenile justice system. and we even know some of the reasons. we have an idea around some of the characteristics for young people that make them most likely and make them most vulnerable to juvenile justice system involvement. we do know quite a bit about the harm that's caused to young people by moving into the juvenile justice system from foster care. we have statistics that tell us that this group of young people does far worse than either child welfare supervised or probation supervised youth and a whole and i know just jessica's going to talk with you in more detail about that information. we know concretely about the harm that is placed by to young people related to juvenile justice system involvement, the stigma that they experience, the potential immigration consequences, the loss of permanency, and other transition services as they transition to adulthood. we also know that even one brief touch with the juvenile justice system and as brief as one night in detention results in a whole myriad of other consequences for youth. like much greater chance at further juvenile justice system involvement, lower educational outcomes, challenges in meeting all of the developmental milestones that we'd like to see teens growing up. we also know that our policies and practices do not ensure that young people who are in the juvenile justice system get access to the same supports and services that they would have if they turned 18 or 16 in our child welfare system. what we don't know is why this pipeline has been created. we spend a lot of time i think in california and across the country talking about the school to prison pipeline, however we've spent shockingly little time talking about the direct pipeline we've created from the child welfare system to the juvenile justice system. we also don't know what the effects are on young people, either short term or long term. we don't know a lot about what this does to young people as they are thinking of their opportunities for their future, as they are thinking about themselves as parents, as they're evaluating what their opportunities are. and lastly what we don't know, is we don't know what it will take to move our system to understand that this is really not a story. the data is not telling us the story of individual youth and their behavior and their challenges, that's really telling us a story about our own system and our own policies. we don't know what it will take to move to that recognition. to me this particular issue around young people who cross over, it is really a canary in the coal mine issue. the number of young people that we have from foster care who have interaction with our juvenile justice system is a perfect indicator of the overall health of our child welfare system. and the ability of our system to provide nurturing safe and stable supports to children and child welfare. it is our child welfare system's responsibility to provide adults who are loving and caring and to give children an environment that can create safety, stability and healing. we know anytime that a young person has contact with the juvenile justice system, that likely we have failed in some regard. and too often we interpret the data and we tell the system, the story of what's happening, as a story of young people who are seriously disturbed, or having behavior problems, or acting out. we could take a different perspective and when we look at the data that tells us multiple placements make it more likely that a young person will have juvenile justice involvement. that being placed in a group home makes it more likely the a young person will have juvenile justice involvement, that running away makes it more likely. we could look at that then as a story about our ability as a system to serve those young people rather than the young people themselves. and how damaged they might be. the juvenile justice system as i mentioned before had some major changes and one of the most significant that i want to talk about is really moving the system towards diversion. and that's been an acknowledgement of all of the data that i mentioned earlier about how harmful and damaging even one touch with being in detention or with law enforcement is. so in just about every situation possible, and here in california, you see extraordinary changes in our juvenile halls with populations in many of the facilities down to less than half of what they were several years ago. we are moving towards making sure that young people at all costs do not have to be incarcerated. however, the experience of youth from foster care is much, much different. often times when the young person from foster care is referred to the juvenile justice system. the same risk assessment instrument that is used to divert most young people is bypassed and that young person is taken into juvenile hall. the irony of this is that of course because they are in foster care, we have an automatic assurance that they have 24 hour care and supervision. and a place to live, where for most young people who are living at home with their parents that is a primary deciding factor. and whether or not public safety will allow them to remain in the community rather than incarcerated. but in fact, it has the opposite effect for many of our foster youth and they are automatically taken into detention, and this is not a small issue. we over the past two years have been looking in detail at several of our congregate care facilities across california. and i'm going to tell you a little bit about one of the facilities, we've been looking at. because although it's an outlier, it's very telling. one county operated shelter in the central valley who then public record acts request and looked at the data on this facility. in the first 6 months of last year, they called law enforcement nearly 1,700 times on the young people who are in this home. it is a 40 bed facility, you really have to work in order to call the police that many times on the youth in the home. in looking at the type of things that the police were called on for young people was normal teenage behaviours. in fact, it was behaviours that are the very work of the teenage sort of develop, healthy development. getting in to fights with their peers, talking back to staff members, consensual sex between residence, use of alcohol. a good number of these calls to law enforcement had to do with young people running away. when we talked with young people who lived in this facility, the primary reason for them running away was that there was no internet access in this particular shelter. so they were running away across the street to the hospital, so they could use the internet hotspot. and to me this is a great example, because it tells us where the disconnect is between what we know to be true, as everything we know what it takes to raise a healthy young person to adulthood. and our policies and practices inside of many of our child welfare congregate care facilities and our system as a whole. this is one facility where we see a huge disconnect, many of these young people were not detained indefinitely. most of them were either cited and released or taken to juvenile hall for a time out and brought back to the facility. but what is happening in this particular facility is telling of the way that law enforcement is being used in many facilities in california. which is they're stepping in as a substitute for a parent. and in fact, the facility is turning over part of their care into provision responsibilities to law enforcement. so for those of us who are parents, i know blade and i are both. i'm a mommy, he's a daddy. we both do everything possible to shield our children from the impacts of law enforcement. i do not feel safe and comfortable calling the police when my child talks back to me, because i worry about what the police will do to my child. and now with a child who's entering the teenage years, i am even more conscious of the way that my child looks in the eyes of law enforcement. so it is absolutely a crisis that we are using law enforcement in this way to deal and to take over the with part of the parenting with our young people. although this particular facility is egregious and it really is an outlier. the same story that is told day after day on a smaller scale in many of our conversation facilities particularly those where young people come in crisis. our shelters in california, a place where young people are coming in either having just been removed or in between placements. it is a place where we should be prepared for behaviors that result from the trauma that they've experienced where we should be prepared because there's a large population of teenagers that they will be doing what healthy teenagers do. which is testing limits, challenge authorities, look for social activities. and if they can't find those healthy developmental experiences in the facility, they will leave the facility to go get them or they will make them there. i can't underscore enough how important what the recommendations that blade made around extracurricular activities, social experiences, and friendships. if our system simply focused on those as prevention, i truly believe we'd see an entirely different response. in closing, i just want to ask a few questions. as you are listening to the rest of the testimony today. what protections exist to protect against children becoming either dual status or crossing over for behavior that would not result in juvenile court action for children in the community? and as the authority to reject inappropriate cases and probation clearly delineated. what criteria gets used to determine whether juvenile justice or dual jurisdiction is appropriate? and what criteria is used to determine whether it's inappropriate? so for example, the question that i always think of is, what is it that's available in the juvenile justice system that you cannot get in the dependency system? we hear too many social workers and congregate care facilities saying, we had to call in the juvenile justice system or probation to get the youth the services they needed. there is never a time that anybody should be saying that. if we do not have the services and the support in the child welfare system to meet the needs of young people, then we need to build those. so we need put in place the resources and policies that make those appropriate. what services were supposed to be provided to that youth in the dependency case, where they actually provide? and is there some sort of a process for investigating whether problems at that group home or foster home. the staff abuse bullying by other residents, inadequate activities and supports. or in the childs trajectory in the system, multiple placements, long periods in the shelter, poor unification systems contributed to the delinquent behavior. what crisis and respite services were available to those caregivers or providers that would have alleviated the need to proceed with delinquency proceedings? should the system have alternatives in place to calling law enforcement to deal with problems that might arise in the congregate care facility or the resource family? who provides reasonable efforts, reunification services, permanency supports, and other transition services when youth are moved over to the juvenile justice system, and how do those get coordinated? too many young people are like blade and that in the juvenile justice system and then release with the foster care system never stepping back again. to offer any support. this results in young people losing eligibility for extended foster care, being unable to get medi-cal to 26 and many of the other really critical supports that help youth transition to adulthood, successfully. what, if anything, is done to address the child's needs that resulted in their initial removal from their home while that young person is in the juvenile justice system? and do our data requirements assure that a meaningful evaluation of dual jurisdiction and of youth who cross over is possible? shouldn't we be requiring counties at the very least to collect data on the nature of the offense, who requested the petition? was it the caregiver, was it law enforcement, what the placement was immediately prior, what the placement history was, the mental health, education and service history, the length of time that young people spend in secure confinement, the length of time that they spend in their delinquent status, the services that are provided in the delinquency system and whether the child has been returned to the dependent status. from the system's point of view, shouldn't counties also collect data on the cost to each system of services and placements? so the last thing i want to leave you with is that the majority of these questions and recommendations were actually developed by the youth loss center in 2005. so we are 12 years from the time that we first asked these questions of the system. and during that time countless young people have been dumped into a system that disposes of them. and i don't think it is inappropriate to say that the majority of those young people are black and latino. and so at a time in child welfare and in the juvenile justice system where we are increasingly aware of the impact of our disparate policies and practices and where we need to be taking extra steps to ensure that these young people are treated equally, it seems to me that over a decade is too long to wait to truly take action on this. thank you so much for listening to me.
[{'start': 120, 'end': 129, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2157, 'end': 2164, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 9242, 'end': 9247, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
 : of the caretakers and preschools and
[]
Will Lightbourne: Thank you Chair Stone, Chair Jones, Will Lightbourne from the California Department of Social Services. I just want to frame a bit from the state perspective and then our county colleagues and both system will go into more details of specific practices. I'd like to touch just for a moment on the who it is we are talking about and what those numbers look like. On an annual basis, approximately 500,000 reports of child abuse are made to county child welfare agencies. Those 500,000 referrals eventually turn into about 80,000 substantiations of abuse or neglect and those in turn may lead to about, annually approximately about 30,000 children entering out of home care for some period of time. At any point in time there were probably because of entries and exits about 45,000 children in out of home care, in the Juvenile Justice System they receive about 100,000 referrals annually of whom about half of those result. And petitions being filed. So, what's the interaction between these two sets of numbers and the people who this represents? Almost just observing, its difficult to say because we have non-interactive data systems at this point. But it's also hard to say because words mean different things in whichever conversation you happen to be in. So let me just establish some basic standards. Some people refer to children or youth who are known to the system. That would include the referrals that did not result in substantiation that would. Refer to the referrals that do not result in petitions. It's a vast number and so most of the concentrated work we're going to do we're going to step up to a level below. There's touched by the system, so that would include the substantiating. That would probably include interviews that are done by probation related staff or law enforcement staff. There's crossover, these are the children or youth who started in one system. Their case ended or suspended in that system and they entered the other system and it can go either way, but it is largely been from the child welfare system to the juvenile probation system. And with many of the characteristics that Ms Heldman noted on the last panel. And then there's the dual status youth. Who are the youth who have cases open in both systems and in some counties that either means that one system is on hold or in other counties it means they are simply agreeing on who the lead agency is in the degree of collaboration. You'll hear from my colleagues about some of the specific approaches that have been used in different locations. But, from the state perspective, I'd observe that from what we can see from the data we do have, success can be obtained in any one of the structural environments so long as the relationship, and the practice, and the cultures, I particularly like Ms Heldman emphasizing that, the cultures at the ground are intentionally committed to making that work happen. So far we've been sort of primarily talking about two systems, probation and child welfare, but it's important I think that we reference two others that are integral to the possibility of success and meeting the goals that I think we all share here. And that's both the mental health system and the school systems. In terms of mental health I think the single determinant in crossover and dual cases is whether youth receive the appropriate assessments and trauma informal services at the beginning of there contact with either system. Actually there was no body killed there were only youth who had not received the services they needed at the time they needed them from the education system, the identification of a child's trauma based needs and meeting those needs rather than reliance on the discipline system I think is the other key ingredient in making the connections work. And we all have to be part of that solution. I had the Privileged before I was in this role of being in Santa Clara County and that was a county in which there was a very intentional decision by the Board of Supervisors to have all the systems work with schools, and what they refer to the school link services, to try to ensure that wherever the child is entering and wherever the first contacts have beening made services were getting there. But a caution that was a approach that involved the significant investment, the kind of resources. And there was a conscious choice to do it and I think it has shown in the outcome data that we can see that it's worth doing it that way. So where are we now in California and what are our critical junctures? First, as mentioned by Ms Rodriguez, and we do almost all of these things in really close partnership with both California Youth Connection and Youth Law Center. Ms Rodriguez never sizes to inspire me. The continuum of Care reforms Charles Stone authored two years ago now embodies the following qualities. Assessment that are done at the beginning of a child's contact with the child welfare system Integration of mental health as a proactive player with both the Child Welfare System and the Juvenile Probation System if that's where the child is being cared for at that point. The progress that's been made around that is both the assessment instruments and pilot testing in a number of counties. And the instructions for mental health services access, claiming, and the actual training around that is now underway. A comment that Ms Heldman raised which was an extremely important is the notion of engaging all in a teaming process to support a child in identifying their needs and resolving those. And the child family teaming system which is supported through consumer care reform is that place which is going to bring together all of those people who are part of the child's service system and life support system, including education, is their expectation. Reducing the use of congregate care and emphasizing home-based care like these were the mission statement of continued care reform is, all children deserve to live with a committed, nurturing and permanent family that prepares the youth for successful transition into adulthood. So the core construct is those lifetime commitments of appropriate adults to a child. Another piece that is under way at this point AB388. Which was inactive several years ago. Assemblyman Chespera's bill, which requires the monitoring of congregate care facilities that may be doing heavy referral to law enforcement. Possibly as a means of discipline and the data from the first couple of years, or at least the second year of that is either available on our website or will be in the next couple of days. The caution I would offer about looking to those facilities that use referrals to law enforcement is this. Some of it is a system self-inflicted wound. And let me explain what I mean by that. We place facilities that we license under a degree of scrutiny that from the facility perspective is not always nuance. And so there is an expectation on at least the facilities believe there is that every time a child leaves the facility without permission or unaccompanied that they have to call a report to law enforcement or they are at risk of licensing violations and things like that. As part of CCR and with our partners we've been sort of working with our licensing staff to really try to nuance, how do we help this? All of the caregivers in the child welfare system move from sort of a risk averse fair based model to a prudent parenting model. Where people are acting as the examples we were discussing on the last panel with the children we ourselves care for. AB 1911, which is referenced in your background package, Ms Eggman's bill that has the juvenile justice, that the Judicial Council convening work groups to look at both data collection and the definitions that go into that. Just informationally, we are expecting this month to implement the first of the codes in the case management system that can start to track the dual and crossover youth. We realize there's a lot further definition to come from the Judicial Council work. But, we feel that having early access to information will put us in a stronger position planning for the future. And then, SBA55, which was adopted a couple of years ago as part of, well, it was the state budget, included the development of the support services and interventions for commercially sexually exploited children. A key part of what that did and what that requires is the development of very active protocols at the local level between child welfare, law enforcement, probation, mental health, schools, everyone who is going to touch a child. Because as we move towards the commitment of saying we are going to serve exploited trafficked children as victims, not as some part of a justice system then having all of those systems work effectively together becomes critical. So to conclude, there are a lot of sort of these initiatives which are now sort of coming to their critical points, they're somewhat overlapping, its almost like traffic management with some of it. I consider myself someone who persistently sees the world as glass half full, half empty rather. And so although things have move forward, we still have a great work to do and committed to doing it. Thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 21, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 29, 'end': 34, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 36, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2123, 'end': 2130, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2793, 'end': 2800, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4563, 'end': 4572, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4702, 'end': 4711, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4769, 'end': 4782, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5374, 'end': 5381, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6270, 'end': 6278, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7615, 'end': 7621, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
David McManus: I appreciate the opportunity, thank you. Yes, David Mcmanus, Assistant Chief of Placer County and we are a dual status county. I think because a lot of others have already touched on the 241.1 process itself, I'm going to talk a little bit about creating a system of care and true integration and how that will help you be successful in implementing the 241.1 process. Because in Placer I have had the luxury of moving into a system that was, has been sustained for decades now. And there truly are lessons that have been Learned about integration, collaboration and communication. And through cross-pollination of probation and CWS staff as they co-locate and cultures change. And truly we do have a 241.1 MOU and it talks about some of the best practices that have been identified such as less least restrictive level of care and family centered approach and unified case plans,which we all do. But more importantly is that our staff have evolved in change and they truly think in a different way, we have probation officers that understand trauma and form care. They understand when they're seeing certain delinquency acts and that comes from neglect and abuse. And we now have a long standing tradition of refusing to criminalize some of those acts. And one of the things I also heard earlier was the need for crisis centres and mental health response. And we do have luxury of having a Crisis Resolution Centre in our community. So we talk about diversion and we are focussed on diversion but some of those cases are diverted from our delinquency system before they even get to us. Some of those vandalism type cases, or pushing past mom in the hallway which would have been a battery, and arrest into the hall. We have a crisis resolution center that's dealing with that and we get great results from that. And also recently we developed a mobile response team for mental health response. And that goes down to even 16 year olds can benefit from this mobile response team that can divert where police when we've heard a lot about police shouldn't be doing the parenting, police shouldn't be doing the direct intervention. This allows mental health to step in and divert those cases that would typically be brought to our juvenile detention facility. Another thing that we've learned, a key lesson that we've learned is the importance for some policy board to oversee all agencies and to get true buy-in. And we do have a systems management advocacy, geez, resource team, yes. And it is headed up by our juvenile judge and has the Director of Health Human Services, and the Probation Chief, and the Office of Education Superintendent and that team holds staff and systems true to the culture of integration. Another thing that we have had success with is blended funding when it comes to out-of-home placements. I think one of the issues with the lack of communication between systems is fiscal issues. Out-of-home placement is expensive, when there is a blended part of funding for out-of-home placement that can be utilized by CWS or probation. Some of those turf wars are eliminated and the focus is on the family and the child and what's best and not on the system's fiscal outcome from the decision. We also have multidisciplinary teams that weigh in on decisions and are even part of the 241.1 process at times at least making a recommendation. And we've evolved that into instead of being government run by any one agency, those are not facilitated by family advocates. So families come in, they feel comfortable, they are able to share their experience, brainstorm, bring in resources, and truly help children and families be successful. A lot of what I've read about the best practices from California are things that we've already incorporated into our MOU. And it really tells me that we've had the luxury being out in the front of integration and truly, I think success in a 241.1 system and being able to step back as a probation department and recommend that minor not be on probation or that he or she gets diversion from the beginning. I think, know that theres a system in place, really allows more creativity and due to respond throughout the spectrum as you should and avoid criminalizing minors that come in at least in to our system, and I will stop there.
[{'start': 46, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barbara Duey: good afternoon barbara i'm from the children's loss center of california. i'm an attorney supervisor there and a care project director and i'm also a member of the robert f kennedy children's action core dual status practice network, so i get to work with jessica. it's wonderful to hear these practices, los angeles we struggle with our size, there is no question about that. our offices represent 33,000 children in foster care. alone so, somebody said something about 100 kids. we have 100 youth a month that get arrested and go through the 241.1 process every single month. early on, we were very early dual status county as well. we started building the dual status system in 2005. in 2006, we launched it, in 2007, and it went county wide in 2012. we had all the same stakeholders from all different disciplines, the attorneys, the advocates, service providers, and all the agencies. and i think we did a very good job of identifying the youth, notifying, creating the legal process. i think our biggest challenge has been and continues to be the dual supervision piece. so you've heard about the lead agency and on hold, we are lead agency. that means when a youth is designated dual status, they have both a probation officer and a social worker working with them. partly due to our size, but also historically in california, probation and child welfare have worked in silos. they have no history of working together, they have separate cultures and i don't want to speak for any other county but i know that in los angeles county and the first 18 years,i was, or at 15 years old i was at the children law center, if the youths got arrested, they went to probation,there was no communication at all whatsoever between the child welfare system and the probation system. so when we became a dual status system, and these youths came out, we had their disposition they were given dual status. they were given this to a social worker and a probation officer who were just not used to talking to each other. so we saw very poor communication, we saw gaps in services. we saw delays in court, because you have a dependency court in one part of la and a delinquency court in another, and they are trying out to find out what is happening in each other's courts. the social worker might be in the dependency court, but they do not go to delinquency court. the probation officers in the delinquency court, but they do not go to the dependency court. so, all the important people, since we have two judges and not one, the two judges don't get all the information. they get it piece mail from different people. the result was, or has been, because of all of this that the delays, the gaps, and services, and so a youth who's now been placed on probation, they're not getting linked, they don't know who's supervising them. the attorney, as the attorney for the child, i'm not sure who's supposed to link them to drug counseling, who's going to link them to therapy and who do i go to if that doesn't happen. so the result is the youth would often stumble and fall. and then they would go deeper into the juvenile justice system. they are the ones who are held accountable, not the agencies. the judge would say you have not done this. you haven't done your community service. so, they would go deeper. and so what children law center did? our answer to this problem was creating the care unit, which is a specialized unit within clc. originally, we wanted to just to address the gaps and improve the communication, but we reached a little higher and we decided what we really wanted to do was provide more support, direct support for the youth. and we wanted to provide empathetic support with a trauma focused lens and a clinical perspective. so what we did was we contracted with several msw graduate schools. and we have msw interns to come to clc for a year. they are trained, and they are paired with the attorney, and they are paired with a dual status youth. and each intern has two, three, to four youth that they are assigned to and they see that youth every single week. they attend every hearing whether its dependency or delinquency. every meeting whether it's an mdt as part of the 241, or whether it's a school meeting or an iep or just a school meeting check in. group home meetings, cfts, anything you can think of that the youth goes to from both sides were there with the youth. so number one the youth sees us, it's the same person or the same team, and they have that support. and also we kind of become the single point of contact for everybody. because we are at all these things, we can provide more consistent and current information to the two judges and to the attorneys. we're the dependency attorney, but there's also a delinquency attorney and a district attorney. and when we go to the delinquency hearing, we can give them information about what's happening on the dependency side, what service the youth is receiving or not receiving. and what's happening with their placement. that's kind of what we were going for. the number one goal is to help the foster youth navigate through and successfully complete probation at the earliest possible moment. what i've seen in the 27 years that i've been at clc, is that foster youth, we know that they get arrested more often and detained longer. but they are on probation much longer, they linger on probation. and what i realize is, that they don't have a parent they are helping them through probation. if my daughter or your child was on probation, we would make sure they got signed up for community service, we would make sure they had transportation to do their community service that they got transportation to therapy. and that they would get up on saturday morning. someone would wake them up, they're teenagers and say you got to go do this. the majority of our kids, as you heard from jennifer are living in congregate care. they don't have parents, they have staff. and it's a rotating staff and they are not there to, they don't micro manage the children in the way they should be, that the way a parent does. so the care unit tries to provide that support. with the insurance act as support, as a mentor, as someone to encourage the youth. they communicate directly and constantly with the supervising probation officer and the social worker, and the school, and the placement and make sure that everybody is kind of on the same page. we do the same thing when we go to the courts so that the judges know what's going on. the relationship that the care unit has with the youth is very unique because we can attend all the meetings. we can be a better facilitator of the youth and the agencies and between the agencies themselves. i'm often calling the social worker telling them what's happening on the probation case or vice versa. so that everybody is in, on the same page. the youth know that the attorney and their care intern keeps their confidence. so the youth are more open and willing to talk about their needs and their challenges. and then that gives us the information we need to get them into the right services. the judge and probational may not know that they have a substance abuse problem. they tell us that they do. we can get them referred to a drug council and testing program, and we can do that quickly. the contact we have with the youth i think as i said is approximately four times a week. this is something that our case carrying  attorneys couldn't dream of doing with 220 clients each and in courts every single day with anywhere from eight to 15 cases everyday, they can't even take the time off to go to the 241 hearing which i think is essential for all the attorneys to be at. so we were able to do this by securing private funding to supplement the state funding. we felt that that was essential to do because, these kids are most at risk kids. they really need the support. and we are finding that with this extra support and advocacy they are doing much better. last year we had or in the last year we had 96 cases, 53 closed and 43 of those cases closed successfully. we saw a 44% increase in school attendance, not sure if that was kind of came out of the sky but we took it. and the other part of it that i think was unexpected but very positive outcome was we have created a great collaboration with the supervising probational officers. we work with them, we do cross trainings together. once they have gotten to know my interns and they are used to our calls, what they will do when a youth starts to act out or show some negative behavior instead of just filing a triple seven, a probation violation, they call us. i had a probation officer stop me in the hall and ask me if a certain youth was in my care unit and i said yes and they said, this certain youth had tested positive for drugs on his drug test. can you get him into a program? and we were able to do that. we were able to do that like the next day. and that avoided a probation violation, which i think is the type of thing that happens in smaller counties all the time, and i envy that. i think that's really wonderful, but in a county such as los angeles, with so many kids and so many different players, that just never used to happen. i mean, the probation officer was more of a gotcha back then. i have seen juvenile probation really turn around, i've seen the culture there. becoming again more trauma informed and more understanding of the foster youth through this relationship they have had with the care unit. i wanted just to kind of end by saying that the intern and the care unit team is the relationship with the youth is key. and i think anything we can do to create a type of program or service where there is somebody who has that relationship with the youth. it's something that blake said in his testimony that he never had someone tell him he could do it, never had someone tell him he was special or he was the best. and that's what we do for these kids. we tell them they can do it and that we're there to help them. we make sure they understand what they need to do on probation. we make sure there's no barriers and it they have the tools needed to be successful. so that when they go back before the delinquency judge, hopefully we can show that they've complied and get the mock probation and back to independency. so i think that ideally i think depending on the country size obviously there's different models that work. but any way, we could find a way to support the youth, the way care supports the youth, and focus on helping the youth succeed. too many times i see, and again, i am just going to speak for la, i see sometimes probation and social workers kind of, it is your job, no, it's your job. and that should not be the focus. the focus should be on making sure that you succeed. thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 256, 'end': 263, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5870, 'end': 5878, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 9789, 'end': 9794, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 10631, 'end': 10633, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michelle Callejas: Good afternoon. Michelle Callejas, Child Welfare Director for Sacramento County. Thank you very much for focusing on this area. It is a critical issue for both child welfare and probation. So I will give you just a real brief on where we are in Sacramento. So sometime back in 2011 the decision was made to not go dual jurisdiction in our county. I came on in 2012 and there were feelings about that decision that I think were led by child welfare. And so we started having discussions about do we go that route, and instead focused on how do we serve this population better, how do we come to better understand this population regardless of whether we embark upon the dual jurisdiction work. So there was commitment from probation, child welfare education, and behavioral health initially early on. And we started with the positive youth justice initiative and did some work through 2013. But at the end of 2013, we decided that where we were headed with the particular grant we were going after and the resources we had, it just didn't feel like it was a fit for us at that time. So, Assistant Chief Shores had a great deal of contact with Georgetown University's Center for Juvenile Justice Reform and we decided to embrace a crossover youth practice model. So in 2014 we really delved into that, began to understand the model and talked openly about where we saw it fit, it didn't fit for a county, and realized that really it was a great model for what we had locally. And in November of 2014, the presiding judge, myself and Mister Shores along with our behavioral health director, County Office of Education, and County Council all flew out to Georgetown, which we thought was going to be, yay, fun! But it was just an intensive seven day course on multi-systems Integration. And it was really great and I think we came out of it, it was not only enriching, but we came out of it with stronger partnerships, relationships, personally and professionally. We realize we all really liked each other which is helpful when you are doing really difficult work. But we also came out with the renewed sense of commitment to do better by these kids and a renewed sense of urgency. So we came back and formed an executive Committee and began considering what it is, what steps we needed to put into place. We began developing our crossover youth practice model protocol that Judge Cayeti spoke to. I will not go into great detail but it really is the same type of work that we endeavored here in Sacramento County. I would say a couple of the areas of success or the areas that are needed when systems embark on this type of work is first and foremost leadership from the top. If it were not for the commitment from the judge and probation and child welfare and education and behavioral health, I don't think we would be where we are today. And we wanted to put something in place which we are still working on, that is sustainable. So that if one of us leaves, the work doesn't just crumble and I think that's a real challenge. But we really held a lot at our level as we were pushing stuff down and did a lot of the troubleshooting as an executive Committee. And then I think that really helped inform how it is we rule this out to our staff across four different major entities. So, I think we have as an executive Committee really come from a core belief that it's not your kid, it's not my kid, it's not their kid, that it's our kid, these are all our kids. As a major child serving systems, we have joint responsibility and joint accountability for better serving them in ways that will enhance child safety, community safety, enhanced emotional well-being and academic success. And as you look at those outcomes, and again, across four major systems that tend to be entrenched where we are. It is a large endeavor but it is a very worthy one, and one that we do have a responsibility to pursue. So after we developed our protocols and really kind of parallel, I think another area where we were successful was in our stakeholder engagement. And the same stakeholder groups that both judge Cayette and Ms Duey spoke to where it is child welfare probation education behavioral health. Bringing in for the child welfare side the public defender's office and District Attorney was new for us. And in the same respect for our probation partners bringing into children's law center, the attorneys that represent the kids in court was new. We had children's law center there and we had a court appointed special advocates, there were, I would say, very robust conversations, and really, it was good, because the first several meetings. And it overlapped with our work with commercially sexually exploited youths, so it is hard to kind of separate out the two, but really the cultures of each system came forth, and the rehabilitation or detention versus advocacy, there were a lot of discussions that needed to happen early on. But I think where we are so fortunate in our community is no one walked away. Everyone that hung in there through those difficult conversations to help get us to where we are today, so I think director Lightborn spoke to the importance of communication and I think out of the leadership out of the stakeholder process, that in order to make this work there has gotta be transparency and strong communication across us at the executive level team and also across our systems. We realized early on the assumptions that social workers were making about probation officers. I mean you could walk by cubicles. Why doesn't probation go do something? Why don't they go do this? And Mike can hear the same thing in his side, what is child welfare doing, they never do anything, the papers are right. And so, how we had to shift that? We have called joint management team meetings. So that we can kind of clear those urban mess, those mistaken expectations. I think our side so probation has having all this authority. And so really understanding each other scope, limitations, mandates And that has really promoted a great deal of understanding. And what we also know is being face-to face it is a little harder to send snarky emails or not respond to phone calls right? So we really wanted to help foster that and we continue with those meetings as we try to move the work forward and down to the line level. Some of the work groups that we've developed are continuing to go, we started early on with really putting together all the assessment processes that a youth go through, from child welfare to behavioral health to probation and education. we assess the heck of our kids and so really looking at, how much is too much? And I think that is a challenge that I across our state we have to come to is kind of what is the proper dosage and when are we over assessing and still under serving. So we also had a prevention and disproportionality work group where we have more work to do on that. And then the delayed data collection and data sharing. And as you can imagine when it comes to data sharing across these core systems it was complex. And what we basically did is shoved all the attorneys in one room to figure out HIPAA and FERPA and the juvenile court confidentiality and they worked their magic and then, we are now at a point where we are sharing our data across systems and with the goal of ultimately finding some type of IT system where we can house it, also that we can pull reports. I think the other success has been the teaming, and I think both LA and San Diego are doing it and the child and family team meetings, which really evolved out of the mental health world and wraparound services, are really effective practice, and I am really glad that they were included in continuum of care reform. Because right now we are required to do them only for kids receiving mental health services. But it is best practice for all kids when they are- Multiple systems surveying children and youth. So we have implemented child and family team meetings. I think for our colleagues in probation, that was just, it might can speak to the cultural shifts there. We're used to working with the families and it's just a new world for probation from that end. But that has been really successful in bringing youth and families to the table. Having youth be able to identify who they see as a support person. It could be a teacher, it could be a coach. And having the parents be able to identify who they want in the room. And it gives us an opportunity to explain, here's a role of probation, here's a role of child welfare. And to give the respect to the parents as experts on their family, regardless of the choices they've made, I think, goes really far in getting them better engaged and having buy-in to the services and case plans that are ultimately developed. The 241.1 assessments, I think, for us was a significant shift. And so and I should have started earlier our definition of crossover youth as a child with an open child welfare case who gets a citation or is arrested by law enforcement. And so there's an immediate notification process from probation, they're able to access a child welfare system. They see there's an open investigation or open case. They contact our side. We have an email that goes to, an email that checked constantly. Also includes the social worker supervisor on the case. And our protocols immediately go into place for a joint team in discussion about next steps. For the assessment determine which system is best to serve the youth, deliquency or dependency. I'm embarrassed to say this but it really was kind of a check sheet. A check list and it was sometimes a phone call or messages left or email. It was not the type of comprehensive assessment that are used to serve or that could really help inform next steps. So now they have face to face meetings. We had a recent visit from Georgetown University. And we had probation officers and social workers on a panel all talking about this process. And it was great to see and hear the success and their excitement about the process. Because both sides are getting far more information. It has helped us all see that these are the same kids. But for very few outliers, these are the same kids who many of whom have been through extreme trauma, often cumulative. And so their behaviors get manifested differently. But I think the process is so much richer and helps inform decisions to the court as well as helps inform the service plan and delivery that is going to roll out for the youth and family. And I think again the importance of these meetings is a communication and coordination of services in care. When we don't do that, kids fall through the cracks and need simply go on map. Couple of challenges. And I don't want to keep saying it but mental health, mental health, mental health, mental health. Mental health services are critical to well in a number of areas. One before kids even come into child welfare or probation. My mantra is the way to prevent kids from crossing over from child welfare to probation is keep them out of child welfare. So I'd really love being able to have the resources to serve the children and families upfront, strengthen families, keep kids home when it's safe to do so. But once we come in to our care, if we really want to realize the goals and vision by Continuum of Care Reform, we have to have the mental health services in place. Wherever the kids are placed. So if it is in a group home or a short term therapeutic residential program, when it's necessary, if we really want it to be an intervention rather than a placement then there must be the mental health services and therapeutic interventions there to meet the youth's needs to help get them stabilized, and help prepare them for transition to a family based setting. But that's the critical work is having them in the group homes while we want to reduce the use of them and we're absolutely committed to them. We also know that sometimes it's needed but it should be for short term. And so stepping them down into a foster family home to a resource parent, to a relative, you heard Mr. Oestreich talk about being with relatives, what we have done to this point is we place kids with relatives, it is core value of ours. But we find a relative and we say thank you very much and then we see them once a month. We were providing the training, the supports and the mental health services can come into their home and best meet the needs of that youth. So they are needed there and then they are also needed if we are able to transition that youth back to their family, that's a very significant time of vulnerability, as reunification. Everyone pulls out and our families are left now to negotiate this new dynamic, with their kids being home. So the mental health services, and I'll quit saying it, but they really are critical to making this all work. A couple of other challenges, collaboration's very hard, and yet so important. And so I think that it's messy, it takes time, and it takes a lot of resources from our staff. And so it's easy to work in silos and I know I have social workers who say, this is my child, I've had them, this is my family, nobody else can touch them. And it's not effective. And so helping shift the culture within to really embrace and value these team meetings, and to call the probation officers, to meet with the probation officers, to share information. It's a hard sell when they have 25, 30 other children on their caseload or youth under caseload. But it's important. So having the time and allowing them the time to do that is a significant challenge. A quick example, we had a youth who just turned 12 and he's been in our system for a while. He runs from placement frequently and he's very vulnerable. He's got mental health issues. He's got some cognitive impairments, and does not make good choices. And our law enforcement partners have been involved, probation's been involved, we've been involved. And it was last week some time, it took about seven hours of phone calls with the District Attorney. Children's law center, probation, meetings, consultations, to finally figure out how we could serve him and keep him safe. And we hope it works but the amount of time it took with so many people is just a reality from the resource perspective.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2378, 'end': 2384, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4093, 'end': 4100, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4108, 'end': 4112, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5127, 'end': 5136, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5600, 'end': 5604, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 12113, 'end': 12122, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Shores: Thank you and I appreciate the opportunity to speak. My name is Michael Shores. I'm the Assistant Chief Probational Officer here in Sacramento County. I'm going to try to not go into some of the same detail that Michelle just went over relative to some of the work that Sacramento County has done and I think instead, what I'll try to do is put the probation specific approach and include some of the challenges that come with probation moving into this collaborative environment that we've engaged in. I've been with the department for 26 years. I worked in a variety of different assignments. As a line officer all the way through supervisor. So I'm bringing a perspective about how probation has worked over the years with youth that are in the dependency system. And frankly up until I got into a management position I don't know that I ever communicated with a social worker. It was something that just didn't occur. So all of the comments, all of the previous panelists that have spoken, those comments were accurate and I have that perspective as I engage on this work. One of the reasons we moved toward the cross over youth practice model was the recognition that we were working in silos. We've heard that previously and it was really accurate and I think that's really the challenge, breaking down those silos. And as I get through my comments I really want to stop and focus on the communication piece as it relates to the delinquency system and the youth as they start to move into the delinquency system. The crossover youth practice model allowed us to really establish goals, something that didn't exist with the work that we were trying to do in Sacramento county and I'll go briefly over those goals because I think they are important because if you don't have goals, if you don't have outcome measures, you don't have an ability to really articulate your successes and or engage your failures. CYPM allowed us to first, really focus on identifying who are crossover youth. We recognize early on in this work that we weren't doing a good job. Of even identifying at the earlier age of the process who those youth were that had been involved and were currently and actively involved in the children welfare system. The second goal is sharing data and resources and I think that was really one of the biggest eye opening challenges for us was that working together we can achieve a lot more, but we never did that. And the data that we had; was again not shared. There was actually a belief I think between systems that it was probably inappropriate and potentially illegal to share data between systems. So that was something we had to overcome as well. Another issue that is a huge goal is, reducing the reliance on detention for youth who but, for their dependency status may be released from the probation system. When a child presents to us at detention and we have no options for placement. When we have no licensed facilities that we have an ability to place that youth into, besides detention, we're making decisions that are based on the child's safety. That's a challenge for us and I think it's an issue that we continue to work through. It's a challenge for child welfare and it's a challenge for probation. But one of our goals is to try to create and establish alternatives to the detention facility for those youth. Another goal was to reduce the reliance on out of home placement for those youth that are in probation placement to reduce our reliance on congregate care something that continued care reform is assisting us with as well. A broader goal for probation is reduce for recidivism and long term recidivism rates for those youths we're actively tracking that. For probation one of the, another big challenge was to increase family and youth in the decision-making process. Again, this is a concept that i think was born out of the child welfare and behavioral health systems that was pretty foreign to the probation department and to probation systems in general. So, getting officers in the system to recognized that youth and family could, should and may, in fact, be of value in the decision-making process is also something that's new and it's a concept that I think probation is continuing to understand. That is one of our goals. We want to increase the satisfaction with our county process. I think that's a simple one to achieve if we can achieve all of the others. And last we wanted to increase the quality of our joint assessments I think something that director pay has spoke to our joint assessments met the mandate of the law but they didn't do more than that we really met the minimum standard of what was expected and there is a lot more that can be done through good communication and good collaboration. As director Callejas said we implemented in October of 2016. Our implementation efforts are early, our outcomes are still evolving, we're starting to recognize some very early successes, I'll talk about that here briefly in a second, but currently we have 41 youth in Sacramento county that are being jointly supervised by a social worker and a probation officer. Those youth are dualy involved. They remain in the dependency system and they're actively on some form of either court diversion or probation diversion that allows us to keep them in the dependency system while we work with them and support the social workers in their care. Some of the things that are working. I mentioned some of the child welfare practices the use of child and family team meetings, a concept that probation abrupt practice that we didn't utilize. But we now in Sacramento County have trained all of our probation officers in the CFT process and not only where we'll be participating, we'll be actually facilitating the CFT as we move into the future. That's something as well that continue of care reform has helped push us towards. There's been some funding to help with the training and there's been a mandate that CFTs will be a part of the process. Fortunately for us with cross over youth practice model we were a little bit ahead of some of those mandates. The use of multidisciplinary team meetings, that is another. A huge practice for us that we know will have a huge impact and particularly working with these youths. So we've implemented MDT's that are working with these youths at a variety of stages. I think Judge will talk about that and some of C-Sec work. All of our staff have been trained on trauma, and so. Another area that we're recognizing is critically important, whether the youth is in the dependency system or whatever youth that comes into the delinquency system. Every officer in the Sacramento county probation department has been trained on at least understanding the basics of trauma, but we've brought in a local provider that's helping us with some ongoing training efforts around that as well. With training comes joint training. We're training with social workers, we're training with behavioral health staff, and we're training with some of our community based organizations, so the training is really a collaborative approach. In communication again I wanted to really talk a bit about that, I understand we're short on time, I'll try to make that brief, but communication, it's been said multiple times and the different panels it's really critically the most important aspect of this work. And when you talk about a youth that's coming into the delinquency system, whether it's via citation or custodial arrest, there are different points of contact that allow for us to communicate with our partners in the child welfare system and start to make decisions that are really in the best interest of the child. And I could cite examples of each of those points of contact that we have circumvented or prevented the youth from coming into the delinquency system because of that communication. So I just wanted to highlight again that communication is really the critical aspect of the work that we're doing. Whatever model that you wish to pursue, I think communication is really the key component of that And we've seen that that's the greatest challenge and probably the area of our greatest success. I mentioned working with families to maintain the protective factors, we're doing more of that, that's going to be a work in progress for us on the probation side and it will continue with support from our child welfare partners. I move briefly into some of the challenges that we have before I close. The ability to use relative placements on the delinquency side is, again, new to us. We have historically not done a lot of family finding, we haven't done a lot of alternative to group home care sort of placements. Again, AB-403 has allowed us to start to explore that. And some of the funding that has come with that has allowed us to generate some contracts in Sacramento County that will assist with that family finding. And we actively now have 14 youth that have been referred, and we're hoping to find families to place them with in order to not use congregate cares, is that option. So we're seeing some progress there. But it remains a challenge, families are not often jumping up and down to accept our youth into their homes. And so there's a lot of work and engagement that needs to go with that practice and with those processes. Resources, and not specifically county resources, but the use of youth advocates, youth mentors and others to work with our youth is, again, there's a shortage of those that available to us. That's an area that we need to work collectivity to build up a pool and a group of people that are willing to come back and work on the delinquency side. I think oftentimes when youth age out or move out of the delinquency system and they've been involved in the dependency system, they're more willing to go back to the dependency system and do work versus come back to the delinquency system. And I think that's more of a recognition that delinquency hasn't welcomed that, and so that's an area that we need to improve on and we need to build those resources. I mentioned earlier the lack of alternatives to detention, so I won't talk much about that but it is a big issue, and something that we need to continue to look for options. Director Callejas House mentioned data sharing, the input and the access to the CWS/CMS system by probation remains a challenge, it requires basically duplicate efforts. We have our own case management systems. And when we have to enter data into the CWS/CMS system, it requires officers to do that work twice. With large case loads and challenging and complex cases that becomes an issue as well. Case management, I mentioned earlier case management is changing. How we managed these case loads is a little different. Our mandates aren't the same as child welfares. However, we're starting to understand that we have common goals and collectively working together, the way we manage these cases can be a little different than how we manage a high-risk case out in the community. So I'll close with, I think it's that common goal that continues to pull us together. It's the common goal that pulls us together at an executive level, and as we continue to move forward with our implementation efforts, we're seeing our officers and our social workers really gravitate towards that. And I am really eager, I'm excited to see what the future years bring in terms of the outcomes that we can generate, and I thank you today for the time to talk about this issue.
[{'start': 64, 'end': 78, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 212, 'end': 220, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4775, 'end': 4783, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Blade Oestreich: good afternoon and thank you for holding today's hearing and listening to my testimony. my name is blade jonah oestreich, i'm 24 years old. currently i hold position as a policy assistant at california youth connection and also run my own business and a father of two and i'm married already. my future goals are to move up in my organization that i'm working in right now. and yeah, that's it on my intro. today is the first time i have ever shared my experience of being placed in the juvenile justice system from kinship care. i think there are things that are different about my experience from many other foster youth but also some things in common that you have the future, the power to change. and that i hope you will take action on. i know my life has turned out well but a lot of that is because of my own advocacy and focus, and it doesn't turn out that way for most youth. i grew up in kinship care living with different relatives. i did not have a lot of support. i never really received parenting. i only saw a social worker twice over all the years that i was in kinship. my relatives only worried that i would come home by curfew, but often i didn't get support or guidance i needed. i didn't have anyone to teach me self sacrifice or self discipline. and so i started trying to fill the void with making people like me. i was eager and hungry to be liked and to prove myself as being the strongest and the best. i didn't have anyone who i felt saw me as the best. like i do for my son today, i always support and try to get him to the place that i wasn't as a youth. i didn't have anyone who i've felt supported all my decisions. i tried to fill my emptiness with people. this resulted in behaviors that weren't normal for me and hanging out with the wrong people. eventually, i ended up getting a year for someone else's crime. i didn't want to talk to anyone about it. and i didn't want to share the real story, i just decided to take the punishment. i felt that even if i was honest, the result would be the same. i spent six months in juvenile hall while my case was in court, and then i served an extra six months on top of that when it was finished. it was pretty scary being in juvenile hall. i would go to sleep having vivid dreams and being out and having fun with my family and siblings, waking up to the same brick wall every single day. the feeling of having nothing of your own there, not having your own clothes, not your shoes, not your underwear, toothpaste, or your food. you having to turn into a drone having to listen to all the mindless tasks all the time. i tried to make the best of my experience and sought out help. this was different from almost all the youth around me. i sought out what i needed: medic time to deal with health issues, school support so that i got teaching that matched how i learn, and individual time with staff. i was able to get what i needed but the only reason i got help was because i advocated for myself. that's not realistic for most youth. almost all the youth around me did not have the same experience because they did not seek out anything, so they didn't get anything. most children, even adults, can't seek this kind of help out. i'm a dad now and i wouldn't expect this from my own child. finally at 18, i was exited to a program in an ankle bracelet. i graduated high school a month after i got out. i attended a mandatory program that provided me transportation to and from school. so i was never really alone unless i was at my house. my probation officer stereotyped me as being the same as the rest of his cases. he required me to have proof of everything i did. if i went to a job interview, i needed to get a note to prove that i was there. that was so hard because it would have let everyone know that i was on probation. i wouldn't even get that job, completely wasting my time for that interview in the first place. i am lucky because i had plenty of support from my family, they offered me forgiveness and understanding, they helped me get a job and what i needed, many youth do not have this type of support. while my situation turned out well, it could have been, this support could have been offered before i went to juvenile home and would have prevented me from ever going. here are some ideas i hope you will take action on for other youth. number one, when it comes to our foster youth and teens in general, the only way to combat the problem is to stop using law enforcement and juvenile hall as the first step. too often when a problem with a youth happens, that's the only way the system response. but, most of the time when someone is acting out, they want attention, social workers need to take extra steps to make sure the youth are not locked away. number two, the youth need the support before there is contact with juvenile justice system. i only got support after. social workers and teachers need to understand youth stories, understand how their different experiences can impact behavior and give support to ones who need it before there's a problem. number three, programs need to be in place to support extracurricular activities and healthy friendships for youth. like many youth, i tried to fill my emptiness with the wrong people because i didn't have the activities and healthy friendships. not everyone gets the support they need from a parent and so they look for it. funding should be provided to support extra activities at school and policies should support youth participating in social activities and places to find healthy relationships. it is so important to be able to meet youth who have been in the same situation to build and find support with. experiences like participating in the california youth connection can support youth so they don't have to teach the rights and wrongs of the world to themselves. number four, where youth lives matters. some group homes and staff are just clocking in and out. they are paid very little and care very little. those staff are the ones that will place the immediate call to the police and give seven days notice to a youth. they are getting paid minimum wage to sit eight hours, so their care is not there. if they got training, it might not be this way. families would care and spend more time. there's going to be substantially more care and more thought put into the youth in the family that are not supported by staff. but they have to be families that want to be family, not just getting by. number five, running away should never be disciplined and result in police being called and youth going to juvenile hall. running away is really an opportunity to train families and social workers about responding appropriately rather than sending to juvenile hall. the reasons youth run away need to be dealt with. when youth run away they have to survive, survival is going to land them in juvenile hall. thank you for listening to my ideas today. my experience turned out good, but it is not the case for 90% of other youths who cross over. but if you take action by creating new policy that stops juvenile hall from being used as a first stop, providing new funding for normal activities and programs that support healthy relationships and making sure youth are treated differently by professionals. then the youth experiences will end differently and more positively too.
[{'start': 99, 'end': 120, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Rodriguez: Good afternoon. Thank you Assembly members for caring about this issue and for allowing us to testify today. My name is Jennifer Rodriguez, I am a lawyer and Executive Director of the Youth Law Center. And we're an advocacy organization that focuses on system change in both the child welfare and the juvenile justice system. And the reason I think that's important is because we see both sides of this issue, we see both the cause and why young people are pushed into the juvenile justice system. And then we see the impact once we have young people in detention and exiting and returning back to the community. My own personal background on this particular issue, I have actually been doing advocacy on issues related to youth who move into the juvenile justice system for over 20 years because I myself spent all of my teenage years bouncing between group homes and juvenile hall. And although we've made a surprising amount of progress, particularly in the juvenile justice system and the way that we see that system responding to young people as well as our child welfare system, for this group of young people who is caught in the middle of the two, who are in virtually the same place we were when I was in care. I want to talk a little bit about what we know related to youth who cross over and what we don't know. What we do know at this point is we know some of the data. We know some of the numbers of young people who moved from once system to another, how many young people end up being, continuing to be served by both child welfare and juvenile justice, how many young people move over and are exclusively served by the juvenile justice system. And we even know some of the reasons. We have an idea around some of the characteristics for young people that make them most likely and make them most vulnerable to juvenile justice system involvement. We do know quite a bit about the harm that's caused to young people by moving into the juvenile justice system from foster care. We have statistics that tell us that this group of young people does far worse than either child welfare supervised or probation supervised youth and a whole and I know just Jessica's going to talk with you in more detail about that information. We know concretely about the harm that is placed by to young people related to juvenile justice system involvement, the stigma that they experience, the potential immigration consequences, the loss of permanency, and other transition services as they transition to adulthood. We also know that even one brief touch with the juvenile justice system and as brief as one night in detention results in a whole myriad of other consequences for youth. Like much greater chance at further juvenile justice system involvement, lower educational outcomes, challenges in meeting all of the developmental milestones that we'd like to see teens growing up. We also know that our policies and practices do not ensure that young people who are in the juvenile justice system get access to the same supports and services that they would have if they turned 18 or 16 in our child welfare system. What we don't know is why this pipeline has been created. We spend a lot of time I think in California and across the country talking about the school to prison pipeline, however we've spent shockingly little time talking about the direct pipeline we've created from the child welfare system to the juvenile justice system. We also don't know what the effects are on young people, either short term or long term. We don't know a lot about what this does to young people as they are thinking of their opportunities for their future, as they are thinking about themselves as parents, as they're evaluating what their opportunities are. And lastly what we don't know, is we don't know what it will take to move our system to understand that this is really not a story. The data is not telling us the story of individual youth and their behavior and their challenges, that's really telling us a story about our own system and our own policies. We don't know what it will take to move to that recognition. To me this particular issue around young people who cross over, it is really a canary in the coal mine issue. The number of young people that we have from foster care who have interaction with our juvenile justice system is a perfect indicator of the overall health of our child welfare system. And the ability of our system to provide nurturing safe and stable supports to children and child welfare. It is our child welfare system's responsibility to provide adults who are loving and caring and to give children an environment that can create safety, stability and healing. We know anytime that a young person has contact with the juvenile justice system, that likely we have failed in some regard. And too often we interpret the data and we tell the system, the story of what's happening, as a story of young people who are seriously disturbed, or having behavior problems, or acting out. We could take a different perspective and when we look at the data that tells us multiple placements make it more likely that a young person will have juvenile justice involvement. That being placed in a group home makes it more likely the a young person will have juvenile justice involvement, that running away makes it more likely. We could look at that then as a story about our ability as a system to serve those young people rather than the young people themselves. And how damaged they might be. The juvenile justice system as I mentioned before had some major changes and one of the most significant that I want to talk about is really moving the system towards diversion. And that's been an acknowledgement of all of the data that I mentioned earlier about how harmful and damaging even one touch with being in detention or with law enforcement is. So in just about every situation possible, and here in California, you see extraordinary changes in our juvenile halls with populations in many of the facilities down to less than half of what they were several years ago. We are moving towards making sure that young people at all costs do not have to be incarcerated. However, the experience of youth from foster care is much, much different. Often times when the young person from foster care is referred to the juvenile justice system. The same risk assessment instrument that is used to divert most young people is bypassed and that young person is taken into juvenile hall. The irony of this is that of course because they are in foster care, we have an automatic assurance that they have 24 hour care and supervision. And a place to live, where for most young people who are living at home with their parents that is a primary deciding factor. And whether or not public safety will allow them to remain in the community rather than incarcerated. But in fact, it has the opposite effect for many of our foster youth and they are automatically taken into detention, and this is not a small issue. We over the past two years have been looking in detail at several of our congregate care facilities across California. And I'm going to tell you a little bit about one of the facilities, we've been looking at. Because although it's an outlier, it's very telling. One county operated shelter in the central valley who then public record acts request and looked at the data on this facility. In the first 6 months of last year, they called law enforcement nearly 1,700 times on the young people who are in this home. It is a 40 bed facility, you really have to work in order to call the police that many times on the youth in the home. In looking at the type of things that the police were called on for young people was normal teenage behaviours. In fact, it was behaviours that are the very work of the teenage sort of develop, healthy development. Getting in to fights with their peers, talking back to staff members, consensual sex between residence, use of alcohol. A good number of these calls to law enforcement had to do with young people running away. When we talked with young people who lived in this facility, the primary reason for them running away was that there was no Internet access in this particular shelter. So they were running away across the street to the hospital, so they could use the Internet hotspot. And to me this is a great example, because it tells us where the disconnect is between what we know to be true, as everything we know what it takes to raise a healthy young person to adulthood. And our policies and practices inside of many of our child welfare congregate care facilities and our system as a whole. This is one facility where we see a huge disconnect, many of these young people were not detained indefinitely. Most of them were either cited and released or taken to juvenile hall for a time out and brought back to the facility. But what is happening in this particular facility is telling of the way that law enforcement is being used in many facilities in California. Which is they're stepping in as a substitute for a parent. And in fact, the facility is turning over part of their care into provision responsibilities to law enforcement. So for those of us who are parents, I know Blade and I are both. I'm a mommy, he's a daddy. We both do everything possible to shield our children from the impacts of law enforcement. I do not feel safe and comfortable calling the police when my child talks back to me, because I worry about what the police will do to my child. And now with a child who's entering the teenage years, I am even more conscious of the way that my child looks in the eyes of law enforcement. So it is absolutely a crisis that we are using law enforcement in this way to deal and to take over the with part of the parenting with our young people. Although this particular facility is egregious and it really is an outlier. The same story that is told day after day on a smaller scale in many of our conversation facilities particularly those where young people come in crisis. Our shelters in California, a place where young people are coming in either having just been removed or in between placements. It is a place where we should be prepared for behaviors that result from the trauma that they've experienced where we should be prepared because there's a large population of teenagers that they will be doing what healthy teenagers do. Which is testing limits, challenge authorities, look for social activities. And if they can't find those healthy developmental experiences in the facility, they will leave the facility to go get them or they will make them there. I can't underscore enough how important what the recommendations that Blade made around extracurricular activities, social experiences, and friendships. If our system simply focused on those as prevention, I truly believe we'd see an entirely different response. In closing, I just want to ask a few questions. As you are listening to the rest of the testimony today. What protections exist to protect against children becoming either dual status or crossing over for behavior that would not result in juvenile court action for children in the community? And as the authority to reject inappropriate cases and probation clearly delineated. What criteria gets used to determine whether juvenile justice or dual jurisdiction is appropriate? And what criteria is used to determine whether it's inappropriate? So for example, the question that I always think of is, what is it that's available in the juvenile justice system that you cannot get in the dependency system? We hear too many social workers and congregate care facilities saying, we had to call in the juvenile justice system or probation to get the youth the services they needed. There is never a time that anybody should be saying that. If we do not have the services and the support in the child welfare system to meet the needs of young people, then we need to build those. So we need put in place the resources and policies that make those appropriate. What services were supposed to be provided to that youth in the dependency case, where they actually provide? And is there some sort of a process for investigating whether problems at that group home or foster home. The staff abuse bullying by other residents, inadequate activities and supports. Or in the childs trajectory in the system, multiple placements, long periods in the shelter, poor unification systems contributed to the delinquent behavior. What crisis and respite services were available to those caregivers or providers that would have alleviated the need to proceed with delinquency proceedings? Should the system have alternatives in place to calling law enforcement to deal with problems that might arise in the congregate care facility or the resource family? Who provides reasonable efforts, reunification services, permanency supports, and other transition services when youth are moved over to the juvenile justice system, and how do those get coordinated? Too many young people are like Blade and that in the juvenile justice system and then release with the foster care system never stepping back again. To offer any support. This results in young people losing eligibility for extended foster care, being unable to get Medi-Cal to 26 and many of the other really critical supports that help youth transition to adulthood, successfully. What, if anything, is done to address the child's needs that resulted in their initial removal from their home while that young person is in the juvenile justice system? And do our data requirements assure that a meaningful evaluation of dual jurisdiction and of youth who cross over is possible? Shouldn't we be requiring counties at the very least to collect data on the nature of the offense, who requested the petition? Was it the caregiver, was it law enforcement, what the placement was immediately prior, what the placement history was, the mental health, education and service history, the length of time that young people spend in secure confinement, the length of time that they spend in their delinquent status, the services that are provided in the delinquency system and whether the child has been returned to the dependent status. From the system's point of view, shouldn't counties also collect data on the cost to each system of services and placements? So the last thing I want to leave you with is that the majority of these questions and recommendations were actually developed by the Youth Loss Center in 2005. So we are 12 years from the time that we first asked these questions of the system. And during that time countless young people have been dumped into a system that disposes of them. And I don't think it is inappropriate to say that the majority of those young people are Black and Latino. And so at a time in child welfare and in the juvenile justice system where we are increasingly aware of the impact of our disparate policies and practices and where we need to be taking extra steps to ensure that these young people are treated equally, it seems to me that over a decade is too long to wait to truly take action on this. Thank you so much for listening to me.
[{'start': 120, 'end': 138, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2166, 'end': 2173, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 9251, 'end': 9256, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
 : of the caretakers and preschools and
[]
Will Lightbourne: Thank you Chair Stone, Chair Jones, Will Lightbourne from the California Department of Social Services. I just want to frame a bit from the state perspective and then our county colleagues and both system will go into more details of specific practices. I'd like to touch just for a moment on the who it is we are talking about and what those numbers look like. On an annual basis, approximately 500,000 reports of child abuse are made to county child welfare agencies. Those 500,000 referrals eventually turn into about 80,000 substantiations of abuse or neglect and those in turn may lead to about, annually approximately about 30,000 children entering out of home care for some period of time. At any point in time there were probably because of entries and exits about 45,000 children in out of home care, in the Juvenile Justice System they receive about 100,000 referrals annually of whom about half of those result. And petitions being filed. So, what's the interaction between these two sets of numbers and the people who this represents? Almost just observing, its difficult to say because we have non-interactive data systems at this point. But it's also hard to say because words mean different things in whichever conversation you happen to be in. So let me just establish some basic standards. Some people refer to children or youth who are known to the system. That would include the referrals that did not result in substantiation that would. Refer to the referrals that do not result in petitions. It's a vast number and so most of the concentrated work we're going to do we're going to step up to a level below. There's touched by the system, so that would include the substantiating. That would probably include interviews that are done by probation related staff or law enforcement staff. There's crossover, these are the children or youth who started in one system. Their case ended or suspended in that system and they entered the other system and it can go either way, but it is largely been from the child welfare system to the juvenile probation system. And with many of the characteristics that Ms Heldman noted on the last panel. And then there's the dual status youth. Who are the youth who have cases open in both systems and in some counties that either means that one system is on hold or in other counties it means they are simply agreeing on who the lead agency is in the degree of collaboration. You'll hear from my colleagues about some of the specific approaches that have been used in different locations. But, from the state perspective, I'd observe that from what we can see from the data we do have, success can be obtained in any one of the structural environments so long as the relationship, and the practice, and the cultures, I particularly like Ms Heldman emphasizing that, the cultures at the ground are intentionally committed to making that work happen. So far we've been sort of primarily talking about two systems, probation and child welfare, but it's important I think that we reference two others that are integral to the possibility of success and meeting the goals that I think we all share here. And that's both the mental health system and the school systems. In terms of mental health I think the single determinant in crossover and dual cases is whether youth receive the appropriate assessments and trauma informal services at the beginning of there contact with either system. Actually there was no body killed there were only youth who had not received the services they needed at the time they needed them from the education system, the identification of a child's trauma based needs and meeting those needs rather than reliance on the discipline system I think is the other key ingredient in making the connections work. And we all have to be part of that solution. I had the Privileged before I was in this role of being in Santa Clara County and that was a county in which there was a very intentional decision by the Board of Supervisors to have all the systems work with schools, and what they refer to the school link services, to try to ensure that wherever the child is entering and wherever the first contacts have beening made services were getting there. But a caution that was a approach that involved the significant investment, the kind of resources. And there was a conscious choice to do it and I think it has shown in the outcome data that we can see that it's worth doing it that way. So where are we now in California and what are our critical junctures? First, as mentioned by Ms Rodriguez, and we do almost all of these things in really close partnership with both California Youth Connection and Youth Law Center. Ms Rodriguez never sizes to inspire me. The continuum of Care reforms Charles Stone authored two years ago now embodies the following qualities. Assessment that are done at the beginning of a child's contact with the child welfare system Integration of mental health as a proactive player with both the Child Welfare System and the Juvenile Probation System if that's where the child is being cared for at that point. The progress that's been made around that is both the assessment instruments and pilot testing in a number of counties. And the instructions for mental health services access, claiming, and the actual training around that is now underway. A comment that Ms Heldman raised which was an extremely important is the notion of engaging all in a teaming process to support a child in identifying their needs and resolving those. And the child family teaming system which is supported through consumer care reform is that place which is going to bring together all of those people who are part of the child's service system and life support system, including education, is their expectation. Reducing the use of congregate care and emphasizing home-based care like these were the mission statement of continued care reform is, all children deserve to live with a committed, nurturing and permanent family that prepares the youth for successful transition into adulthood. So the core construct is those lifetime commitments of appropriate adults to a child. Another piece that is under way at this point AB388. Which was inactive several years ago. Assemblyman Chespera's bill, which requires the monitoring of congregate care facilities that may be doing heavy referral to law enforcement. Possibly as a means of discipline and the data from the first couple of years, or at least the second year of that is either available on our website or will be in the next couple of days. The caution I would offer about looking to those facilities that use referrals to law enforcement is this. Some of it is a system self-inflicted wound. And let me explain what I mean by that. We place facilities that we license under a degree of scrutiny that from the facility perspective is not always nuance. And so there is an expectation on at least the facilities believe there is that every time a child leaves the facility without permission or unaccompanied that they have to call a report to law enforcement or they are at risk of licensing violations and things like that. As part of CCR and with our partners we've been sort of working with our licensing staff to really try to nuance, how do we help this? All of the caregivers in the child welfare system move from sort of a risk averse fair based model to a prudent parenting model. Where people are acting as the examples we were discussing on the last panel with the children we ourselves care for. AB 1911, which is referenced in your background package, Ms Eggman's bill that has the juvenile justice, that the Judicial Council convening work groups to look at both data collection and the definitions that go into that. Just informationally, we are expecting this month to implement the first of the codes in the case management system that can start to track the dual and crossover youth. We realize there's a lot further definition to come from the Judicial Council work. But, we feel that having early access to information will put us in a stronger position planning for the future. And then, SBA55, which was adopted a couple of years ago as part of, well, it was the state budget, included the development of the support services and interventions for commercially sexually exploited children. A key part of what that did and what that requires is the development of very active protocols at the local level between child welfare, law enforcement, probation, mental health, schools, everyone who is going to touch a child. Because as we move towards the commitment of saying we are going to serve exploited trafficked children as victims, not as some part of a justice system then having all of those systems work effectively together becomes critical. So to conclude, there are a lot of sort of these initiatives which are now sort of coming to their critical points, they're somewhat overlapping, its almost like traffic management with some of it. I consider myself someone who persistently sees the world as glass half full, half empty rather. And so although things have move forward, we still have a great work to do and committed to doing it. Thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 21, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 29, 'end': 34, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 36, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2123, 'end': 2130, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2793, 'end': 2800, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4563, 'end': 4572, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4702, 'end': 4711, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4769, 'end': 4782, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5374, 'end': 5381, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6270, 'end': 6278, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7615, 'end': 7621, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
David McManus: i appreciate the opportunity, thank you. yes, david blade mcmanus, assistant chief of placer county and we are a dual status county. i think because a lot of others have already touched on the 241.1 process itself, i'm going to talk a little bit about creating a system of care and true integration and how that will help you be successful in implementing the 241.1 process. because in placer i have had the luxury of moving into a system that was, has been sustained for decades now. and there truly are lessons that have been learned about integration, collaboration and communication. and through cross-pollination of probation and cws staff as they co-locate and cultures change. and truly we do have a 241.1 mou and it talks about some of the best practices that have been identified such as less least restrictive level of care and family centered approach and unified case plans,which we all do. but more importantly is that our staff have evolved in change and they truly think in a different way, we have probation officers that understand trauma and form care. they understand when they're seeing certain delinquency acts and that comes from neglect and abuse. and we now have a long standing tradition of refusing to criminalize some of those acts. and one of the things i also heard earlier was the need for crisis centres and mental health response. and we do have luxury of having a crisis resolution centre in our community. so we talk about diversion and we are focussed on diversion but some of those cases are diverted from our delinquency system before they even get to us. some of those vandalism type cases, or pushing past mom in the hallway which would have been a battery, and arrest into the hall. we have a crisis resolution center that's dealing with that and we get great results from that. and also recently we developed a mobile response team for mental health response. and that goes down to even 16 year olds can benefit from this mobile response team that can divert where police when we've heard a lot about police shouldn't be doing the parenting, police shouldn't be doing the direct intervention. this allows mental health to step in and divert those cases that would typically be brought to our juvenile detention facility. another thing that we've learned, a key lesson that we've learned is the importance for some policy board to oversee all agencies and to get true buy-in. and we do have a systems management advocacy, geez, resource team, yes. and it is headed up by our juvenile judge and has the director of health human services, and the probation chief, and the office of education superintendent and that team holds staff and systems true to the culture of integration. another thing that we have had success with is blended funding when it comes to out-of-home placements. i think one of the issues with the lack of communication between systems is fiscal issues. out-of-home placement is expensive, when there is a blended part of funding for out-of-home placement that can be utilized by cws or probation. some of those turf wars are eliminated and the focus is on the family and the child and what's best and not on the system's fiscal outcome from the decision. we also have multidisciplinary teams that weigh in on decisions and are even part of the 241.1 process at times at least making a recommendation. and we've evolved that into instead of being government run by any one agency, those are not facilitated by family advocates. so families come in, they feel comfortable, they are able to share their experience, brainstorm, bring in resources, and truly help children and families be successful. a lot of what i've read about the best practices from california are things that we've already incorporated into our mou. and it really tells me that we've had the luxury being out in the front of integration and truly, i think success in a 241.1 system and being able to step back as a probation department and recommend that minor not be on probation or that he or she gets diversion from the beginning. i think, know that theres a system in place, really allows more creativity and due to respond throughout the spectrum as you should and avoid criminalizing minors that come in at least in to our system, and i will stop there.
[{'start': 46, 'end': 65, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barbara Duey: Good afternoon Barbara Duey I'm from the Children's Loss Center of California. I'm an attorney supervisor there and a care project director and I'm also a member of the Robert F Kennedy children's action core dual status practice network, so I get to work with Jessica. It's wonderful to hear these practices, Los Angeles we struggle with our size, there is no question about that. Our offices represent 33,000 children in foster care. Alone so, somebody said something about 100 kids. We have 100 youth a month that get arrested and go through the 241.1 process every single month. Early on, we were very early dual status county as well. We started building the dual status system in 2005. In 2006, we launched it, in 2007, and it went county wide in 2012. We had all the same stakeholders from all different disciplines, the attorneys, the advocates, service providers, and all the agencies. And I think we did a very good job of identifying the youth, notifying, creating the legal process. I think our biggest challenge has been and continues to be the dual supervision piece. So you've heard about the lead agency and on hold, we are lead agency. That means when a youth is designated dual status, they have both a probation officer and a social worker working with them. Partly due to our size, but also historically in California, probation and child welfare have worked in silos. They have no history of working together, they have separate cultures and I don't want to speak for any other county but I know that in Los Angeles County and the first 18 years,I was, or at 15 years old I was at the Children Law Center, if the youths got arrested, they went to probation,there was no communication at all whatsoever between the child welfare system and the probation system. So when we became a dual status system, and these youths came out, we had their disposition they were given dual status. They were given this to a social worker and a probation officer who were just not used to talking to each other. So we saw very poor communication, we saw gaps in services. We saw delays in court, because you have a dependency court in one part of LA and a delinquency court in another, and they are trying out to find out what is happening in each other's courts. The social worker might be in the dependency court, but they do not go to delinquency court. The probation officers in the delinquency court, but they do not go to the dependency court. So, all the important people, since we have two judges and not one, the two judges don't get all the information. They get it piece mail from different people. The result was, or has been, because of all of this that the delays, the gaps, and services, and so a youth who's now been placed on probation, they're not getting linked, they don't know who's supervising them. The attorney, as the attorney for the child, I'm not sure who's supposed to link them to drug counseling, who's going to link them to therapy and who do I go to if that doesn't happen. So the result is the youth would often stumble and fall. And then they would go deeper into the juvenile justice system. They are the ones who are held accountable, not the agencies. The judge would say you have not done this. You haven't done your community service. So, they would go deeper. And so what Children Law Center did? Our answer to this problem was creating the care unit, which is a specialized unit within CLC. Originally, we wanted to just to address the gaps and improve the communication, but we reached a little higher and we decided what we really wanted to do was provide more support, direct support for the youth. And we wanted to provide empathetic support with a trauma focused lens and a clinical perspective. So what we did was we contracted with several MSW graduate schools. And we have MSW interns to come to CLC for a year. They are trained, and they are paired with the attorney, and they are paired with a dual status youth. And each Intern has two, three, to four youth that they are assigned to and they see that youth every single week. They attend every hearing whether its dependency or delinquency. Every meeting whether it's an MDT as part of the 241, or whether it's a school meeting or an IEP or just a school meeting check in. Group home meetings, CFTs, anything you can think of that the youth goes to from both sides were there with the youth. So number one the youth sees us, it's the same person or the same team, and they have that support. And also we kind of become the single point of contact for everybody. Because we are at all these things, we can provide more consistent and current information to the two judges and to the attorneys. We're the dependency attorney, but there's also a delinquency attorney and a District Attorney. And when we go to the delinquency hearing, we can give them information about what's happening on the dependency side, what service the youth is receiving or not receiving. And what's happening with their placement. That's kind of what we were going for. The number one goal is to help the foster youth navigate through and successfully complete probation at the earliest possible moment. What I've seen in the 27 years that I've been at CLC, is that foster youth, we know that they get arrested more often and detained longer. But they are on probation much longer, they linger on probation. And what I realize is, that they don't have a parent they are helping them through probation. If my daughter or your child was on probation, we would make sure they got signed up for community service, we would make sure they had transportation to do their community service that they got transportation to therapy. And that they would get up on Saturday morning. Someone would wake them up, they're teenagers and say you got to go do this. The majority of our kids, as you heard from Jennifer are living in congregate care. They don't have parents, they have staff. And it's a rotating staff and they are not there to, they don't micro manage the children in the way they should be, that the way a parent does. So the care unit tries to provide that support. With the insurance act as support, as a mentor, as someone to encourage the youth. They communicate directly and constantly with the supervising probation officer and the social worker, and the school, and the placement and make sure that everybody is kind of on the same page. We do the same thing when we go to the courts so that the judges know what's going on. The relationship that the care unit has with the youth is very unique because we can attend all the meetings. We can be a better facilitator of the youth and the agencies and between the agencies themselves. I'm often calling the social worker telling them what's happening on the probation case or vice versa. So that everybody is in, on the same page. The youth know that the attorney and their care intern keeps their confidence. So the youth are more open and willing to talk about their needs and their challenges. And then that gives us the information we need to get them into the right services. The judge and probational may not know that they have a substance abuse problem. They tell us that they do. We can get them referred to a drug council and testing program, and we can do that quickly. The contact we have with the youth I think as I said is approximately four times a week. This is something that our case carrying  attorneys couldn't dream of doing with 220 clients each and in courts every single day with anywhere from eight to 15 cases everyday, they can't even take the time off to go to the 241 hearing which I think is essential for all the attorneys to be at. So we were able to do this by securing private funding to supplement the state funding. We felt that that was essential to do because, these kids are most at risk kids. They really need the support. And we are finding that with this extra support and advocacy they are doing much better. Last year we had or in the last year we had 96 cases, 53 closed and 43 of those cases closed successfully. We saw a 44% increase in school attendance, not sure if that was kind of came out of the sky but we took it. And the other part of it that I think was unexpected but very positive outcome was we have created a great collaboration with the supervising probational officers. We work with them, we do cross trainings together. Once they have gotten to know my interns and they are used to our calls, what they will do when a youth starts to act out or show some negative behavior instead of just filing a triple seven, a probation violation, they call us. I had a probation officer stop me in the hall and ask me if a certain youth was in my care unit and I said yes and they said, this certain youth had tested positive for drugs on his drug test. Can you get him into a program? And we were able to do that. We were able to do that like the next day. And that avoided a probation violation, which I think is the type of thing that happens in smaller counties all the time, and I envy that. I think that's really wonderful, but in a county such as Los Angeles, with so many kids and so many different players, that just never used to happen. I mean, the probation officer was more of a gotcha back then. I have seen juvenile probation really turn around, I've seen the culture there. Becoming again more trauma informed and more understanding of the foster youth through this relationship they have had with the care unit. I wanted just to kind of end by saying that the intern and the care unit team is the relationship with the youth is key. And I think anything we can do to create a type of program or service where there is somebody who has that relationship with the youth. It's something that Blake said in his testimony that he never had someone tell him he could do it, never had someone tell him he was special or he was the best. And that's what we do for these kids. We tell them they can do it and that we're there to help them. We make sure they understand what they need to do on probation. We make sure there's no barriers and it they have the tools needed to be successful. So that when they go back before the delinquency judge, hopefully we can show that they've complied and get the mock probation and back to independency. So I think that ideally I think depending on the country size obviously there's different models that work. But any way, we could find a way to support the youth, the way CARE supports the youth, and focus on helping the youth succeed. Too many times I see, and again, I am just going to speak for LA, I see sometimes probation and social workers kind of, it is your job, no, it's your job. And that should not be the focus. The focus should be on making sure that you succeed. Thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 261, 'end': 268, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5875, 'end': 5883, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 9794, 'end': 9799, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 10636, 'end': 10638, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michelle Callejas: good afternoon. michelle david callejas, child welfare director for sacramento county. thank you very much for focusing on this area. it is a critical issue for both child welfare and probation. so i will give you just a real brief on where we are in sacramento. so sometime back in 2011 the decision was made to not go dual jurisdiction in our county. i came on in 2012 and there were feelings about that decision that i think were led by child welfare. and so we started having discussions about do we go that route, and instead focused on how do we serve this population better, how do we come to better understand this population regardless of whether we embark upon the dual jurisdiction work. so there was commitment from probation, child welfare education, and behavioral health initially early on. and we started with the positive youth justice initiative and did some work through 2013. but at the end of 2013, we decided that where we were headed with the particular grant we were going after and the resources we had, it just didn't feel like it was a fit for us at that time. so, assistant chief shores had a great deal of contact with georgetown university's center for juvenile justice reform and we decided to embrace a crossover youth practice model. so in 2014 we really delved into that, began to understand the model and talked openly about where we saw it fit, it didn't fit for a county, and realized that really it was a great model for what we had locally. and in november of 2014, the presiding judge, myself and mister shores along with our behavioral health director, county office of education, and county council all flew out to georgetown, which we thought was going to be, yay, fun! but it was just an intensive seven day course on multi-systems integration. and it was really great and i think we came out of it, it was not only enriching, but we came out of it with stronger partnerships, relationships, personally and professionally. we realize we all really liked each other which is helpful when you are doing really difficult work. but we also came out with the renewed sense of commitment to do better by these kids and a renewed sense of urgency. so we came back and formed an executive committee and began considering what it is, what steps we needed to put into place. we began developing our crossover youth practice model protocol that judge cayeti spoke to. i will not go into great detail but it really is the same type of work that we endeavored here in sacramento county. i would say a couple of the areas of success or the areas that are needed when systems embark on this type of work is first and foremost leadership from the top. if it were not for the commitment from the judge and probation and child welfare and education and behavioral health, i don't think we would be where we are today. and we wanted to put something in place which we are still working on, that is sustainable. so that if one of us leaves, the work doesn't just crumble and i think that's a real challenge. but we really held a lot at our level as we were pushing stuff down and did a lot of the troubleshooting as an executive committee. and then i think that really helped inform how it is we rule this out to our staff across four different major entities. so, i think we have as an executive committee really come from a core belief that it's not your kid, it's not my kid, it's not their kid, that it's our kid, these are all our kids. as a major child serving systems, we have joint responsibility and joint accountability for better serving them in ways that will enhance child safety, community safety, enhanced emotional well-being and academic success. and as you look at those outcomes, and again, across four major systems that tend to be entrenched where we are. it is a large endeavor but it is a very worthy one, and one that we do have a responsibility to pursue. so after we developed our protocols and really kind of parallel, i think another area where we were successful was in our stakeholder engagement. and the same stakeholder groups that both judge cayette and ms duey spoke to where it is child welfare probation education behavioral health. bringing in for the child welfare side the public defender's office and district attorney was new for us. and in the same respect for our probation partners bringing into children's law center, the attorneys that represent the kids in court was new. we had children's law center there and we had a court appointed special advocates, there were, i would say, very robust conversations, and really, it was good, because the first several meetings. and it overlapped with our work with commercially sexually exploited youths, so it is hard to kind of separate out the two, but really the cultures of each system came forth, and the rehabilitation or detention versus advocacy, there were a lot of discussions that needed to happen early on. but i think where we are so fortunate in our community is no one walked away. everyone that hung in there through those difficult conversations to help get us to where we are today, so i think director lightborn spoke to the importance of communication and i think out of the leadership out of the stakeholder process, that in order to make this work there has gotta be transparency and strong communication across us at the executive level team and also across our systems. we realized early on the assumptions that social workers were making about probation officers. i mean you could walk by cubicles. why doesn't probation go do something? why don't they go do this? and mike can hear the same thing in his side, what is child welfare doing, they never do anything, the papers are right. and so, how we had to shift that? we have called joint management team meetings. so that we can kind of clear those urban mess, those mistaken expectations. i think our side so probation has having all this authority. and so really understanding each other scope, limitations, mandates and that has really promoted a great deal of understanding. and what we also know is being face-to face it is a little harder to send snarky emails or not respond to phone calls right? so we really wanted to help foster that and we continue with those meetings as we try to move the work forward and down to the line level. some of the work groups that we've developed are continuing to go, we started early on with really putting together all the assessment processes that a youth go through, from child welfare to behavioral health to probation and education. we assess the heck of our kids and so really looking at, how much is too much? and i think that is a challenge that i across our state we have to come to is kind of what is the proper dosage and when are we over assessing and still under serving. so we also had a prevention and disproportionality work group where we have more work to do on that. and then the delayed data collection and data sharing. and as you can imagine when it comes to data sharing across these core systems it was complex. and what we basically did is shoved all the attorneys in one room to figure out hipaa and ferpa and the juvenile court confidentiality and they worked their magic and then, we are now at a point where we are sharing our data across systems and with the goal of ultimately finding some type of it system where we can house it, also that we can pull reports. i think the other success has been the teaming, and i think both la and san diego are doing it and the child and family team meetings, which really evolved out of the mental health world and wraparound services, are really effective practice, and i am really glad that they were included in continuum of care reform. because right now we are required to do them only for kids receiving mental health services. but it is best practice for all kids when they are- multiple systems surveying children and youth. so we have implemented child and family team meetings. i think for our colleagues in probation, that was just, it might can speak to the cultural shifts there. we're used to working with the families and it's just a new world for probation from that end. but that has been really successful in bringing youth and families to the table. having youth be able to identify who they see as a support person. it could be a teacher, it could be a coach. and having the parents be able to identify who they want in the room. and it gives us an opportunity to explain, here's a role of probation, here's a role of child welfare. and to give the respect to the parents as experts on their family, regardless of the choices they've made, i think, goes really far in getting them better engaged and having buy-in to the services and case plans that are ultimately developed. the 241.1 assessments, i think, for us was a significant shift. and so and i should have started earlier our definition of crossover youth as a child with an open child welfare case who gets a citation or is arrested by law enforcement. and so there's an immediate notification process from probation, they're able to access a child welfare system. they see there's an open investigation or open case. they contact our side. we have an email that goes to, an email that checked constantly. also includes the social worker supervisor on the case. and our protocols immediately go into place for a joint team in discussion about next steps. for the assessment determine which system is best to serve the youth, deliquency or dependency. i'm embarrassed to say this but it really was kind of a check sheet. a check list and it was sometimes a phone call or messages left or email. it was not the type of comprehensive assessment that are used to serve or that could really help inform next steps. so now they have face to face meetings. we had a recent visit from georgetown university. and we had probation officers and social workers on a panel all talking about this process. and it was great to see and hear the success and their excitement about the process. because both sides are getting far more information. it has helped us all see that these are the same kids. but for very few outliers, these are the same kids who many of whom have been through extreme trauma, often cumulative. and so their behaviors get manifested differently. but i think the process is so much richer and helps inform decisions to the court as well as helps inform the service plan and delivery that is going to roll out for the youth and family. and i think again the importance of these meetings is a communication and coordination of services in care. when we don't do that, kids fall through the cracks and need simply go on map. couple of challenges. and i don't want to keep saying it but mental health, mental health, mental health, mental health. mental health services are critical to well in a number of areas. one before kids even come into child welfare or probation. my mantra is the way to prevent kids from crossing over from child welfare to probation is keep them out of child welfare. so i'd really love being able to have the resources to serve the children and families upfront, strengthen families, keep kids home when it's safe to do so. but once we come in to our care, if we really want to realize the goals and vision by continuum of care reform, we have to have the mental health services in place. wherever the kids are placed. so if it is in a group home or a short term therapeutic residential program, when it's necessary, if we really want it to be an intervention rather than a placement then there must be the mental health services and therapeutic interventions there to meet the youth's needs to help get them stabilized, and help prepare them for transition to a family based setting. but that's the critical work is having them in the group homes while we want to reduce the use of them and we're absolutely committed to them. we also know that sometimes it's needed but it should be for short term. and so stepping them down into a foster family home to a resource parent, to a relative, you heard mr. oestreich talk about being with relatives, what we have done to this point is we place kids with relatives, it is core value of ours. but we find a relative and we say thank you very much and then we see them once a month. we were providing the training, the supports and the mental health services can come into their home and best meet the needs of that youth. so they are needed there and then they are also needed if we are able to transition that youth back to their family, that's a very significant time of vulnerability, as reunification. everyone pulls out and our families are left now to negotiate this new dynamic, with their kids being home. so the mental health services, and i'll quit saying it, but they really are critical to making this all work. a couple of other challenges, collaboration's very hard, and yet so important. and so i think that it's messy, it takes time, and it takes a lot of resources from our staff. and so it's easy to work in silos and i know i have social workers who say, this is my child, i've had them, this is my family, nobody else can touch them. and it's not effective. and so helping shift the culture within to really embrace and value these team meetings, and to call the probation officers, to meet with the probation officers, to share information. it's a hard sell when they have 25, 30 other children on their caseload or youth under caseload. but it's important. so having the time and allowing them the time to do that is a significant challenge. a quick example, we had a youth who just turned 12 and he's been in our system for a while. he runs from placement frequently and he's very vulnerable. he's got mental health issues. he's got some cognitive impairments, and does not make good choices. and our law enforcement partners have been involved, probation's been involved, we've been involved. and it was last week some time, it took about seven hours of phone calls with the district attorney. children's law center, probation, meetings, consultations, to finally figure out how we could serve him and keep him safe. and we hope it works but the amount of time it took with so many people is just a reality from the resource perspective.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2384, 'end': 2390, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4099, 'end': 4106, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4114, 'end': 4118, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5133, 'end': 5142, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5606, 'end': 5610, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7159, 'end': 7164, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 12119, 'end': 12128, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Shores: thank you and i appreciate the opportunity to speak. my name is michael. i'm the assistant chief probational officer here in sacramento county. i'm going to try to not go into some of the same detail that michelle just went over relative to some of the work that sacramento county has done and i think instead, what i'll try to do is put the probation specific approach and include some of the challenges that come with probation moving into this collaborative environment that we've engaged in. i've been with the department for 26 years. i worked in a variety of different assignments. as a line officer all the way through supervisor. so i'm bringing a perspective about how probation has worked over the years with youth that are in the dependency system. and frankly up until i got into a management position i don't know that i ever communicated with a social worker. it was something that just didn't occur. so all of the comments, all of the previous panelists that have spoken, those comments were accurate and i have that perspective as i engage on this work. one of the reasons we moved toward the cross over youth practice model was the recognition that we were working in silos. we've heard that previously and it was really accurate and i think that's really the challenge, breaking down those silos. and as i get through my comments i really want to stop and focus on the communication piece as it relates to the delinquency system and the youth as they start to move into the delinquency system. the crossover youth practice model allowed us to really establish goals, something that didn't exist with the work that we were trying to do in sacramento county and i'll go briefly over those goals because i think they are important because if you don't have goals, if you don't have outcome measures, you don't have an ability to really articulate your successes and or engage your failures. cypm allowed us to first, really focus on identifying who are crossover youth. we recognize early on in this work that we weren't doing a good job. of even identifying at the earlier age of the process who those youth were that had been involved and were currently and actively involved in the children welfare system. the second goal is sharing data and resources and i think that was really one of the biggest eye opening challenges for us was that working together we can achieve a lot more, but we never did that. and the data that we had; was again not shared. there was actually a belief i think between systems that it was probably inappropriate and potentially illegal to share data between systems. so that was something we had to overcome as well. another issue that is a huge goal is, reducing the reliance on detention for youth who but, for their dependency status may be released from the probation system. when a child presents to us at detention and we have no options for placement. when we have no licensed facilities that we have an ability to place that youth into, besides detention, we're making decisions that are based on the child's safety. that's a challenge for us and i think it's an issue that we continue to work through. it's a challenge for child welfare and it's a challenge for probation. but one of our goals is to try to create and establish alternatives to the detention facility for those youth. another goal was to reduce the reliance on out of home placement for those youth that are in probation placement to reduce our reliance on congregate care something that continued care reform is assisting us with as well. a broader goal for probation is reduce for recidivism and long term recidivism rates for those youths we're actively tracking that. for probation one of the, another big challenge was to increase family and youth in the decision-making process. again, this is a concept that i think was born out of the child welfare and behavioral health systems that was pretty foreign to the probation department and to probation systems in general. so, getting officers in the system to recognized that youth and family could, should and may, in fact, be of value in the decision-making process is also something that's new and it's a concept that i think probation is continuing to understand. that is one of our goals. we want to increase the satisfaction with our county process. i think that's a simple one to achieve if we can achieve all of the others. and last we wanted to increase the quality of our joint assessments i think something that director pay has spoke to our joint assessments met the mandate of the law but they didn't do more than that we really met the minimum standard of what was expected and there is a lot more that can be done through good communication and good collaboration. as director callejas said we implemented in october of 2016. our implementation efforts are early, our outcomes are still evolving, we're starting to recognize some very early successes, i'll talk about that here briefly in a second, but currently we have 41 youth in sacramento county that are being jointly supervised by a social worker and a probation officer. those youth are dualy involved. they remain in the dependency system and they're actively on some form of either court diversion or probation diversion that allows us to keep them in the dependency system while we work with them and support the social workers in their care. some of the things that are working. i mentioned some of the child welfare practices the use of child and family team meetings, a concept that probation abrupt practice that we didn't utilize. but we now in sacramento county have trained all of our probation officers in the cft process and not only where we'll be participating, we'll be actually facilitating the cft as we move into the future. that's something as well that continue of care reform has helped push us towards. there's been some funding to help with the training and there's been a mandate that cfts will be a part of the process. fortunately for us with cross over youth practice model we were a little bit ahead of some of those mandates. the use of multidisciplinary team meetings, that is another. a huge practice for us that we know will have a huge impact and particularly working with these youths. so we've implemented mdt's that are working with these youths at a variety of stages. i think judge will talk about that and some of c-sec work. all of our staff have been trained on trauma, and so. another area that we're recognizing is critically important, whether the youth is in the dependency system or whatever youth that comes into the delinquency system. every officer in the sacramento county probation department has been trained on at least understanding the basics of trauma, but we've brought in a local provider that's helping us with some ongoing training efforts around that as well. with training comes joint training. we're training with social workers, we're training with behavioral health staff, and we're training with some of our community based organizations, so the training is really a collaborative approach. in communication again i wanted to really talk a bit about that, i understand we're short on time, i'll try to make that brief, but communication, it's been said multiple times and the different panels it's really critically the most important aspect of this work. and when you talk about a youth that's coming into the delinquency system, whether it's via citation or custodial arrest, there are different points of contact that allow for us to communicate with our partners in the child welfare system and start to make decisions that are really in the best interest of the child. and i could cite examples of each of those points of contact that we have circumvented or prevented the youth from coming into the delinquency system because of that communication. so i just wanted to highlight again that communication is really the critical aspect of the work that we're doing. whatever model that you wish to pursue, i think communication is really the key component of that and we've seen that that's the greatest challenge and probably the area of our greatest success. i mentioned working with families to maintain the protective factors, we're doing more of that, that's going to be a work in progress for us on the probation side and it will continue with support from our child welfare partners. i move briefly into some of the challenges that we have before i close. the ability to use relative placements on the delinquency side is, again, new to us. we have historically not done a lot of family finding, we haven't done a lot of alternative to group home care sort of placements. again, ab-403 has allowed us to start to explore that. and some of the funding that has come with that has allowed us to generate some contracts in sacramento county that will assist with that family finding. and we actively now have 14 youth that have been referred, and we're hoping to find families to place them with in order to not use congregate cares, is that option. so we're seeing some progress there. but it remains a challenge, families are not often jumping up and down to accept our youth into their homes. and so there's a lot of work and engagement that needs to go with that practice and with those processes. resources, and not specifically county resources, but the use of youth advocates, youth mentors and others to work with our youth is, again, there's a shortage of those that available to us. that's an area that we need to work collectivity to build up a pool and a group of people that are willing to come back and work on the delinquency side. i think oftentimes when youth age out or move out of the delinquency system and they've been involved in the dependency system, they're more willing to go back to the dependency system and do work versus come back to the delinquency system. and i think that's more of a recognition that delinquency hasn't welcomed that, and so that's an area that we need to improve on and we need to build those resources. i mentioned earlier the lack of alternatives to detention, so i won't talk much about that but it is a big issue, and something that we need to continue to look for options. director callejas house mentioned data sharing, the input and the access to the cws/cms system by probation remains a challenge, it requires basically duplicate efforts. we have our own case management systems. and when we have to enter data into the cws/cms system, it requires officers to do that work twice. with large case loads and challenging and complex cases that becomes an issue as well. case management, i mentioned earlier case management is changing. how we managed these case loads is a little different. our mandates aren't the same as child welfares. however, we're starting to understand that we have common goals and collectively working together, the way we manage these cases can be a little different than how we manage a high-risk case out in the community. so i'll close with, i think it's that common goal that continues to pull us together. it's the common goal that pulls us together at an executive level, and as we continue to move forward with our implementation efforts, we're seeing our officers and our social workers really gravitate towards that. and i am really eager, i'm excited to see what the future years bring in terms of the outcomes that we can generate, and i thank you today for the time to talk about this issue.
[{'start': 64, 'end': 71, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 205, 'end': 213, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4768, 'end': 4776, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Daina Lujan: All right, thank you. Thank you for this opportunity. My name is Daina Lujan. To give you a sense of who I am, I am Vice President of the South San Francisco Unified School District, Board of Trustees and currently, principal of Meadows Elementary in Millbrae. I taught for eight years and am currently in my, sixth year of administration. My goal today is to provide a local perspective on the impact of the teacher shortage and strategic responses. As a touch on responses, I'd like to talk about both the district-level response as well as a county-level response. The county-level response I will share today is unique to San Mateo County. Because this is the only place we've really had the opportunity to launch our work, but our work is scalable and replicable. So what does the teacher shortage look like on a school site? I am a principal of a TK through fifth grade elementary school with 435 students. In the 15, 16 school year we were awarded the Gold Ribbon Award. I was lucky and I opened this current school year, 16-17 fully staffed but barely. I have an intern teaching my moderate severe class of students. This class includes non-verbal students who have autism, gross and fine motor delays or traumatic brain injuries. They can not communicate verbally, so they communicate with behaviors. Starting the year with an intern means that she teaches all day, she oversees three aides all day, and then takes classes at night and on weekends. I opened the year with this intern in place and three brand new aides because paraprofessionals are also in great need. And students responded to the change in the only way they could, with big behaviors. They began running a lot. So I spent two months running after students, trying to keep them from getting into the street. And run over by a car or getting lost in a neighborhood and having no way to advocate for themselves. When I am running after students to keep them safe, I do not care about their learning goals, my biggest concern is their safety. And for this group of students, that's tragic. Because they can and should be productive, engaged members of society in the future. But their learning goals are the least of my concerns when I'm trying to keep them safe. To ensure that I open the school year fully staffed, the Millbrae School District employed several strategies to help minimize the impacts of the teacher shortage. We determined hiring needs early. We began recruiting early and we had partnerships with local universities. Beyond this, we also offer pay incentive in the form of an annual stipend to our special education teachers and and we have capped their classes. So my mod-severe teacher can have no more than 10 students. District level responses, such as recruiting early and providing pay incentives, as recommended by Learning Policy Institute are quite effective in ensuring individual district opens the school year fully staffed. But, they do nothing for our neighboring district down the road because the underlying supply and demand problem has not been addressed. In San Mateo county, where I work, this is a serious challenge. There are 23 school districts all competing for the same pool of teachers who serve over 94,000 students. So at this juncture I'd like to shift the perspective just a little bit and talk about some of our county level responses. Under the leadership of county Superintendent Ann Campbell the San Mateo County Office of Education has organized a work group to analyze Data. Identify causes of the shortage and outline strategic plans and has taken actions to assist with attracting, training, retaining and sustaining teachers. Representatives include administration from the county office events, San Francisco State University, Notre Dame De Namur University, local school districts and our community college district. Our work group has looked beyond district level responses that make one district seem more appealing than another and considered one how do we address immediate needs. And two, how can we build a sustainable pipeline to ensure every school opens fully staffed? This second question of how do we build a sustainable pipeline is of critical importance. Because looking beyond times of crisis when there are no shortages, as a county we know that there's always a relative need for teachers. For those who are retiring, who leave the profession because it truly is not a good fit, or who have have a life change. So naturally we have 7% attrition no matter what. So in looking to how do we address immediate needs, members of our work group pursued the classified employee credential program grant and the four year BA plus credential planning grant. The San Mateo County Office of Education was successful in earning a classified employee credential grant for 50 candidates a year. San Francisco State earned two planning BA plus credential grants, and Notre Dame De Namur earned one BA plus credential planning grant. These wins have been instrumental in working to address some of our immediate needs. But there's still a crisis ahead. So, and looking at how do we address longer term needs and another key accomplishment of the county work group over the past several months includes building a pilot pathway project within local high schools to attract students to future careers in teaching. We began looking at high schools because some key data points struck our group. According to data from the Learning Policy Institute, 60% of teachers work within 15 miles of where they went to high school. If we look to San Mateo County, there are 6,000 high school seniors at this moment in time. County education is provided by 4,700 teachers, and if we count for 7% attrition, we need about 300 teachers annually. So, if I look at my 6,000 high school seniors, I need 300 of them, or 5% to become teachers. So, to built a pilot pathway we have partnered with Project Tomorrow, an organization in Southern California that oversees educators rising and Youth Teach to Learn. Youth Teach to Learn provides a high school curriculum for a two part course designed to get students familiar with the basic of learning theory as well as quality lesson design in the areas of math and science. We have supported community colleges and local high school districts with engaging in conversations about articulation agreements. And we have supported the high schools with taking the Youth Teach to Learn program and building a career technical education pathway in the education sector. As I wrap up, I would like to state that yes, we as a state have faced a teacher shortage before. When class size reduction was instituted, we faced massive shortages of multiple subject credential candidates. Some of the solutions of the past are of significant importance once again, but I must also express that today's shortage is slightly different and more critical. Today we face critical needs in specialized areas. Additionally, where I work, few districts, if any, still implement class size reduction. If anything, class sizes has certainly increased. So as we look to the future we want for our students, we must draw upon lessons from the past, such as loan forgiveness. But we must also dream big, and think strategically for our students. Building a sustainable teacher pipeline that attracts, trains, retains, and sustains teachers is a long term and permanent endeavor. Every year, we must start to develop the next cadre of teachers who will replace those retiring or who are leaving the profession for other reasons. This is a necessary step to ensure all children of California have access to dynamic, dedicated, valued and highly trained educators throughout their educational experience, thank you.
[{'start': 65, 'end': 76, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 3407, 'end': 3419, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kilian Betlach: thank you. greetings community members, and thank you to the chairs for the opportunity to speak today. my name is kilian jonah betlach. it is my honor to be the principal at elmhurst community prep middle school in oakland unified, where i've worked for eight years. i've come here to talk about the teacher shortage crisis from the context of teacher retention, because that is how we understand it, if we retain our teachers then we are not exposed to the shortage. that's particularly meaningful for me because that is how i got into education. i came into teaching through teach for america. i worked in san jose, in a neighbor hood known as 
barrio sal de si puedes, get out if you can. and stayed because of my principal, a man named glen vanserbe. when he left, i lasted one more year and then i left. and i didn't think i would be back. when i came back, i said, i'm going to ground my work as a leader of a school and be for others what my principal was for me. and hopefully be a force that allows them to stay. and so in doing that work, i failed a lot. and so, some of the lessons that i am here, i have submitted humbly, i don't have all the answers. but there is things that we think about at elmhurst that i want to share, that we feel like we've gotten pretty good results. out of 20 certificate staff, six years ago we had to replace nine, last year it was three, next year it's one. so and thinking about that, some context is perhaps helpful. elmhurst community prep is located in deep east oakland, where the first and third most violent police beats converged. we serve 375 6th, 7th, and 8th graders. 100% are young people of color. nearly 100% live below the poverty line. our unduplicated lcff percentage is 93.7 because we didn't get in all the forms in on time. this makes ecp a particularly difficult place to recruit teachers into, and perhaps a more difficult place to retain them. and most of the external factors that could contribute to longevity in a career, whether we're talking about the extent of parental involvement, the readiness, emotional, academic of students, age of facilities, ,our building was built in 1906, or even competitiveness of salary, those push away from us. we don't have those in our favor, right? and so we have to compensate by working conditions on site and creating community, climate and culture that make teachers feel valued, excited. and make the idea of leaving, something they would never consider, right? so let me, those five things. the first is the stuff you hear about all the time which is get the right people on the bus, right? and you can read all the things that say that and it's really important. what's particularly important for us is being reflective and understanding what we look for in a quality and effective perspective teacher, and having the flexibility and freedom. and then taking the initiative to run a rigorous, nuanced, multi-step interview process, right? chairman allen, you spoke i think to dr. darling-hammond  about that, what about this disconnect? this works on both ends. it is less likely for us to have a disconnect of a candidate coming in if we meet with him four times before we make an offer. and it's less likely for us to make an error in judgement. if also the people meeting them aren't just me, but are teachers, parents, kids, staff members, and folks that they're going to interact with everyday. that's not something that every school or every district does and it's critical. the second thing is to create a mission and value driven workplace. as chairman o'donnell knows, not every aspect of teaching is joyous and amazing, and enlightening, and full of sunlight. there are things that are not fun, like grading and filling out report forms and maybe sometimes attending meetings. but if we understand our work and the context of vision, of mission and shared values, particularly in a politically charged context where many of us are serving communities that are literally under attack, politically. then we are more likely to push through things that aren't inherently interesting because we understand that they are oriented towards a greater good. and so by naming those values at our school site by defining them by what we mean, every school in the world's going to tell you they have high expectations, right? now we saw famously, there was a school in new york where high expectations meant, my teacher's going to rip up my math homework and yell at me, right? that's not how we define high expectations, right? we understand it differently, and we bring that shared value to our workplace. we are going to find a community and a connectiveness to carry us through some of the times that are hard. i ask teachers to think often about the no matter whatness of our work, and what it means to show up for each other and to show up for kids because that's what we are called to. and when we bring that into meeting spaces, right, we have educator of the month, but you don't get it because you were nice to me in a meeting. you get it because you showed our social justice core value in your classroom, right? you get it because you collaborated with colleagues and they nominated you. so basing our work in those values, allows us to have a more rich and fulfilled professional experience. the next two, the next three are the places i want to actually spend a little bit of time, and they've been brought up actually before this. so it's kind of some nice serendipity. the third element that we focus on is every teacher's on a team. every teacher has a team. because when the bell rings and the doors close, it's you and 32 kids. so that never changes. it's hard to stay in your work, right? kids are great, they're awesome. and you need adult connectivity to carry you through. and so every teacher is on a grade level team that meets weekly. what are we going to do about the fact that jorge keeps chewing gum, samantha's on her phone? or how do we get this mom to come in and help talk to us about their kid, right? that matters because that helps teachers pick each other up, no matter what level of experience they're at. and it smooths out the difference in child experience between the teacher that's been here 20 years and the teacher that just walked in the door. because they talk to each other every single week and do the same thing. the second thing is that teachers are always on their department teams. it is really critical, particularly in the middle grades, that kids have a unified experience. one of things i sought to end was this idea that kids experience our school three times, one year at a time and every year is different. no, there's no need for that. so we work in departments to vertically align our work and our pursuit of standards based mastery, right? so that kids go to school one time for three years and then that their english experiences vertically align t 6th through 8th grade, their history experiences vertically align. my 6th grade teachers talking to me about synthesizing evidence. my 7th grade teacher is going to talk to me about the same thing, and my 8th grade teacher, too. because that's what historians do, right? so those departments at our school meet at minimum of twice per month for 90 minutes. they are meeting right now. yep, right now. the fourth factor that's really critical for us is every teacher has a coach. and when i say every teacher at our school has a coach, i mean that literally. you heard that there is this thing that happens with teachers at years three, four, five where they start leaving, here's why? because they've achieved a basic level of averageness or acceptability, or it's okayness in the classroom. they've gotten over that hump and the profession offers very little, except 30 more years of that. with no one to talk to about it, and no one to support you, and nowhere to grow. and by offering teachers a coach, what we're saying is, i'm investing, a couple things. one, i'm investing in you, so invest back. and number two, we're saying that your growth matters, your professional develop matters. not as an empty imperative but as something that i'm going to work with you on. so, our coaches don't come from a county office, although county offices are great. they don't come from the district, although districts are great. they come from our school and i, when creating a budget fund for site-based teacher leaders that are in the classroom, 20 to 30%, sometimes as little as 10%, coaching teachers the rest of the time. this matters. this distinction is important, because you also maybe heard from teachers that there's worse than the person coming out without context or understanding of your job and telling you how to get better. perhaps as elected officials, you have experienced that as well. and so that's critical as well because that's not in my regular psyche based allocation, right? of funding or fte. that has to be prioritized and sometimes grant sought after to get those positions. we also provide coaching on the restorative justice side of the house. so we fund three restorative justice professionals who also coach teachers in restoratives practices, in moving beyond punitive measures of students. and moving beyond replicating the justice system in classrooms, so that we're getting to learning, growth and achievement. those are the kind of things that communicate to educators that their growth matter on a longitudinal scale, right? i'm not just trying to get you to where you're not struggling anymore. i actually care to see you all the way through. the last thing i just want to share that we've been working on is flexibility. when i came into school leadership, i didn't understand things like maternity leave, paternity leave, how daycare works. why do you need friday off for daycare with the child, i understand that now. and so one of the things we've worked really hard at is telling teachers, your job here, you don't have to choose between having a family and having a job. and so, we have created a site-based model where teachers who are coming back from maternity or paternity work at 80% time. they take off fridays, because that's when daycare wants you to take off. and we hire a site-based substitute who comes in and teaches that fifth day. and what we ask is that the teachers mentor the sub, that the sub work with the teachers. and we've now provided a professional learning experience for someone who may become a future teacher. we've provided a sustainable life experience for a teacher. and we've also given them a little taste of leadership because they are able to mentor that substitute. those kind of things came when i had to get over something that i struggled with. where i thought if i was asking my staff if they wanted to come back, that i was failing. because i was letting in the light of doubt. and so now we've actually shifted that as much, as far away as possible. and are communicating all the time with teachers. how are you, what do you need? how are you doing? that comes in both informal stuff, but also formal surveys that i give out. this year, it was the first day back from winter break. i think i'm going to do it right after thanksgiving next year because that's when people make up their minds about the next year. so what's going on at the school? what do you need? and often i hear things like, i hate first period prep. i was like, i can fix that for you. you got it. other times it's like, i love computer science and i'd want to teach computer science here. okay. so i had a teacher who said that to me, and i knew that from the second day of this job. so we've been looking for grants to have him be partially funded for computer science. go our grant, he's teaching computer science next year. our kids win, our teacher stays, we're moving forward, right? the more that, and so, and what i wanted to share briefly about, those are our five, right? so the right people on the bus, mission and values driven work, every teacher on a team, every teacher with a coach and then having built in flexibility. what i want to share that makes some of that difficult is that these are site based autonomies that often have to be fought for, or figured out, or done on the sly. they're not always the norm, and it's hard for principals to always have the staffing structures to make these happen. it's a very difficult, on a year after year annual budgeting cycle, to plan ahead, and i was trained to do none of this. so we heard about principal pd, it'd be good. there's some best practices in the world that are often not picked up on and shared in principle, professional development, and the stat that you heard, that i've certainly read, that teachers are leaving for a lot of reasons, but one of the reasons they stay, is leaders. i think think about that at 3:45 in the morning a lot, and so the more that we can support the folks that are supporting the people who work with kids, the better we are going to be as a state and as a community. so i really appreciate your time today, thank you.
[{'start': 115, 'end': 135, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 740, 'end': 753, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2962, 'end': 2967, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2994, 'end': 3009, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3574, 'end': 3583, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5915, 'end': 5920, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5940, 'end': 5948, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ivette Castilan: Good afternoon, just kidding. Third time's a charm. Good afternoon, my name is Ivette Castilan, and I'm currently a Mexican-American history teacher and Academic Dean at Luis Valdez Leadership Academy in East Side San Jose. Last week, I had the opportunity to take 12 of my students, who will be the first in their family to graduate from high school and go to college, to a trip to visit universities in the Pacific Northwest. As we were traveling back, Roberto, one of my students, turned to me and said, Miss Castilan, I know I can go to college and succeed. I just need to remember my why, why I want to go to college. As my student mentioned this, I began to think about my why, the factors that motivated me to go to college and to stay in college, and that why was my family. Like my students, I too was the first in my family to graduate from high school and go to college. I grew up in a low income, predominantly Latino neighborhood in San Bernardino, California. Each time I packed my bags to travel across the country to Brown University, where I completed my undergraduate studies, I took much more with me than that can ever be weighed by an airport security scale. Each time I traveled to and from Brown, I carried with me my dad. My dad, an immigrant from Mexico who worked three minimum jobs, and that still wasn't enough to prevent our family from declaring bankruptcy and losing our home while I was in college and my mom. My mom, whose rheumatoid arthritis required more costly medicines as the years went on. It was during my senior year at Brown, when deciding my next steps, that these pieces of my background weighed heavily on what I would choose to pursue after college. I wanted to graduate and help my family financially, and my next steps had to allow for this to happen. While I was at Brown I found my passion for teaching. The thought of teaching students that looked like me became another one of my wise. I found purpose in teaching. I remained invigorated about obtaining a higher education, at potentially teaching and preparing first generation students of color to go to college, as well. While I was a senior at Brown I applied and received a fellowship from the Rockefeller Brothers Fund for Aspiring Teachers of Color, which awarded me with $25,000 to apply towards a teacher credential program, and also get a portion of my loans forgiven if I taught for five years in a school where the students were predominantly students of color. It was after I received this fellowship that my next steps of applying to a teacher ed program became more of a reality. I applied to the Stanford teacher education program, also known as STEP, and was admitted. Upon admission, I learned that I was selected to receive the Dorothy Avery Forgivable Loan, for the amount of $20,000. The $20,000 would help fund my STEP education, in a form of a loan that would be fully forgiven after teaching for five years. I then take out Perkins loans to pay for the difference. When I was in STEP, I applied to the Assumption Program of Loans for Education forgiveness programs, that would forgive a portion of my loans each year after teaching in a low income school setting. Moreover, by going into teaching I was eligible for the Perkins Teacher Forgiveness Program that would eventually pay off my Perkins loans from both my undergraduate and graduate education. I wanted to go into a teacher education program and a master's program because I wanted to enter the classroom fully prepared for my students because, as you have seen in the researchers' presentations, I was one of those students that had subs coming in and out. So when I got to Brown it was hard, I was not prepared, and so if I wanted to go into teaching, I wanted to be a teacher that was prepared to serve my students. So that when they got to a college campus, when they got to a Brown, when they got to any college campus, they would feel like they belonged and that they were prepared, and as much as I wanted to pursue my masters and teaching credential, it would not have been feasible to pursue if it weren't for these programs that helped me to finance a Masters in Education and secondary teaching credential and for that I am eternally grateful. I am now able to provide for my family and I have the best job that I could ask for. I am in my eighth year teaching and I love it as much, if not more, than when I first entered the profession, and it's because I get to learn and work with students like Roberto. To go back to the anecdote that I began with, Roberto also told me something else on the trip that stuck with me. Roberto shares that he hopes to one day take my job of being a Mexican-American history teacher at Luis Valdez Leadership Academy. As Roberto continues to explore his passion of teaching, I want him to have opportunities to pursue a teaching credential and masters program, that will allow for him to be the best possible teacher that he can be for his students. Without having to second-guess if he should or could do it based upon his financial circumstances, because he is and will be amazing for the Luis Valdez leadership community and for our society. I firmly believe that education has the power to transform not just a student, but families, communities, and societies, and teachers have such an impact on the educational experiences that each student has. I know that Roberto and other aspiring teachers would greatly benefit from teacher scholarships that would help to alleviate the teacher shortage, and diversify the teaching pipeline. Thank you.
[{'start': 79, 'end': 94, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 512, 'end': 520, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4497, 'end': 4504, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4552, 'end': 4559, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4620, 'end': 4627, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4754, 'end': 4761, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5124, 'end': 5135, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5398, 'end': 5405, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bob Capriles: my name is bob kilian capriles, thank you, you did a great job on my last name. my path to teaching is a little bit different than my colleagues sitting next to me. i have a bachelor of science in electrical engineering and computer science from california state university chico, and i worked for early 20 years as an engineer and project manager at high-tech companies such as hewlett-packard, agilent technologies, avago technologies, yahoo, and netsuite. fortunately as i have grown over the years, my wife and i have had three sons, and it's the community involvement that i got involved in with my sons that really lead me to teaching in many ways. i've been a scout leader, i've been involved with athletics with my sons, and what i really came to love was seeing young children grow and develop under my guidance. it's really a key part of what i do and i became more excited about my after-school work than i was with my day job. i also had the experience of having some sons who, when the oldest got to fifth grade my wife looked at me and says, it's your turn, i can't help them anymore with their homework, and that's when i began to start doing some work at home with my sons in math. and i still get to do that. i think one of my favorite experiences recently was when i was working with my high school student doing some math work. my middle schooler came and asked for help, and then my college student calls me on the phone, and three boys in one night all ask for math help, and i love that, that's an experience that i love. so, let me tell you a little bit about how i got to teaching. so, after working in tech and enjoying that after school type of activity, i actually attended a training program where i learned about living life powerfully and living a life i love. and i really started to think about what i was doing every day and as my wife puts it, i didn't have a mid-life crisis about having a new car or another pretty woman, it was about my career, and that's where it started. i actually took some time off from work, was involved with an organization called promatch, which is part of experience unlimited, to help people who are professionally looking for work after having been out of work, and i also, at this time, heard about something called the encore teacher program, which helps people to consider what education would be like after having worked in high technology. specifically, in the stem areas, specifically at high-needs schools. though i was involved in investigating teaching a little bit, i was, bluntly, very scared. i think as we get older sometimes we, or at least for me personally, the older i got, the more scared i was of changing things, and i saw that in a lot of my colleagues, they kept pining for retirement and they're saying, this is what i want to do in 10 years when i retire and i'm thinking to myself, why are you waiting? why in the world are you waiting to retire? so, i finished my last tech job in 2010 and when i walked out of the door, i knew i would never work in technology again, and i was going to be a teacher, and there are whole bunch of things you have to consider when you go into teaching because i left a job that was paying me about $110,000 a year to look into a job that was going to pay me maybe a little more than half that, and my wife needed go back to work. now she's an elementary school teacher, so trust me, i've had teaching around my house for a long time. i got to retain my 401k, but i had to give up the possibility of social security. because the way things work, i pay in to calstrs, i don't pay into social security anymore. so likely i'll never see anything, and the money that i put into social security while i was working in high-tech, but i also kept reflecting back on living life powerfully and living a life that i love, and i was reflecting on my work-life balance, my own personal happiness, as well as happiness of my family, and i wanted to set an example for my sons, an example of the difference between having a capability and being passionate about what you do everyday. so my family laughs at me because i leap out of bed at 5:30 in the morning so excited to go to the classroom, it's not even funny. i went through a program where i substituted, i had a sub permit within three weeks from leaving my last tech job. i told lots of people that i wanted to go into teaching, and they were all very supportive. a superintendent, who happened to be a classmate of mine from high school, says, go in, tell them you want to be a sub and we will get you on the sub list, and i was substituting k to 12, i was substituting in special day classes. i was substituting in catholic schools, and when they had math lessons to teach, i said, please leave me a math lesson. i want to teach math, and they gave me that opportunity. i took subject matter tests, i was a tutor in a high school tutorial center, and i started investigating credential programs. one thing important to me and it's been mentioned today, is i needed income while i was going to school, and fortunately i was accepted into the san jose state intern credential program, where i was able to prepare, over a summer, not a lot of preparation, but it was some preparation to at least get ready to enter the classroom. there were no openings though i applied in 2011 to go into the classroom. until i get a phone call from the fremont union high school district in november and they said, we need somebody to come in and teach math and by the way there might be some engineering involved, a-ha. so, at this time i also applied to the encorps teacher program, where i started to get some professional development in the teaching realm. in addition to getting the professional development in the classroom at san jose state, i started getting professional development from encorps, and then, two 20 minute interviews later, i had a job as a math teacher at fremont high school in sunnyvale. after having spent 6 hours going through interviews in high tech, i couldn't believe two 20 minute interviews was all i needed, but that's where we started. the supports i got after that were unbelievable. first and foremost the people i have to always thank are my wife and my sons, i could not do what i do today if it were not for the support that they provide me every single day, but, of course, i got huge supports in my school district. you've heard about professional learning communities today, my peers collaborate. we really collaborate. they share and they share and they share, and they're like, do you need some help with this, how can i help you. that is the culture at our school and there was a question earlier about, how do we get that ingrained? it's culture. it's something that the school has to own. it's something that everybody at that school owns. it's not something that somebody forces down, top-down. it's something that we all agree, we would be a better community if we all contributed, and, i guess one thing that i want to leave with you as well today, is that i was growing up, i thought i was suppose to teach my sons. that's what i thought i was supposed to do as a parent. i had no idea what they were going to teach me, and i experience exactly the same thing in the classroom. so, it's truly a teaching learning environment for me in the school classroom. after teaching for 6 months, 1 semester in fremont high school, the district spent $2,500 to send me to a training class so i could teach project lead engineering at our school, and since that time when i started teaching one project lead the way class, we now have five courses. three different types of classes with five different sections so our students can experience what an engineer does. now in my district, fremont's a unique school. we are a high needs school, 42% hispanic, but in the district that you go, wait a minute, this district isn't high needs. we have four other comprehensive high schools that have a very different population. so most of the kids at fremont don't know what an engineer does. unless they think it's somebody who drives the train down the tracks. so our kids get an opportunity to see what an engineer does, and they get to see this distinction, either i love engineering, i want to do more of it, or ew, that's engineering, i don't want to have anything to do with it. and both of those things are phenomenal for our students. i've been given a mentor from my district while i was an intern. i taught for a year and a half under an intern credential and then, once i finished that, i got an intern to help me continue on to help me clear my credential. so those supports have been tremendous. i've continued to be part of the encorp teacher education program where i get additional professional development. so, there are opportunities out there to grow and develop. and with in my school itself, we continue to do things as teacher led activities, as well as activities that the district say's hey, this would be a neat thing that we need to put into place across the district. so, i just want to thank you very much for your time today. i wanted to just leave you with just a little bit of this story of how i got into teaching, and how i'm just so thankful that i found something that i'm passionate about and i get to do every day. it is a privilege and it is so much more fun to teach than it is to go to work. i can't begin to tell you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ron Rapp: thank you. good afternoon, chairman allen, chairman o'donnell. my name is rapp, i'm the legislative director for the california federation of teachers. i just want to thank you for convening this hearing. it was very informational. i really enjoyed it, you had great panelists up here. as you probably know, i'm a former teacher, english teacher of 10 years in three states. i can go into the reasons why i left different schools and districts, but i won't do that now. i just want to let you know that this a critical issue, as you well know, and it's a priority for cft. i have to mention this, that we were the proud co-sponsors of the classified school employee teacher credentialing program. and worked vigorously to get that into the budget and get a $20 million allocation. you heard about the success of that program. we certainly need more money because the need is out there, the interest is out there and we can't fund everyone at the current rate given that interest. i also want to mention that we are sponsors of ab 401. it is a bill that would prohibit leas from charging new teachers. we think that's a travesty. based upon the ctc informal survey from 2015, at least 12% of providers charge new teachers for this. we think it's an extreme disincentive for prospective teachers and we need to fix that problem. so i want to thank you once again and i want you to know that cft is committed to working with you to address this very important issue. thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 41, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 52, 'end': 61, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 74, 'end': 78, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katherina Rigana: good afternoon, katherina on behalf of california's first 5 commissions. including first 5 california, first 5 los angeles, and the first 5 association. we encourage state leaders to include early learning in a comprehensive plan to address our state's critical teacher shortages. preschool and childcare providers are experiencing a shortage crisis in parallel to, and in many cases, even more severe than the k12 system. a recent study published by bellwether education partners, for example, found that teacher turnover in head start programs is as high as 50% every year and headstart programs often pay more than california's state subsidized care, where providers are struggling to keep up with the minimum wage. the first 5s, which work closely with early education providers in counties across california, are hearing stories of early educators leaving the classroom to take higher paying jobs in fast food and retail. or in k-12 classrooms. the first 5 community is eager to work with you all to develop solutions which address teacher shortages in all education settings and want to ensure that solutions work for the p through 12 education system in california so we can provide our children to high-quality teachers at every age. thank you very much.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sasha Horowitz: Thank you, Assembly member O'Donnell and Senator Allen for holding this hearing today. I am Sasha Horowitz. I am the Government Affairs Director with the Linked Learning Alliance and we work with schools, districts, researchers, employers and others across the state to support the link learning field, which is trying to make sure that public school pathways that integrate college and career prep curriculum are available to all students. So everyone graduates college and career ready. So there's little that I can add to the great comments of the panel today, and some of my colleagues behind me from the Pathway Teacher Workforce. But the one issue that I do want to make sure gets a little more emphasis is the need for CTE credentialed teachers. Right now, we've expanded the funding for CTE across the state, but we haven't made it any easier for CTE teachers to become credentialed. In fact, it can be a much more difficult than a single subject teacher to earn a CTE credential. So there's a few incentives that can be considered and I'm sure my colleague behind me will be happy to add on to that comment. Thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 36, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 49, 'end': 54, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 92, 'end': 106, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Annie Johnston: Good afternoon, education Commission legislators. My name is Annie Johnston. I'm from UC Berkeley's college and career academy support network and I facilitate a network of education leaders from across this state who are responsible for the pathway teacher workforce. This network includes educators from county offices of education, districts, and teacher education programs across the state, and we reformed in response to the shortage that we were experiencing as we responded to the legislatures incentives to build pathways. We are passionate about pathway development, particularly because of the impact that it has on disparity issues within high schools, that it really improves the motivation of students and their connection to real world applications for academics. It connects them to future careers and opens opportunities for them. So as people committed to that, we were building those pathways because of the generous and very, very well appreciated California Career Pathways Trust Grants, and the Career Technical Education Incentive Grants that pushed us to develop new pathways. But we have not been able to fully staff those pathways, especially because we're looking in career fields that are in high demand. If you could sum up please. I can, yes. We need programs to develop teachers who can teach academics and CTE. We need programs that will be able to sustain teachers who can train our students to be able to be able to be 21st century students. So for that, we need your support.
[{'start': 61, 'end': 75, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lynette Corning: Good afternoon, legislatures. My name is Lynette Corning and I am the CTE director at Red Bluff High School, which is about two and a half hours north of here and I just wanted to give you a perspective of this teacher shortage specifically for the CTE area. We lost five teachers in retirement and we were trying to rehire because we are one of seven schools in California that received a California career pathway trust grant. It was really imperative that we fill these positions and with that, we were able to do that with the seat of our pants to get them in. Almost the situation Bob was telling you, which was grabbing people that we knew were in industry, and enticing them to come into education. What I would suggest is to do something with the mentoring, because these are the teachers who are really in a critical State of not having an education in education, and they're going to be needing a mentor and a coach. So beyond having a mentorship in the teaching program induction series, they need a coach as well. So you can do that, and pay attention to the needs of the shortage of the CTE staff, that would be great, thank you.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 586, 'end': 589, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Louise Steinmetz: Good afternoon, Louise Steinmetz from Sacramento County Office of Education. We are one of seven CTIG technical assistant providers in the state. So I wanted to share a little unintended consequence of that. We realized very quickly that we have a lot of districts with issues in hiring, finding, recruiting teachers with CTE credentials and so, that has become a new piece of our work in our 14 county region, and we are working on strategies to recruit teachers. Next month we start our first teacher support training that will include classroom coaching. Sac State partnered with us to be able to offer teachers continuing education credits. We hope to do a whole series of those and after listening to Killian today, we need to not just work with new CTE teachers, we need to work with those five, six, seven year teachers. So that will be the next thing I do when I go back to work, thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 706, 'end': 713, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
David Simms: Good afternoon, David Simms Assistant Superintendent of Personnel Services for Ventura County Office of Education, and I started in teacher recruitment actually in 1987, so that's my 30th year of working on this, and in all that time, I've seen down turns with like the aerospace in the early 90s, class size reduction, which we had the huge teacher shortage, and then the downturn around 2007 with the great recession, and in all of that time, we have never had a time that we have enough math teachers, science teachers, special education teachers, bi-lingual teachers, or career educational teachers. So those are particular areas that we really need to have an emphasis on. I want to thank you for AB2122, for Ventura County, we got 50 slots, so that we'll be able to move our para-educators and other classified staff towards becoming teachers. However, we had 175 qualified applicants that wanted to be in the program, and because there was only funding for 1,000 people across the state we only got slots for 50. So that is a project that really needs additional support, and to go back over that period of time, back in 2007, we got $3,000 ahead for para, so this is 4,000, that's better, but we also go $2,500 a head for interns, and we got 5,500 for the BTSA Program. Now over the last few years, we've really streamlined those programs, but what we have done is by cutting down the paperwork we've had to increase the mentoring, mentors are expensive. So anything that you can do that would help us with that. The incentive programs that Dr Darling-Hammond discussed would be extremely helpful.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1552, 'end': 1559, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Dietrich: Hi, good afternoon, Jennifer Dietrich with the Partnership for Children in Youth. I'm representing CA3, the California Afterschool Advocacy Alliance, thank you for having this hearing. After school programs serve as a pipeline for new teachers. As one example, one of our CA3 members is a California Teaching Fellows Foundation, based in Fresno. They recruit and prepare local college students already on a teaching path, and place them in after-school programs. Over the next five years, their program alone will place 1,200 teachers in classrooms and those teachers will show up with hands on experience from their after school programs to match what they're getting in college. But state funded programs like these, the state funded after school programs like that, are at risk at this moment. With stagnant ASIS funding. As Assembly Member McCarthy had mentioned, we look forward to having the discussion to address the teacher shortage in budget committees as well. Thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 844, 'end': 852, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Betsy McKinstry: good afternoon, my name is betsy bob mckinstry and i'm the director of college and career readiness for antelope valley union high school district, which is in the northern most part of la county. i just want to address really quickly, the fact that we do have a cte shortage, but we also have a tremendous amount of cte teachers that would benefit from actually going on to get their single subject credential, as well, that are currently working part time or working within the cte world and that could be definitely a possible solution. the second piece is we really need flexibility of funding and scheduling, in order to address the teacher shortage on both ends, cte and academic.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Daina Lujan: all right, thank you. thank you for this opportunity. my name is daina. to give you a sense of who i am, i am vice president of the south san francisco unified school district, board of trustees and currently, principal of meadows elementary in millbrae. i taught for eight years and am currently in my, sixth year of administration. my goal today is to provide a local perspective on the impact of the teacher shortage and strategic responses. as a touch on responses, i'd like to talk about both the district-level response as well as a county-level response. the county-level response i will share today is unique to san mateo county. because this is the only place we've really had the opportunity to launch our work, but our work is scalable and replicable. so what does the teacher shortage look like on a school site? i am a principal of a tk through fifth grade elementary school with 435 students. in the 15, 16 school year we were awarded the gold ribbon award. i was lucky and i opened this current school year, 16-17 fully staffed but barely. i have an intern teaching my moderate severe class of students. this class includes non-verbal students who have autism, gross and fine motor delays or traumatic brain injuries. they can not communicate verbally, so they communicate with behaviors. starting the year with an intern means that she teaches all day, she oversees three aides all day, and then takes classes at night and on weekends. i opened the year with this intern in place and three brand new aides because paraprofessionals are also in great need. and students responded to the change in the only way they could, with big behaviors. they began running a lot. so i spent two months running after students, trying to keep them from getting into the street. and run over by a car or getting lost in a neighborhood and having no way to advocate for themselves. when i am running after students to keep them safe, i do not care about their learning goals, my biggest concern is their safety. and for this group of students, that's tragic. because they can and should be productive, engaged members of society in the future. but their learning goals are the least of my concerns when i'm trying to keep them safe. to ensure that i open the school year fully staffed, the millbrae school district employed several strategies to help minimize the impacts of the teacher shortage. we determined hiring needs early. we began recruiting early and we had partnerships with local universities. beyond this, we also offer pay incentive in the form of an annual stipend to our special education teachers and and we have capped their classes. so my mod-severe teacher can have no more than 10 students. district level responses, such as recruiting early and providing pay incentives, as recommended by learning policy institute are quite effective in ensuring individual district opens the school year fully staffed. but, they do nothing for our neighboring district down the road because the underlying supply and demand problem has not been addressed. in san mateo county, where i work, this is a serious challenge. there are 23 school districts all competing for the same pool of teachers who serve over 94,000 students. so at this juncture i'd like to shift the perspective just a little bit and talk about some of our county level responses. under the leadership of county superintendent ann campbell the san mateo county office of education has organized a work group to analyze data. identify causes of the shortage and outline strategic plans and has taken actions to assist with attracting, training, retaining and sustaining teachers. representatives include administration from the county office events, san francisco state university, notre dame de namur university, local school districts and our community college district. our work group has looked beyond district level responses that make one district seem more appealing than another and considered one how do we address immediate needs. and two, how can we build a sustainable pipeline to ensure every school opens fully staffed? this second question of how do we build a sustainable pipeline is of critical importance. because looking beyond times of crisis when there are no shortages, as a county we know that there's always a relative need for teachers. for those who are retiring, who leave the profession because it truly is not a good fit, or who have have a life change. so naturally we have 7% attrition no matter what. so in looking to how do we address immediate needs, members of our work group pursued the classified employee credential program grant and the four year ba plus credential planning grant. the san mateo county office of education was successful in earning a classified employee credential grant for 50 candidates a year. san francisco state earned two planning ba plus credential grants, and notre dame de namur earned one ba plus credential planning grant. these wins have been instrumental in working to address some of our immediate needs. but there's still a crisis ahead. so, and looking at how do we address longer term needs and another key accomplishment of the county work group over the past several months includes building a pilot pathway project within local high schools to attract students to future careers in teaching. we began looking at high schools because some key data points struck our group. according to data from the learning policy institute, 60% of teachers work within 15 miles of where they went to high school. if we look to san mateo county, there are 6,000 high school seniors at this moment in time. county education is provided by 4,700 teachers, and if we count for 7% attrition, we need about 300 teachers annually. so, if i look at my 6,000 high school seniors, i need 300 of them, or 5% to become teachers. so, to built a pilot pathway we have partnered with project tomorrow, an organization in southern california that oversees educators rising and youth teach to learn. youth teach to learn provides a high school curriculum for a two part course designed to get students familiar with the basic of learning theory as well as quality lesson design in the areas of math and science. we have supported community colleges and local high school districts with engaging in conversations about articulation agreements. and we have supported the high schools with taking the youth teach to learn program and building a career technical education pathway in the education sector. as i wrap up, i would like to state that yes, we as a state have faced a teacher shortage before. when class size reduction was instituted, we faced massive shortages of multiple subject credential candidates. some of the solutions of the past are of significant importance once again, but i must also express that today's shortage is slightly different and more critical. today we face critical needs in specialized areas. additionally, where i work, few districts, if any, still implement class size reduction. if anything, class sizes has certainly increased. so as we look to the future we want for our students, we must draw upon lessons from the past, such as loan forgiveness. but we must also dream big, and think strategically for our students. building a sustainable teacher pipeline that attracts, trains, retains, and sustains teachers is a long term and permanent endeavor. every year, we must start to develop the next cadre of teachers who will replace those retiring or who are leaving the profession for other reasons. this is a necessary step to ensure all children of california have access to dynamic, dedicated, valued and highly trained educators throughout their educational experience, thank you.
[{'start': 65, 'end': 70, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 3401, 'end': 3413, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kilian Betlach: Thank you. Greetings community members, and thank you to the Chairs for the opportunity to speak today. My name is Kilian Betlach. It is my honor to be the principal at Elmhurst Community Prep middle school in Oakland Unified, where I've worked for eight years. I've come here to talk about the teacher shortage crisis from the context of teacher retention, because that is how we understand it, if we retain our teachers then we are not exposed to the shortage. That's particularly meaningful for me because that is how I got into education. I came into teaching through Teach for America. I worked in San Jose, in a neighbor hood known as 
Barrio Sal de Si Puedes, get out if you can. And stayed because of my principal, a man named Glen Vanserbe. When he left, I lasted one more year and then I left. And I didn't think I would be back. When I came back, I said, I'm going to ground my work as a leader of a school and be for others what my principal was for me. And hopefully be a force that allows them to stay. And so in doing that work, I failed a lot. And so, some of the lessons that I am here, I have submitted humbly, I don't have all the answers. But there is things that we think about at Elmhurst that I want to share, that we feel like we've gotten pretty good results. Out of 20 certificate staff, six years ago we had to replace nine, last year it was three, next year it's one. So and thinking about that, some context is perhaps helpful. Elmhurst Community Prep is located in deep East Oakland, where the first and third most violent police beats converged. We serve 375 6th, 7th, and 8th graders. 100% are young people of color. Nearly 100% live below the poverty line. Our unduplicated LCFF percentage is 93.7 because we didn't get in all the forms in on time. This makes ECP a particularly difficult place to recruit teachers into, and perhaps a more difficult place to retain them. And most of the external factors that could contribute to longevity in a career, whether we're talking about the extent of parental involvement, the readiness, emotional, academic of students, age of facilities, ,our building was built in 1906, or even competitiveness of salary, those push away from us. We don't have those in our favor, right? And so we have to compensate by working conditions on site and creating community, climate and culture that make teachers feel valued, excited. And make the idea of leaving, something they would never consider, right? So let me, those five things. The first is the stuff you hear about all the time which is get the right people on the bus, right? And you can read all the things that say that and it's really important. What's particularly important for us is being reflective and understanding what we look for in a quality and effective perspective teacher, and having the flexibility and freedom. And then taking the initiative to run a rigorous, nuanced, multi-step interview process, right? Chairman Allen, you spoke I think to Dr. Darling-Hammond  about that, what about this disconnect? This works on both ends. It is less likely for us to have a disconnect of a candidate coming in if we meet with him four times before we make an offer. And it's less likely for us to make an error in judgement. If also the people meeting them aren't just me, but are teachers, parents, kids, staff members, and folks that they're going to interact with everyday. That's not something that every school or every district does and it's critical. The second thing is to create a mission and value driven workplace. As Chairman O'Donnell knows, not every aspect of teaching is joyous and amazing, and enlightening, and full of sunlight. There are things that are not fun, like grading and filling out report forms and maybe sometimes attending meetings. But if we understand our work and the context of vision, of mission and shared values, particularly in a politically charged context where many of us are serving communities that are literally under attack, politically. Then we are more likely to push through things that aren't inherently interesting because we understand that they are oriented towards a greater good. And so by naming those values at our school site by defining them by what we mean, every school in the world's going to tell you they have high expectations, right? Now we saw famously, there was a school in New York where high expectations meant, my teacher's going to rip up my math homework and yell at me, right? That's not how we define high expectations, right? We understand it differently, and we bring that shared value to our workplace. We are going to find a community and a connectiveness to carry us through some of the times that are hard. I ask teachers to think often about the no matter whatness of our work, and what it means to show up for each other and to show up for kids because that's what we are called to. And when we bring that into meeting spaces, right, we have educator of the month, but you don't get it because you were nice to me in a meeting. You get it because you showed our social justice core value in your classroom, right? You get it because you collaborated with colleagues and they nominated you. So basing our work in those values, allows us to have a more rich and fulfilled professional experience. The next two, the next three are the places I want to actually spend a little bit of time, and they've been brought up actually before this. So it's kind of some nice serendipity. The third element that we focus on is every teacher's on a team. Every teacher has a team. because when the bell rings and the doors close, it's you and 32 kids. So that never changes. It's hard to stay in your work, right? Kids are great, they're awesome. And you need adult connectivity to carry you through. And so every teacher is on a grade level team that meets weekly. What are we going to do about the fact that Jorge keeps chewing gum, Samantha's on her phone? Or how do we get this mom to come in and help talk to us about their kid, right? That matters because that helps teachers pick each other up, no matter what level of experience they're at. And it smooths out the difference in child experience between the teacher that's been here 20 years and the teacher that just walked in the door. Because they talk to each other every single week and do the same thing. The second thing is that teachers are always on their department teams. It is really critical, particularly in the middle grades, that kids have a unified experience. One of things I sought to end was this idea that kids experience our school three times, one year at a time and every year is different. No, there's no need for that. So we work in departments to vertically align our work and our pursuit of standards based mastery, right? So that kids go to school one time for three years and then that their English experiences vertically align t 6th through 8th grade, their history experiences vertically align. My 6th grade teachers talking to me about synthesizing evidence. My 7th grade teacher is going to talk to me about the same thing, and my 8th grade teacher, too. because that's what historians do, right? So those departments at our school meet at minimum of twice per month for 90 minutes. They are meeting right now. Yep, right now. The fourth factor that's really critical for us is every teacher has a coach. And when I say every teacher at our school has a coach, I mean that literally. You heard that there is this thing that happens with teachers at years three, four, five where they start leaving, here's why? Because they've achieved a basic level of averageness or acceptability, or it's okayness in the classroom. They've gotten over that hump and the profession offers very little, except 30 more years of that. With no one to talk to about it, and no one to support you, and nowhere to grow. And by offering teachers a coach, what we're saying is, I'm investing, a couple things. One, I'm investing in you, so invest back. And number two, we're saying that your growth matters, your professional develop matters. Not as an empty imperative but as something that I'm going to work with you on. So, our coaches don't come from a county office, although county offices are great. They don't come from the district, although districts are great. They come from our school and I, when creating a budget fund for site-based teacher leaders that are in the classroom, 20 to 30%, sometimes as little as 10%, coaching teachers the rest of the time. This matters. This distinction is important, because you also maybe heard from teachers that there's worse than the person coming out without context or understanding of your job and telling you how to get better. Perhaps as elected officials, you have experienced that as well. And so that's critical as well because that's not in my regular psyche based allocation, right? Of funding or FTE. That has to be prioritized and sometimes grant sought after to get those positions. We also provide coaching on the restorative justice side of the house. So we fund three restorative justice professionals who also coach teachers in restoratives practices, in moving beyond punitive measures of students. And moving beyond replicating the justice system in classrooms, so that we're getting to learning, growth and achievement. Those are the kind of things that communicate to educators that their growth matter on a longitudinal scale, right? I'm not just trying to get you to where you're not struggling anymore. I actually care to see you all the way through. The last thing I just want to share that we've been working on is flexibility. When I came into school leadership, I didn't understand things like maternity leave, paternity leave, how daycare works. Why do you need Friday off for daycare with the child, I understand that now. And so one of the things we've worked really hard at is telling teachers, your job here, you don't have to choose between having a family and having a job. And so, we have created a site-based model where teachers who are coming back from maternity or paternity work at 80% time. They take off Fridays, because that's when daycare wants you to take off. And we hire a site-based substitute who comes in and teaches that fifth day. And what we ask is that the teachers mentor the sub, that the sub work with the teachers. And we've now provided a professional learning experience for someone who may become a future teacher. We've provided a sustainable life experience for a teacher. And we've also given them a little taste of leadership because they are able to mentor that substitute. Those kind of things came when I had to get over something that I struggled with. Where I thought if I was asking my staff if they wanted to come back, that I was failing. Because I was letting in the light of doubt. And so now we've actually shifted that as much, as far away as possible. And are communicating all the time with teachers. How are you, what do you need? How are you doing? That comes in both informal stuff, but also formal surveys that I give out. This year, it was the first day back from winter break. I think I'm going to do it right after Thanksgiving next year because that's when people make up their minds about the next year. So what's going on at the school? What do you need? And often I hear things like, I hate first period prep. I was like, I can fix that for you. You got it. Other times it's like, I love computer science and I'd want to teach computer science here. Okay. So I had a teacher who said that to me, and I knew that from the second day of this job. So we've been looking for grants to have him be partially funded for computer science. Go our grant, he's teaching computer science next year. Our kids win, our teacher stays, we're moving forward, right? The more that, and so, and what I wanted to share briefly about, those are our five, right? So the right people on the bus, mission and values driven work, every teacher on a team, every teacher with a coach and then having built in flexibility. What I want to share that makes some of that difficult is that these are site based autonomies that often have to be fought for, or figured out, or done on the sly. They're not always the norm, and it's hard for principals to always have the staffing structures to make these happen. It's a very difficult, on a year after year annual budgeting cycle, to plan ahead, and I was trained to do none of this. So we heard about Principal PD, it'd be good. There's some best practices in the world that are often not picked up on and shared in principle, professional development, and the stat that you heard, that I've certainly read, that teachers are leaving for a lot of reasons, but one of the reasons they stay, is leaders. I think think about that at 3:45 in the morning a lot, and so the more that we can support the folks that are supporting the people who work with kids, the better we are going to be as a state and as a community. So I really appreciate your time today, thank you.
[{'start': 115, 'end': 129, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 734, 'end': 747, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2956, 'end': 2961, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2988, 'end': 3003, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3568, 'end': 3577, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5909, 'end': 5914, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5934, 'end': 5942, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ivette Castilan: good afternoon, just kidding. third time's a charm. good afternoon, my name is castilan, and i'm currently a mexican-american history teacher and academic dean at luis valdez leadership academy in east side san jose. last week, i had the opportunity to take 12 of my students, who will be the first in their family to graduate from high school and go to college, to a trip to visit universities in the pacific northwest. as we were traveling back, roberto, one of my students, turned to me and said, miss castilan, i know i can go to college and succeed. i just need to remember my why, why i want to go to college. as my student mentioned this, i began to think about my why, the factors that motivated me to go to college and to stay in college, and that why was my family. like my students, i too was the first in my family to graduate from high school and go to college. i grew up in a low income, predominantly latino neighborhood in san bernardino, california. each time i packed my bags to travel across the country to brown university, where i completed my undergraduate studies, i took much more with me than that can ever be weighed by an airport security scale. each time i traveled to and from brown, i carried with me my dad. my dad, an immigrant from mexico who worked three minimum jobs, and that still wasn't enough to prevent our family from declaring bankruptcy and losing our home while i was in college and my mom. my mom, whose rheumatoid arthritis required more costly medicines as the years went on. it was during my senior year at brown, when deciding my next steps, that these pieces of my background weighed heavily on what i would choose to pursue after college. i wanted to graduate and help my family financially, and my next steps had to allow for this to happen. while i was at brown i found my passion for teaching. the thought of teaching students that looked like me became another one of my wise. i found purpose in teaching. i remained invigorated about obtaining a higher education, at potentially teaching and preparing first generation students of color to go to college, as well. while i was a senior at brown i applied and received a fellowship from the rockefeller brothers fund for aspiring teachers of color, which awarded me with $25,000 to apply towards a teacher credential program, and also get a portion of my loans forgiven if i taught for five years in a school where the students were predominantly students of color. it was after i received this fellowship that my next steps of applying to a teacher ed program became more of a reality. i applied to the stanford teacher education program, also known as step, and was admitted. upon admission, i learned that i was selected to receive the dorothy avery forgivable loan, for the amount of $20,000. the $20,000 would help fund my step education, in a form of a loan that would be fully forgiven after teaching for five years. i then take out perkins loans to pay for the difference. when i was in step, i applied to the assumption program of loans for education forgiveness programs, that would forgive a portion of my loans each year after teaching in a low income school setting. moreover, by going into teaching i was eligible for the perkins teacher forgiveness program that would eventually pay off my perkins loans from both my undergraduate and graduate education. i wanted to go into a teacher education program and a master's program because i wanted to enter the classroom fully prepared for my students because, as you have seen in the researchers' presentations, i was one of those students that had subs coming in and out. so when i got to brown it was hard, i was not prepared, and so if i wanted to go into teaching, i wanted to be a teacher that was prepared to serve my students. so that when they got to a college campus, when they got to a brown, when they got to any college campus, they would feel like they belonged and that they were prepared, and as much as i wanted to pursue my masters and teaching credential, it would not have been feasible to pursue if it weren't for these programs that helped me to finance a masters in education and secondary teaching credential and for that i am eternally grateful. i am now able to provide for my family and i have the best job that i could ask for. i am in my eighth year teaching and i love it as much, if not more, than when i first entered the profession, and it's because i get to learn and work with students like roberto. to go back to the anecdote that i began with, roberto also told me something else on the trip that stuck with me. roberto shares that he hopes to one day take my job of being a mexican-american history teacher at luis valdez leadership academy. as roberto continues to explore his passion of teaching, i want him to have opportunities to pursue a teaching credential and masters program, that will allow for him to be the best possible teacher that he can be for his students. without having to second-guess if he should or could do it based upon his financial circumstances, because he is and will be amazing for the luis valdez leadership community and for our society. i firmly believe that education has the power to transform not just a student, but families, communities, and societies, and teachers have such an impact on the educational experiences that each student has. i know that roberto and other aspiring teachers would greatly benefit from teacher scholarships that would help to alleviate the teacher shortage, and diversify the teaching pipeline. thank you.
[{'start': 79, 'end': 87, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 448, 'end': 455, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 505, 'end': 513, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4490, 'end': 4497, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4613, 'end': 4620, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4747, 'end': 4754, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5117, 'end': 5128, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5391, 'end': 5398, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bob Capriles: My name is Bob Capriles, thank you, you did a great job on my last name. My path to teaching is a little bit different than my colleagues sitting next to me. I have a Bachelor of Science in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science from California State University Chico, and I worked for early 20 years as an engineer and project manager at high-tech companies such as Hewlett-Packard, Agilent Technologies, Avago Technologies, Yahoo, and NetSuite. Fortunately as I have grown over the years, my wife and I have had three sons, and it's the community involvement that I got involved in with my sons that really lead me to teaching in many ways. I've been a scout leader, I've been involved with athletics with my sons, and what I really came to love was seeing young children grow and develop under my guidance. It's really a key part of what I do and I became more excited about my after-school work than I was with my day job. I also had the experience of having some sons who, when the oldest got to fifth grade my wife looked at me and says, it's your turn, I can't help them anymore with their homework, and that's when I began to start doing some work at home with my sons in math. And I still get to do that. I think one of my favorite experiences recently was when I was working with my high school student doing some math work. My middle schooler came and asked for help, and then my college student calls me on the phone, and three boys in one night all ask for math help, and I love that, that's an experience that I love. So, let me tell you a little bit about how I got to teaching. So, after working in tech and enjoying that after school type of activity, I actually attended a training program where I learned about living life powerfully and living a life I love. And I really started to think about what I was doing every day and as my wife puts it, I didn't have a mid-life crisis about having a new car or another pretty woman, it was about my career, and that's where it started. I actually took some time off from work, was involved with an organization called ProMatch, which is part of Experience Unlimited, to help people who are professionally looking for work after having been out of work, and I also, at this time, heard about something called the Encore Teacher Program, which helps people to consider what education would be like after having worked In high technology. Specifically, in the STEM areas, specifically at high-needs schools. Though I was involved in investigating teaching a little bit, I was, bluntly, very scared. I think as we get older sometimes we, or at least for me personally, the older I got, the more scared I was of changing things, and I saw that in a lot of my colleagues, they kept pining for retirement and they're saying, this is what I want to do in 10 years when I retire and I'm thinking to myself, why are you waiting? Why in the world are you waiting to retire? So, I finished my last tech job in 2010 and when I walked out of the door, I knew I would never work in technology again, and I was going to be a teacher, and there are whole bunch of things you have to consider when you go into teaching because I left a job that was paying me about $110,000 a year to look into a job that was going to pay me maybe a little more than half that, and my wife needed go back to work. Now she's an elementary school teacher, so trust me, I've had teaching around my house for a long time. I got to retain my 401K, but I had to give up the possibility of Social Security. Because the way things work, I pay in to CalSTRS, I don't pay into Social Security anymore. So likely I'll never see anything, and the money that I put into Social Security while I was working in high-tech, but I also kept reflecting back on living life powerfully and living a life that I love, and I was reflecting on my work-life balance, my own personal happiness, as well as happiness of my family, and I wanted to set an example for my sons, an example of the difference between having a capability and being passionate about what you do everyday. So my family laughs at me because I leap out of bed at 5:30 in the morning so excited to go to the classroom, it's not even funny. I went through a program where I substituted, I had a sub permit within three weeks from leaving my last tech job. I told lots of people that I wanted to go into teaching, and they were all very supportive. A superintendent, who happened to be a classmate of mine from high school, says, go in, tell them you want to be a sub and we will get you on the sub list, and I was substituting K to 12, I was substituting in special day classes. I was substituting in Catholic schools, and when they had math lessons to teach, I said, please leave me a math lesson. I want to teach math, and they gave me that opportunity. I took subject matter tests, I was a tutor in a high school tutorial center, and I started investigating credential programs. One thing important to me and it's been mentioned today, is I needed income while I was going to school, and fortunately I was accepted into the San Jose State Intern Credential Program, where I was able to prepare, over a summer, not a lot of preparation, but it was some preparation to at least get ready to enter the classroom. There were no openings though I applied in 2011 to go into the classroom. Until I get a phone call from the Fremont Union High School District in November and they said, we need somebody to come in and teach math and by the way there might be some engineering involved, a-ha. So, at this time I also applied to the EnCorps Teacher Program, where I started to get some professional development in the teaching realm. In addition to getting the professional development in the classroom at San Jose State, I started getting professional development from EnCorps, and then, two 20 minute interviews later, I had a job as a math teacher at Fremont High School in Sunnyvale. After having spent 6 hours going through interviews in high tech, I couldn't believe two 20 minute interviews was all I needed, but that's where we started. The supports I got after that were unbelievable. First and foremost the people I have to always thank are my wife and my sons, I could not do what I do today if it were not for the support that they provide me every single day, but, of course, I got huge supports in my school district. You've heard about professional learning communities today, my peers collaborate. We really collaborate. They share and they share and they share, and they're like, do you need some help with this, how can I help you. That is the culture at our school and there was a question earlier about, how do we get that ingrained? It's culture. It's something that the school has to own. It's something that everybody at that school owns. It's not something that somebody forces down, top-down. It's something that we all agree, we would be a better community if we all contributed, and, I guess one thing that I want to leave with you as well today, is that I was growing up, I thought I was suppose to teach my sons. That's what I thought I was supposed to do as a parent. I had no idea what they were going to teach me, and I experience exactly the same thing in the classroom. So, it's truly a teaching learning environment for me in the school classroom. After teaching for 6 months, 1 semester in Fremont High School, the district spent $2,500 to send me to a training class so I could teach Project Lead Engineering at our school, and since that time when I started teaching one Project Lead The Way class, we now have five courses. Three different types of classes with five different sections so our students can experience what an engineer does. Now in my district, Fremont's a unique school. We are a high needs school, 42% Hispanic, but in the district that you go, wait a minute, this district isn't high needs. We have four other comprehensive high schools that have a very different population. So most of the kids at Fremont don't know what an engineer does. Unless they think it's somebody who drives the train down the tracks. So our kids get an opportunity to see what an engineer does, and they get to see this distinction, either I love engineering, I want to do more of it, or ew, that's engineering, I don't want to have anything to do with it. And both of those things are phenomenal for our students. I've been given a mentor from my district while I was an intern. I taught for a year and a half under an intern credential and then, once I finished that, I got an intern to help me continue on to help me clear my credential. So those supports have been tremendous. I've continued to be part of the EnCorp teacher education program where I get additional professional development. So, there are opportunities out there to grow and develop. And with in my school itself, we continue to do things as teacher led activities, as well as activities that the district say's hey, this would be a neat thing that we need to put into place across the district. So, I just want to thank you very much for your time today. I wanted to just leave you with just a little bit of this story of how I got into teaching, and how I'm just so thankful that I found something that I'm passionate about and I get to do every day. It is a privilege and it is so much more fun to teach than it is to go to work. I can't begin to tell you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ron Rapp: thank you. good afternoon, chairman allen, chairman o'donnell. my name is ron jonah rapp, i'm the legislative director for the california federation of teachers. i just want to thank you for convening this hearing. it was very informational. i really enjoyed it, you had great panelists up here. as you probably know, i'm a former teacher, english teacher of 10 years in three states. i can go into the reasons why i left different schools and districts, but i won't do that now. i just want to let you know that this a critical issue, as you well know, and it's a priority for cft. i have to mention this, that we were the proud co-sponsors of the classified school employee teacher credentialing program. and worked vigorously to get that into the budget and get a $20 million allocation. you heard about the success of that program. we certainly need more money because the need is out there, the interest is out there and we can't fund everyone at the current rate given that interest. i also want to mention that we are sponsors of ab 401. it is a bill that would prohibit leas from charging new teachers. we think that's a travesty. based upon the ctc informal survey from 2015, at least 12% of providers charge new teachers for this. we think it's an extreme disincentive for prospective teachers and we need to fix that problem. so i want to thank you once again and i want you to know that cft is committed to working with you to address this very important issue. thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 41, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 52, 'end': 61, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 74, 'end': 88, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katherina Rigana: Good afternoon, Katherina Rigana on behalf of California's First 5 Commissions. Including First 5 California, First 5 Los Angeles, and the First 5 Association. We encourage state leaders to include early learning in a comprehensive plan to address our state's critical teacher shortages. Preschool and childcare providers are experiencing a shortage crisis in parallel to, and in many cases, even more severe than the K12 system. A recent study published by Bellwether Education Partners, for example, found that teacher turnover in Head Start programs is as high as 50% every year and Headstart programs often pay more than California's state subsidized care, where providers are struggling to keep up with the minimum wage. The First 5s, which work closely with early education providers in counties across California, are hearing stories of early educators leaving the classroom to take higher paying jobs in fast food and retail. Or in K-12 classrooms. The First 5 community is eager to work with you all to develop solutions which address teacher shortages in all education settings and want to ensure that solutions work for the P through 12 education system in California so we can provide our children to high-quality teachers at every age. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sasha Horowitz: thank you, assembly member o'donnell and senator allen for holding this hearing today. i am sasha ron horowitz. i am the government affairs director with the linked learning alliance and we work with schools, districts, researchers, employers and others across the state to support the link learning field, which is trying to make sure that public school pathways that integrate college and career prep curriculum are available to all students. so everyone graduates college and career ready. so there's little that i can add to the great comments of the panel today, and some of my colleagues behind me from the pathway teacher workforce. but the one issue that i do want to make sure gets a little more emphasis is the need for cte credentialed teachers. right now, we've expanded the funding for cte across the state, but we haven't made it any easier for cte teachers to become credentialed. in fact, it can be a much more difficult than a single subject teacher to earn a cte credential. so there's a few incentives that can be considered and i'm sure my colleague behind me will be happy to add on to that comment. thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 36, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 49, 'end': 54, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 92, 'end': 110, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Annie Johnston: good afternoon, education commission legislators. my name is annie sasha johnston. i'm from uc berkeley's college and career academy support network and i facilitate a network of education leaders from across this state who are responsible for the pathway teacher workforce. this network includes educators from county offices of education, districts, and teacher education programs across the state, and we reformed in response to the shortage that we were experiencing as we responded to the legislatures incentives to build pathways. we are passionate about pathway development, particularly because of the impact that it has on disparity issues within high schools, that it really improves the motivation of students and their connection to real world applications for academics. it connects them to future careers and opens opportunities for them. so as people committed to that, we were building those pathways because of the generous and very, very well appreciated california career pathways trust grants, and the career technical education incentive grants that pushed us to develop new pathways. but we have not been able to fully staff those pathways, especially because we're looking in career fields that are in high demand. if you could sum up please. i can, yes. we need programs to develop teachers who can teach academics and cte. we need programs that will be able to sustain teachers who can train our students to be able to be able to be 21st century students. so for that, we need your support.
[{'start': 61, 'end': 81, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lynette Corning: Good afternoon, legislatures. My name is Lynette Corning and I am the CTE director at Red Bluff High School, which is about two and a half hours north of here and I just wanted to give you a perspective of this teacher shortage specifically for the CTE area. We lost five teachers in retirement and we were trying to rehire because we are one of seven schools in California that received a California career pathway trust grant. It was really imperative that we fill these positions and with that, we were able to do that with the seat of our pants to get them in. Almost the situation Bob was telling you, which was grabbing people that we knew were in industry, and enticing them to come into education. What I would suggest is to do something with the mentoring, because these are the teachers who are really in a critical State of not having an education in education, and they're going to be needing a mentor and a coach. So beyond having a mentorship in the teaching program induction series, they need a coach as well. So you can do that, and pay attention to the needs of the shortage of the CTE staff, that would be great, thank you.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 586, 'end': 589, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Louise Steinmetz: good afternoon, louise from sacramento county office of education. we are one of seven ctig technical assistant providers in the state. so i wanted to share a little unintended consequence of that. we realized very quickly that we have a lot of districts with issues in hiring, finding, recruiting teachers with cte credentials and so, that has become a new piece of our work in our 14 county region, and we are working on strategies to recruit teachers. next month we start our first teacher support training that will include classroom coaching. sac state partnered with us to be able to offer teachers continuing education credits. we hope to do a whole series of those and after listening to killian today, we need to not just work with new cte teachers, we need to work with those five, six, seven year teachers. so that will be the next thing i do when i go back to work, thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 696, 'end': 703, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
David Simms: good afternoon, david assistant superintendent of personnel services for ventura county office of education, and i started in teacher recruitment actually in 1987, so that's my 30th year of working on this, and in all that time, i've seen down turns with like the aerospace in the early 90s, class size reduction, which we had the huge teacher shortage, and then the downturn around 2007 with the great recession, and in all of that time, we have never had a time that we have enough math teachers, science teachers, special education teachers, bi-lingual teachers, or career educational teachers. so those are particular areas that we really need to have an emphasis on. i want to thank you for ab2122, for ventura county, we got 50 slots, so that we'll be able to move our para-educators and other classified staff towards becoming teachers. however, we had 175 qualified applicants that wanted to be in the program, and because there was only funding for 1,000 people across the state we only got slots for 50. so that is a project that really needs additional support, and to go back over that period of time, back in 2007, we got $3,000 ahead for para, so this is 4,000, that's better, but we also go $2,500 a head for interns, and we got 5,500 for the btsa program. now over the last few years, we've really streamlined those programs, but what we have done is by cutting down the paperwork we've had to increase the mentoring, mentors are expensive. so anything that you can do that would help us with that. the incentive programs that dr darling-hammond discussed would be extremely helpful.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Dietrich: Hi, good afternoon, Jennifer Dietrich with the Partnership for Children in Youth. I'm representing CA3, the California Afterschool Advocacy Alliance, thank you for having this hearing. After school programs serve as a pipeline for new teachers. As one example, one of our CA3 members is a California Teaching Fellows Foundation, based in Fresno. They recruit and prepare local college students already on a teaching path, and place them in after-school programs. Over the next five years, their program alone will place 1,200 teachers in classrooms and those teachers will show up with hands on experience from their after school programs to match what they're getting in college. But state funded programs like these, the state funded after school programs like that, are at risk at this moment. With stagnant ASIS funding. As Assembly Member McCarthy had mentioned, we look forward to having the discussion to address the teacher shortage in budget committees as well. Thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 844, 'end': 852, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Betsy McKinstry: good afternoon, my name is betsy annie mckinstry and i'm the director of college and career readiness for antelope valley union high school district, which is in the northern most part of la county. i just want to address really quickly, the fact that we do have a cte shortage, but we also have a tremendous amount of cte teachers that would benefit from actually going on to get their single subject credential, as well, that are currently working part time or working within the cte world and that could be definitely a possible solution. the second piece is we really need flexibility of funding and scheduling, in order to address the teacher shortage on both ends, cte and academic.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
William Rosen: thank you members of the committee, my name is rosen. i'm counsel with everytown for gun safety, the largest gun violence prevention organization in the country. as you know, ab 424 will close a loophole in current law that allows school districts to authorize people to carry guns. it's a loophole that we know at least four school districts are currently exploiting to arm teachers. this is part of the gun lobby's agenda, which says more guns are always the answer to threats to public safety. everytown strongly disputes this view and opposes allowing civilians to carry guns for three reasons. first, bringing guns into schools is unnecessary. california schools are extremely safe. there are 10,000 secondary schools with 6 million students. and since 2014, thankfully, there have just been two deaths and three nonfatal injuries from gunshots. second, active shooter incidents like sandy hook or columbine are extremely rare. but even in the event of a shooting like that, research shows that arming civilians is not an effective strategy. a study by the fbi shows that analyzed 160 active shooter incidents and found only one successful armed civilian intervention, and that civilian was a highly trained us marine. and finally, rather than improving student safety, allowing guns into schools actually exposes kids to new risks. researchers at everytown analyzed 113 shootings at elementary, middle, and high schools since 2013, and of those shootings, one in 10 was unintentional. and more than one in six began as a verbal altercation that escalated because of the presence of a gun. so, introducing guns in schools increases the potential for such tragedies. so in short, arming teachers is unnecessary, ineffective and in fact, dangerous. for those reasons, everytown urges the committee to approve ab 424 and keep guns out of california schools.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Martinez: i want to thank the committee for allowing me to testify this morning. my name is richard and i live in san luis obispo county. my son christopher ross michaels-martinez is dead. shot and killed in isla vista, california on may 23rd, 2014. he was our only child and he was the center of our lives. since that day, nothing in my life that was important to me is important to me now. the only thing that's important to me now is working to reduce gun violence in our country. everytown for gun safety and the work that i do, we're working and asking legislators to adopt common sense measures to reduce gun violence. common sense measures that respect the second amendment but recognize the need for public safety. the united states has, compared to other developed countries in the world, a gun violence problem. ab 424 would close a loophole in current law that allows school districts to have guns in their schools. both the american federation of teachers and the national education association, the nation's two largest teachers' organizations, oppose allowing guns in schools. our elected leaders should be listening to the will of their constituents who put the safety of our students first, not the gun lobby. the gun lobby says that guns will make our children safer in schools. and the reality is that guns in schools increase the risk of unintentional shootings, complicate law enforcement response in emergencies, and make non-lethal confrontations escalate into lethal ones. educators don't become educators to be sharpshooters. they're there to enrich the lives of our children and make them strong. we should do everything in our power to make our schools safe and we should reject the gun lobby's vision of america, an america where there are guns everywhere, including in our children's schools. too many have died, and we should say to ourselves not one more. thank you.
[{'start': 82, 'end': 89, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 135, 'end': 169, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Toni Trigueiro: mr. chair, trigueiro on behalf of the california teachers' association. we have a recommended support, we'll communicate it with the staff when we have our official position, but wanted to share it with the author. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Austin Webster: thank you. austin jonah webster on behalf of the faculty association of california community colleges in strong support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alice Kessler: alice austin kessler on behalf of equality california in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeanine Collins: Jeanine Collins, Danville, California, and I support this bill. Moms Demand Action.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Heather Fortes: I'm Heather Fortes from Sacramento, a member of Everytown and a parent, and I support this bill strongly.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Claire Senchyna: Claire Senchyna, Everytown Survivor Network, mother of Camilo, shot and killed December, 2014. I support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 55, 'end': 61, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jessica Rose: Jessica Rose, mother of two young girls in the Folsom Cordova School District where the Superintendent, Deborah Bettencourt, does allow guns on school campuses, in support of this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 104, 'end': 123, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Heather Jennings: Heather Jennings, Local Chapter Lead, Moms Demand Action, Sonoma County, and wife of a high school principal. I support this.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Judy Pazda: judy, petaluma, california, moms demand action, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Deborah Switters: Deborah Switters, I'm from Folsom, California. I am a registered nurse and mama bear and I support this.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lily Constanza: constanza, moms demand action, sister of a gun violence victim, retired teacher, and grandmother of an elementary school student.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Steve Cosenza: steve, alameda county, california resident in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gayla Moganom: gayla alice moganom, survivor of the henry's hostage situation. sorry. that was one block from uc berkeley. sorry. the trauma's too much. i support this.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Adele Ivory: thank you. ivory, corte madera, california. moms demand action. strong support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Nisiri: Jennifer Nisiri, Marin County, I'm a mother, I'm a former teacher, and I'm also a gun survivor. I support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susan Upshaw: susan gayla upshaw, greenbrae california, mother of two, grandmother of four elementary school students. marin moms demand action, i strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lauren Pitts: pitts, larkspur, california. registered nurse, moms demand action. i strongly support this, thank you.
[]
Carol Keithly: carol, moms demand action, sacramento. in support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lois Newberger: Lois Newberger, Oakland California, nurse, I support this bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Fisnis: linda susan fisnis, mother of three, san juan unified school district employee, member of moms demand action. i support this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tristan Brown: thank you, chairman and members. tristan linda brown of california federation of teachers. just like the cta, we have a recommended support position on this bill to be ratified at our convention at the end of the month. thank you.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jaclyn Durer: my name is jaclyn tristan durer. i'm a parent of two children, one of whom is still in the school system here in california. i'm a long time public health worker and volunteer in gun and injury prevention, and i'm a school volunteer, and i urge your support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Lovell: john jaclyn lovell on behalf of the california college and university police chiefs' association. we were the sponsors of the original sb 707. we support this bill. one factual correction, though. in fact, the gun lobby vigorously opposed 707.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Collins: Jennifer Collins, Marin Moms Demand Action, former school administrator, middle school teacher, mom of three, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Manuel Mejia: manuel, oakland, california, first responder, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barbara Maris: Barbara Maris, my son James was murdered by gun violence in 2006 and I am here in his honor.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 22, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Craig DeLuz: Mr. Chair and Members of the Committee, Craig DeLuz with the Firearms Policy Coalition. I also would like to note that I'm currently a sitting, 12 year member of the Robla Elementary School District Board of Trustees, former classroom teacher, and a high school track coach. I want to talk about this, to a certain degree from the context of local control. This Legislature and this Governor, for the last few years has been saying how we want to give more control over the decisions made in regards to our students to those who are closest to them. To those who understand the culture and the values and the needs on a particular community. And it seems like, in this particular case, what we're saying is for, by the way, a bill that has been in place for little more than a year, that we only want to give you local control as long as we agree with the decisions that you make. But even with that, let's consider how many school districts have adopted policies that allow for even the consideration by the school staff or superintendent? For someone to concealed carry. We're talking about 5 school districts out of over 1,000, which basically we're talking about one-half of 1%, of school districts have adopted policies. And if you take the time to actually read those policies, they are quite restrictive, including requiring, in some cases, additional training and insurance, as well as in some cases storage requirements. And finally, I just want to say this. The first concealed carry policy was passed in the State of California in 1923. And then, even with the passage of the School Free Zone Act, concealed carry permit holders had been exempted and then up to SB 707, which by the way, didn't take effect until January 1, 2016, all the way up until today, how many incidents on school campuses have actually involved a concealed carry permit holder? I would encourage anyone to answer that question. In fact, I'll answer it for you. None. And for those reasons, we oppose this measure. Thank you.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sam Paredes: mr. chairman and members, it's pleasure to be back in this committee. paredes representing gun owners of california. i want to point out a couple of issues that are of importance here. number one, for those members that were here when sb 707 was actually heard in this committee room, as well as in the senate and on both floors. this was not a loophole. senator lois wolk came here and passionately testified that school administrators know what's best for their children and they should have the responsibility to decide if this is something that they want to consider. this is what the author of the bill testified in both houses of this legislature. had she wanted to totally ban that ability for administrators to have that responsibility she could have done it and the bill would have still passed. but that is not what she did. so this bill, there is no loophole here. a loophole is something that was unforeseen or inadvertant or something like that. this was totally foreseen with the intention of giving school administrators the responsibility of deciding whether this was proper for them. now, we're talking about school districts in los angeles county, and san diego county, san francisco. but we're also talking about school districts in kern county and shasta county and sierra county where the cultures are very different and even police response is vastly different than it is in your greater urban areas. and the administrators were given this option to consider this if it was something that they wanted to do. in fact, this bill would deny a program that has been in place in the folsom cordova school district that was not made public, they kept it under wraps, where they allowed selected people within the school to come and to be a part of a quick response team on that campus. they had storage requirements where no one, none of the facility, people the teachers, or anybody knew where these firearms were, they were secured. only the administrator and the person that was selected. they underwent training with local law enforcement in order to be able to be an assistance and a quick response to any sort of law enforcement response on a school campus. this program will be wiped out in folsom cordova. so the efforts that these administrators and these folks did in order to protect the children were put in place with full recognition of the law. now, folks, you've heard a lot of testimony from a lot of people here. i'm a father of three, grandfather of four. in a month and a half, i'll be the grandfather of six. and my children are extremely important to me. as was pointed out, not a single crime of any kind, not a single accident of any kind, has ever been committed on a school in the state of california since ccw's have been available since the '30's. so, if we're talking about a response to gun violence, there has been no gun violence. there is no gun violence with regards to ccw holders carrying on campus. as a matter of fact, they are vetted, they have background checks that are done with the federal government, the state government, and the local government. they are required to take training to prove that they are proficient with the firearms. and they pass that and they have to do that every two years. for this reason and it just doesn't make sense and we are concerned that they become more, and more, and more, and more. anything to do to destroy the second amendment, and people's ability to defend themselves. for these reasons, gun owners of california is very opposed to this bill.
[{'start': 363, 'end': 372, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Roy Griffith: mr. chairman, roy john griffith with california rifle and pistol association. if i can just touch on one thing that my colleagues haven't touched on, and that's education itself. as implemented, this bill will devastate after school programs like hunter education that is taught as an in-school curriculum through the state in many counties. an activity that keeps kids off the streets, teaches them life skills to make them future leaders, as would be, and rotc again, would be impacted by this bill. so for those reasons, education itself, which is used throughout the state to teach these classes, we strongly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Lovell: lovell, on behalf of the association for los angeles deputy sheriffs, the association of deputy district attorneys, california association of code enforcement officers, california college and university police chiefs association, california narcotic officers association, la county professional peace officers association, la police protective league, riverside sheriff's association. here's whats happened, shoplifting has now gone beyond the kind of shoplifting that we all have in our minds, the 18 year old who steals a six pack of beer, someone who tries to walk off with some itunes cards. when prop 47 was passed, they provided that commercial burglary would be deemed shoplifting so long as the amount taken was less than $950. so criminals being opportunistic, what you have seen is organized efforts of what amounts to commercial burglary, where you send in a number of people and you keep them all underneath $950. we've even had, most of my clients are rank and file front line officers. and one of the stories i've been getting, from enough of them that i'm thinking that there's some validity to it, is you have some of these folks who go in and they have the calculator app on on their iphone. and they're running it up as they're taking stuff as long as they stay under 950. mr lackey's bill really recognizes this change in criminal behavior and starts to give some tools to deal with it. he is absolutely correct. this is not tinkering with prop 47 at all. what it is doing, is recognizing an unintended consequence that developed with prop 47, and enables us to have some tools to address it.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1294, 'end': 1300, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nicolina Hernandez: Thank you.>>Good afternoon. Nicolina Hernandez with Political Solutions on behalf of The Home Depot in strong support. Thank you.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Usha Mutschler: Good afternoon, Usha Mutschler on behalf of the California State Sheriffs Association in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: Ignacio Hernandez on behalf of the California Attorneys for Criminal Justice, Statewide Association of Criminal Defense Attorneys, we are opposed. Just a couple of brief points. The bill as drafted would not simply apply to what's traditionally considered, quote, organized crime, but also, crime rings, as was mentioned.  Earlier, the bill would also apply to any individuals who, quote, conspire to commit an offense. The example of an 18 year old walking into a store and stealing something, this bill would apply to two year olds talking to each other before they walk into the store to steal some iTunes cards, and this would essentially convert that crime from a misdemeanor to a felony, simply because the two individuals talked about it as they walked in to the store. That's a concern for us. If the desire is to focus on organized crime in the traditional sense, then we'd certainly be happy to review a bill. Which does just that. For those reasons, we are opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathy Sher: Kathy Sher on behalf of the ACLU of California. Under AB 392, a person who walks into a store and takes an item worth less that $950 would be guilty of a misdemeanor. But two people who decide to go together to a store and steal something, but change their minds and don't steal anything, would be guilty of a felony, each of them would be guilty of a felony. We think this result is both unfair and unneccessary in order to punish the crime of conspiracy to commit shoplifting, which is, of course, already a crime under existing California law. And punishable as a felony or a misdemeanor under existing California law. Our other concern about this crime is that it is all too easy to see how this could be used to target young people and especially young people of color. This just puts a huge hammer in the hands of prosecutors, law enforcement, and indeed, shop keepers. When they see young people hanging out in their store, it becomes just a very simple matter to make the allegations that would result in charges of a felony even when no crime has been committed. We are concerned about that potential for targeting and for that reason, we urge your opposition or your no vote on AB 392.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : thank roy you. roy good roy morning, roy thank roy you roy so roy much roy for roy having roy me. roy i roy am roy melena roy blake, roy i'm roy a roy fellow roy at roy the roy justice roy advocacy roy project roy at roy stanford roy law roy school. roy i'm roy also roy here roy representing roy the roy ncaap roy legal roy defense roy fund, roy who roy is roy a roy sponsor roy of roy the roy bill,
[{'start': 6, 'end': 9, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 15, 'end': 18, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 24, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 37, 'end': 40, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 47, 'end': 50, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 55, 'end': 58, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 79, 'end': 82, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 90, 'end': 93, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 98, 'end': 101, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 104, 'end': 107, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 111, 'end': 131, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 133, 'end': 136, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 141, 'end': 150, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 158, 'end': 161, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 165, 'end': 168, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 185, 'end': 188, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 210, 'end': 213, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 250, 'end': 253, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 258, 'end': 261, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 267, 'end': 270, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 276, 'end': 279, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 293, 'end': 296, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 343, 'end': 346, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 347, 'end': 354, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 358, 'end': 361, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 376, 'end': 379, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 383, 'end': 386, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bob Yuron: Mr Chairman and members, Bob Yuron on behalf of the National Union of Healthcare Workers, we have several thousand clinicians, mental health clinicians statewide. The goal of the prison and the jail system after realignment is to rehabilitate prisoners. We'd like to ensure that those that are mentally ill and have been diagnosed as mentally ill receive the service as well incarcerated, so that when we receive them when they're not incarcerated, that they're a little bit better, and that we know how to treat them properly. So, we believe that the assessment by CDCR, and the jail system, and there are several prisoners in the county jail system for up to 10 years these days after realignment, are properly housed, and not mainstreamed into the direct prison population if they're two L. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: ignacio  hernandez on behalf of the california attorneys for criminal justice finally in support of the bill today.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John McMann: john ignacio mcmann, sheriff of san bernardino county. we've all seen violence against law enforcement officers increase drastically over the last number of years. the exact reason anybody can speculate. but in our county, our district attorney mike ramos had to establish a crimes against peace officers unit, specifically designed to investigate and prosecute suspects that are involved in assaulting peace officers. now, that's a sad day when you have to create a special unit just for that. i'm a firm believer in consequences for criminal behavior. and i think, that we need to do something to enhance the penalties for these folks that want to attack our law enforcement officers that are putting their lives on the line every day. and as an example of some of the things that we're doing in our county, that we're forced to do for that matter, is in addition to the regular training that we do, we buy our patrol vehicles with ballistic panels in the doors. now, we had level three panels which would stop most anything, except for rifle rounds. well we've seen an increase in rifle attacks, ambush style attacks. so now, we buy our vehicles with level four ballistic panels in the doors that will stop rifle rounds. in addition to the soft body armor that i provide every one of my deputies, i've now had to buy plate carrier systems that will stop rifle rounds. so, at some point this has gotta stop, and i'm not sure how we get there, but i think enhancing penalties for assaults on police officers is gotta be a step in the right direction, to be quite honest with you. i mean we're the last line of defense and these men and women go to work every day and put their lives on the line to protect the citizens in not only my county but the entire state. unless we do something to help them and try to deter this, i think we're cheating ourselves.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 245, 'end': 255, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Lovell: john john lovell on behalf of the california coalition of law enforcement associations. now, they're a coalition representing probably about 80,000 peace officers in the aggregate. in addition, if i could at this point, just for brevity sake, incorporate by reference-
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marla Marshall: Chairman and Members of the Committee, my name is Marla Marshall, and I'm representing Sheriff Bill Gore, San Diego Sheriff's Department, as well as the California Peace Officers Association today, in support.
[{'start': 50, 'end': 64, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 95, 'end': 104, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nicole Wordelman: Nicole Wordelman on behalf of San Bernardino county Board of Supervisors in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stacy Bart: stacyh and resident of riverside county and i absolutely love san bernardino county sheriff and i am in extremely strong support of this, we have to protect the people who protect us. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Robin Vitsten: Robin Vitsten with Remembrance Project, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gigi Romilla: Gigi Romilla with the American Indians, in strong support
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jim Bells: Jim Bells, I'm a resident of Fresno County, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chanelle Temple: chanelle john temple, blacks for equal rights, and there are blacks in the community that are concerned about our law enforcement. my son himself was a sheriff, and we are in full, strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Raul Rodriguez: My name is Raul Rodriguez Jr. America First Latinos, and I have a son that's in law enforcement. And I want to thank Jay for bringing this this bill forward and I'm asking each and every one of you to consider supporting this bill. It's very important that we protect those in blue.  Thank you very much.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 29, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 117, 'end': 120, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Elizabeth Miller: elizabeth chanelle miller on behalf of cpoa also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 39, 'end': 43, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Stephanie Shannon: stephanie on behalf of cpoa also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 23, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ken Vendor: Ken Vendor, Assistant Sheriff in Santa Clara County, also here with CPOA, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 68, 'end': 72, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Todd Thiesen: lieutenant todd elizabeth thiesen, sacramento county sheriff's department, also in support, here with cpoa.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 102, 'end': 106, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jim Ortega: Captain Jim Ortega, also with CPOA and a captain with the Sacramento Sheriff's Department, in support.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nancy Appel: good morning and thank you for your time today. i'm appel with the anti-defamation league, 104 year old civil rights agency combatting anti-semitism and bigotry, extremism and discrimination of all kinds. recognizing a loophole in the law whereby biased crimes targeting historically persecuted groups based on traits that they either cannot or should not have to change when unrecognized in the law. adl drafted the model hate crime statute in the early 1980s. ever since, we have advocated ceaselessly for enactment of effective and comprehensive legislation nationwide. in parallel, we have also become the nation's foremost post-certified ngo training federal state and local law enforcement agencies in all aspects of hate crime and extremism. consequently, adl is known as a powerful force against hate for all communities in large part because of our unique and supportive relationships with law enforcement agencies across the country. like most states, california already has a very detailed penalty enhancement scheme for attacks of all kinds against police officers. adl supports such laws as a means to recognize, punish and deter the threat to society that such attacks represent. if more still clearly needs to be done to address this issue, we are open to those ideas. that said, adding a vocation, even one as vital as a peace officer status, to our exemplary hate crime law will devalue its meaning and, as my colleague said, cause confusion as to its purpose and implementation. like civil anti-discrimination laws, the law properly meant to cover only core immutable or characteristics that you should not otherwise have to change that we have already recognized in our jurisprudence. we have opposed other proposed additions to the hate crime law categories for this reason as well. not that the crimes targeting those groups aren't worthy of heightened opprobrium, but because they did not target those traits that hate crime laws were designed for. we're experts in fighting hate, experts in hate crime laws, and we've been consistent. for these and many reasons we urge you to protect the hate crime law and vote against ab2, thank you.
[]
Kathy Sher: Kathy Sher for the ACLU of California in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicholas Gonzales: Nicholas Gonzales of the California Civil Liberties Advocacy, opposing.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Prince: Danielle Prince with Black Lives Matter, Sacramento and we are strongly in opposition to AB 2.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sonia Lewis: Sonia Lewis with Black Lives Matter, Sacramento, strong opposition to this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicolette Jones: Hi, my name's Nicolette Jones, again with Sacramento Homeless Organizing Committee, as well as Black Lives Sacramento, and I just want to say that we also feel that the high profile killer. Yeah it's really tragic and alarming.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Denise Lipscomb: denise todd lipscomb, black lives matter, sacramento, strong opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alice Kessler: alice denise kessler on behalf of equality california also in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rosa Aqeel: Rosa Aqeel with the Alliance for Boys and Men of Color in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Myers: It's an honor to be here this morning, Mr. Chairman and honorable members. My name is John Myers and I'm a Professor of Law at the University of Pacific McGeorge School of Law here in Sacramento. My research is in the area of child abuse and domestic violence, that's what I write about.
[{'start': 86, 'end': 96, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Lovell: john alice lovell, on behalf of the association for los angeles deputy sheriffs, association of deputy district attorneys, california association of code enforcement officers, california college and university police chiefs association, california narcotic officers association, la county professional peace officers association,  la police protective league, riverside sheriff's association. california has always been, i've alway thought, and i think this is the perception, on the cutting edge of domestic violence issue. i mean we've expanded definitions of domestic part, we've done all of these things. and i was shocked when i found out that we are one of only 11 states that prohibits the use of this kind of information in a domestic violence case. this is a good sense bill, my law enforcement clients are all strongly in support of this bill. we commend the author for bringing this forward.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Holober: Richard Holober, Consumer Federation of California, in support as proposed to the amendment. I appreciate the author and the Committee working on those amendments, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lynette Earlmayer: Lynette Earlmayer, Executive Director of Empower Yellow, strongly support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tristan Brown: Thank you Mr. Chair and members, Tristan Brown representing the California Federation of Teachers. We've recommended a support position on this bill to be adopted at our convention at the end of the month. So happy to be here to relay that and to see a former Professor in the hot seat instead of me now.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stacy Bart: stacyh in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Raul Rodriguez: raul john rodriguez, america first latinos, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jim Bell: jim raul bell, i support this.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Baker: mr. chair and members, baker with american civil liberties union, not really in opposition, i don't think at this point. thank the author and the committee for the direction of the amendments, we're still reviewing them. we think it's going in the right direction. as mr. lovell said, california has been on the cutting edge of domestic violence. we've also been on the cutting edge of privacy, and we want to make sure that there's an appropriate balance there. so we thank you for the amendments, and we expect to be removing our position once we've had a chance to.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 272, 'end': 278, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: Good morning, Ignacio Hernandez on behalf of CACJ, we also had an opposed position. I just want to clarify, I might've missed when the author accepted the amendments. But I know that there's been talk about as proposed to be amended. But I want to thank the author's office for engaging with us and exchanging ideas, and thoughts about the bill. I do believe the amendments make it a much better bill, more focused on the issues that is going to be the motivation for the bill. So we will be reviewing it and following up with the authors office. But I do want to thank the author and the Committee for working on this and working with us and working on the bill.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 45, 'end': 49, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kathy Brady: I'm Kathy Brady and I'm a Senior Staff Attorney at the Immigrant Legal Resource Center. We're a resource center that answers questions from public defenders and others about immigration, and crimes. I just wanted to make two quick points and see if there were any questions. The first thing is I think this bill would help clogging in the courts. Every single week, I speak to public defenders who are wondering what they can do with deferred entry of judgement, because they may have somebody with a green who is a very sympathetic person and they'd like to put them in, but the person would be deportable. So they engage in filing motions in limine and trying to plead the person to something they didn't do, and several people go to trial, and a kind of messes up the system. I think the intent of the Legislature is DJ is a smooth process it's a win-win. If I'm a very minor offender, I can get education and I'll have a clean slate. But for immigrants unfortunately, it's lose-lose and there isn't a good alternative. So, I would suggest that people maybe look at this as giving the criminal court judge another option that they can decide or not decide to offer someone. The second point I just wanted to make was that the Legislature passed this law, two years ago with a companion bill. It was vetoed by the governor's office. This year, we're working closely with that office. We've already had a preliminary meeting and we intend to have a bill that the Governor feels he can sign.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Glenn Backes: glenn jim backes for drug policy alliance, co-sponsor. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christopher Sanchez : christopherwith chirla, the coalition for humane immigrant rights and proud co-sponsorship. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: ignacio glenn hernandez on behalf of the california attorneys for criminal justice, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rosa Aqeel: Rosa Aqeel on behalf of the Alliance for Boys and Men of Color, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathy Sher: sher on behalf of the aclu of california, co-sponsor, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : Nicolette Jones with the Sacramento Homeless Organizing Committee as well as Black Lives Matter, Sacramento. Strongly support and thank, Member Eggman.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 144, 'end': 150, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Stacy Barth: stacy ignacio barth, american citizen and taxpayer, strongly against supporting illegal aliens in this, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robin Hvidston: Robin Hvidston, The Remembrance Project, strongly oppose.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jim Bills: bills, united states citizen, strongly opposed.
[]
Larry Doyle: larry stacy doyle on behalf of the conference of california bar associations with sponsors of the bill. we think it makes a very small but very significant addition to the existing law, as assemblymember gallagher pointed out. pre-conviction and domestic violence cases, protective orders can be very wide ranging. but at post-conviction, essentially nothing can be done, at least not outside of the victim, him or herself. this expands a bill that was enacted a couple of years ago that defines minors who were witnesses to domestic violence are also victims. because the evidence shows that they have been severely victimized time after time by what they've done. and allows them to, if the court deems it appropriate under the circumstances, to expand the protective order to include those minor witnesses to the crime. does not go any farther than that at this point in time. but we think that that's very, very important in terms of ensuring both protection of the victims of the direct domestic violence. and also the children who are victimized in a different way and enable them to have the protection that the court deems necessary under these limited circumstances. we ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 204, 'end': 213, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Larry Doyle: Larry Doyle on behalf of the Conference of California Bar Associations, we're the sponsor of this legislation, I appreciate Mr. Kiley's authorship. The resolution by the conference upon which this was a basis for this bill came from the Women Lawyers Association of Los Angeles. And I think that's important because this is very much a women's privacy bill. This is meant to protect privacy in the same way that statutes do in what is now the federal statute, and 48 other jurisdictions. No other jurisdiction we're aware of has this particular loophole that enables people to get away with doing the up-skirt and down-blouse type photography. We appreciate the concerns that have been expressed by the opposition, the ACLU and the California Attorneys for Criminal Justice. And we pledge to continue to work with them as the bill moves along to ensure that we don't open the flood gates in some way that we can't foresee right now but which would undermine the statute. But right now we feel that this is a very important and necessary change to make the statute workable and to protect women in California. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 128, 'end': 133, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dawn Koepke: Mr Chair and members, Dawn Koepke, Crime Victims United of California in support. Certainly Crime Victims United would take a broader view, I believe, that even those that are unidentifiable still result in trauma to that victim. But nonetheless really feel very strongly that doing everything we can to deter these types of offenses whether the victim is identifiable or not is certainly very important so we do support the bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jonathan Feldman: chair and members, jonathan larry feldman with the california police chiefs association in support.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Usha Mutschler: good morning, usha jonathan mutschler on behalf of the california state sheriffs' association in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stacy Barth: stacy usha barth in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Raul Rodriguez: raul stacy rodriguez, jr, american first latinos, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jim Bilz: jim raul bilz, california resident, support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: good morning, mr. chair and members, ignacio jim hernandez on behalf of the california attorneys for criminal justice, state wide association of criminal defense attorneys. we are opposed to the bill. first of all, i want to thank both the authors' office, the sponsor, and others that we've for engaging in conversations with us over the last couple of weeks on this bill. let me just clarify our position. we are opposed primarily because i think the resolution that's being offered that they're solving some sort of problem is actually a little bit more complicated. and i think it maybe well intentioned, but i think that the johnson case actually makes this more complicated and it's really unclear what the effect of this amendment will be to current law. and here is why we talk about identifiable in the kind of common understanding what that word means but in the johnson case it made it very clear that it is not clear what identifiable means. i think in the johnson case they looked at a number of different things, is it that the individual can be identified by the photo itself, can the individual be identified by other means, the photo, in combination with other evidence? it kind of opened up the door and made it less clear what identifiable actually means. by removing identifiable we're creating a legislative history that all of those questions are out the door. if you read the case with this change. what happens? we have a situation where the individual doesn't need to be identified by the photo, doesn't need to be identified by other potentially, by any other evidence. we're left in a situation where, is it possible to prosecute someone and i'm not talking about fitting rooms, i'm talking about mainly in someone's house, or someone's bedroom which is covered by this bill. where photos are found and law enforcement decides to prosecute someone even though the photos don't identify who the person is, they may not have other evidence of who the person is, they may just say, well from the cameras we found and from the photos we found, it appears as if there was no consent. and this may sound like me just being extreme, but the reality is in the johnson case that's in fact what happened with some of the prosecutions. there were jane does that were listed as victims. they were never identified in how we talk about it. i think the bottom line for us is this, if the concern is that there should not be a requirement, that the photo identify the individual, then that's what the bill should state. by simply removing the term, identifiable, it opens up the door for many interpretations. it may cover what the intent is of the bill, but it may cover a lot more. and i think it's going to be, worse for everyone because we want to make sure we want to deal with this. it is a crime now, this is not creating a new crime. it's just simply making clear. let me just close by raising kind of specific examples, talking to some of the attorneys down the state. there have been cases where someone's home search for a number of for a warrant for other reasons and they find photographs taken in someone's bedroom. this bill will cover bedroom as i understand it. and the photos themselves, there was a dispute of whether those photos were taken with consent, whether those photos what they covered, and the individuals who own the home claim that he and partners would engage in photographs and videos during their intimate time. and there was a dispute as to who was in the photo. he claimed it was someone who consented. law enforcement thought well, the way that the camera was put and hidden away that they wouldn't be able to consent. and that it might not be that person they identified, it may be be someone else. that's problematic, because we need to be very clear what we're doing with this bill. i'm happy to work with the committee and the author going forward to really specify what they're trying to accomplish. because we think this may be simple on its face, but it makes the law much more complicated and unclear.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 630, 'end': 637, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 873, 'end': 880, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 969, 'end': 976, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2179, 'end': 2186, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Natasha Mensker: mensker, aclu of california. respectfully, we also oppose the bill unless amended to address the issue that there's still a requirement that the prosecution prove lack of consent or knowledge on the part of the person who is the target of the photography recording. we understand completely that the word identifiable is not adding clarity to the law. we understand and agree with the position of my colleague that the johnson case has actually made this more confusing, not less. when i read the johnson case i'm perplexed as to how they could have established the elements of the lack of consent or lack of knowledge for the jane doe victims. and so we are concerned that the legislature simply deleting the word identifiable, without further clarification, will only make this situation worse. the word identifiable was added to the statute when the original bill moved through the senate public safety committee and it was added for an important reason. we are concerned that simply deleting the word will actually make the situation worse and lead to overzealous prosecutions. we are very happy to continue to work with the author and the sponsors on clarifying amendments if we do understand that the current statute, in light of the jones case has gotten worse, not better.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 419, 'end': 426, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 497, 'end': 504, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 627, 'end': 635, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1240, 'end': 1245, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Greg De Giere: Greg De Giere with the Arc and United Cerebral Palsy California Collaboration, a coalition of people with intellectual disabilities and other developmental disabilities, and their families, friends and service providers, and we support the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Catherine Stone: catherine ignacio stone, junior league of palo alto mid peninsula and junior leagues of california in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sean Hoffman: Sean Hoffman with the California District Attorneys Association, again supportive in concept. We're looking at all of the bill's wholesale on this issue before we weigh on it, and any one specific, or several specific bills. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stacy Barth: stacy and a resident of ms. melendez's district in strong support. we should be helping women not discouraging them from existing and being safe.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 36, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jim Bills: Jim Bills California resident in strong support of anything that will help out Proposition 57.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Raul Rodriguez: rodriguez jr, america first latinos, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Chanelle Temple: Chanelle Temple, Blacks for Equal Rights Task Force, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert Copeland: Robert Copeland, concerned citizen. There's a case in Stanford.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert Copeland: robert, concerned citizen.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nancy O'Malley: o'malley, district attorney of alameda county in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Lovell: John Lovell, on behalf of the association for, can we incorporate by reference of the groups? We are all in support of your bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathy Sher: Kathy Sher, on behalf of the ACLU California. I want to start out by saying I'm also the mother of two beautiful young woman and certainly want to do everything I can to protect them. But I think my daughters would understand that increasing the sentences for the offenders covered in this bill and reducing their incentives for participating in rehabilitative programs while they are in prison, it is not the way to achieve that end. Again, I would reiterate the remarks I made with regard to AB 67, that this is undoing the work done and the will of the voters in enacting Prop 57 before it has even had a chance to take effect. We respectfully ask for your no vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicholas Gonzales: Nicholas Gonzales with the California Civil Liberties Advocacy, in opposition. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dawn Koepke: thank you, mr. chair and members. koepke of mchugh, koepke & associates on behalf of crime victims united of california, also in strong support. cvuc has long advocated that the term nonviolent, non-serious is a misnomer, largely, because the crimes that are actually deemed violent and serious are a small subset that are specifically mentioned in the penal code. all others, just by the fact that they're not explicitly mentioned, are thereby considered largely non-serious, non-violent offenses. these particular offenses that ab 67 speak to are some of the worst against some of our most vulnerable victims in california. i really feel that the seriousness should fit the crime. so, for that reason we're very strongly supportive and urge your aye vote. thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 20, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 34, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jonathan Feldman: Chair and Members, Jonathan Feldman, California Police Chiefs Association, in support.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robin Hvidston: Robin Hvidston, The Remembrance Project, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jim Bills: Jim Bills, California resident. Support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Raul Rodriguez: rodriguez, jr., america first latinos, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Gigi Romilla: Gigi Romilla, The American Indians, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stacey Barth: Hi, Stacey Barth, definitely in support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sean Hoffman: Good morning, Sean Hoffman with the California District Attorneys Association, we're supportive of the concept of expanding the list. We're looking at, sort of all the bills that are out there right now, and we'll be weighing in with our thoughts on the entire package at a later time, but we do support the concept of expanding it in a narrow fashion like this bill does.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert Colba: Robert Colba, concerned citizen in strong support. I don't want to see my nieces end up being human traffic, or any nieces, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathy Sher: Kathy Sher on behalf of the ACLU of California in opposition. By adding crimes to the list of violent felonies, AB 67 would undermine the purpose of Proposition 57 before it is even fully put into effect, and would perpetuate California's expensive, and ineffective over reliance on incarceration in direct contradiction to what the voters intended when they voted for Proposition 57. AB 67 singles out human trafficking, a crime for which increased penalties, up to a 15 year to life term, have recently gone into effect. We would note that this is not a bill that fixes some kind of mistake, or misunderstanding on the part of the voters. The crimes addressed in this bill were specifically called out in the opposition arguments in the voter information on Prop 57. This was something the voters knew they were doing. The voters didn't buy it because they understood the choice they were making was what was needed to move the needle on prison cost and over-incarceration in this state. Reducing the number of prisoners, and the cost of the incarcerating them, is not going to happen if every time a step is taken in the direction of making our sentencing laws more reasonable, we immediately start chipping away at that and removing people from the protections of those new laws. Again, we respectfully ask your no vote on AB 67.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Haleek Foster: haleek catherine foster again on behalf of the california public defenders association in respectful opposition of this measure. essentially, as the author said, and as my colleagues stated, the main effect of this bill is to lessen the amount of sentence reduction credits those convicts can earn when they're in, making sentences longer, which would diminish the incentive those convicts have to participate in prison rehabilitation programs. california is only now, after many years of struggle, begging to get out from under the federal receivership of prison overcrowding. i think that we all have an option with what we do with people who actually are convicted of crimes, and when we put them away for unreasonable periods of time without the desire or the intent to rehabilitate, they're going to come back to us worse. if we allow them to have the incentive to rehabilitate as the statutes currently sit, that's likely that we're going to get back a better person. they have to return at some point either way. and, so providing the incentives for them to actually go through rehabilitation programs is a better way to get them back into our society. than giving them longer sentences, taking away their incentive and ultimately returning a worse person to society either way. so, we urge a no vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: ignacio haleek hernandez on behalf of cacj. we are opposed, though i haven't reviewed the amendments that i understand were accepted this morning.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 38, 'end': 42, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Holly Harpham: Good morning, Holly Harpham, from the Los Angeles County District Attorney's office.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sean Hoffman: Sean Hoffman with the California District Attorneys Association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Raul Rodriguez: Raul Rodriguez, Jr America First Latinos in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jim Bell: Jim Bell, California Citizens support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robin Hvidston: Robin Hvidston with Remembrance Project in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dan Valezado: Mr. Chairman, members, Dan Valezado on behalf of the LA County District Attorney's Office. We are the sponsor of this bill. As the Assembly Member pointed out, there's both physical and emotional benefits to witnesses with the use of these therapy and facility dogs. And as the Assembly Member pointed out, we did have a couple of presiding judges in LA who were precluding us from bringing our therapy and facility dogs into the court house which then the trial court judge couldn't have the opportunity to decide whether or not they were appropriately for the case. That's been resolved, fortunately now, in LA County last week. We simple ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathy Katy: Kathy Katy, I'm with the District Attorney's Office, and I'm here to answer any questions, if you have questions.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dawn Koepke: dawn, mchugh, koepke&associates on behalf of crime victims united of california in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 6, 'end': 12, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sean Hoffman: hoffman with the california district attorneys association, also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robin Vitsten: vitsten with remembrance project, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Raul Rodriguez: Raul Rodriguez Jr., America First Latinos in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jim Bills: Jim Bills, California citizen, support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cathy Sure: good morning. cathy ignacio sure on behalf of the aclu of california and i want to start out by stating that we are not anti-dog. our concern with ab 411 is with the standard it sets for the court in deciding whether to allow use of a dog in a particular case. under ab 411, the court would be mandated to permit use of the dog once the party making the request has shown that the dog and handler are suitably qualified and will reasonably assist the testifying witness. a judge with concerns in a particular case as to potential prejudice to a defendant could not deny the motion for use of the dog for that reason the way we read the bill as it is currently drafted. or for that matter for other reasons such as somebody in the courtroom who is allergic to dogs or any other concern the judge might have about the dog in that particular case. i want to note that the court of appeals in the chaneux case, i am not sure how to pronounce it, cited in the analysis did not find the trial court required to allow use of the dog once a showing had been made that the dog would assist the witness in providing truthful and complete testimony but only that the trial court was within its discretion in doing so. the opinion expressly states that in the event the trial court finds that the prejudice to the defendant can not be eliminated or at least reduced to a level that does not infringe on the defendant's constitutional rights to a fair trial and to confront witnesses. the court generally should exercise its discretion by denying the request for presence of a support dog. we believe that, that standard which requires the trial court in each case to consider not only whether the dog is suitably trained, and whether it will be helpful to the witness. but also, the questions of in a particular case, is there a way to minimize any prejudice to the defendant should be part of this bill. we appreciate the willingness that the author and sponsor have shown to work with us on our concerns. but in its current form, because it does not require a consideration of potential prejudice, we must respectfully oppose.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 893, 'end': 900, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kalifasa Guy: Kalifasa Guy on behalf of the California Public Defenders Association also in respectful opposition. With the same issues mentioned with respect to prejudice to the defendant. Thank you.
[]
Jonathan Feldman: chair, members, feldman with the california police chiefs association in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gigi Romilla: gigi cathy romilla, american indian, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Raul Rodriguez: Raul Rodriguez, Jr. America First Latinos, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Robin Vitsten: robin, the remembrance project in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chanelle Temple: Chanelle Temple, Blacks For Equal Rights Task Force, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jim Belzer: Jim Belzer, Remembrance Project, support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: Ignacio Hernandez on behalf of the California Attorneys for Criminal Justice, statewide association of criminal defense attorneys in private practice and also work in public defender offices. We are opposed to the measure, I'll keep my comments brief. The one thing, and I do want to appreciate the author's office I've reached out and spoken with the staff over the last few days, I think our major question and concern with the bill is that there is already existing law which, our reading of it, can already be used for these prosecutions. And the way we read the bill as it's currently drafted, it's kind of double layering an attempt. So the bill itself says, if there's an attempt, I'll pull out the language in a second, but there's an attempt to communicate, to contact a minor in order to commit an offence covered by 236.1(c). 236.1(c) already says, a person who causes, induces or persuades or attempts to cause, induce, persuade a person who is a minor is guilty of human trafficking and has very significant penalties. So what we're confused about and what we're concerned about is creating a double layer statute here that says, well, if you attempt to commit an attempt, then you could be guilty of human trafficking. So we don't really believe the bill is necessary and we think that if they feel like there is a gap, they should look more closely to 236.1 and see if there's a different way to do this. We think everything's already covered and it's just going to create a lot of confusion when it comes to prosecution. For those reasons, we are opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathy Sher: good morning, kathy gigi sher on behalf the aclu of california in opposition. i would just echo the comments that mr. hernandez has made. this bill simply isn't necessary. the state has just recently increased the penalties for human trafficking, which include penalties for attempted human trafficking which is the type of behaviour addressed by this bill. these are already criminal acts and we do not need yet another layer of statute that provides yet a different kind of penalty that can apply for a behavior that is already a crime under existing california law.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 118, 'end': 127, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jayann Sepich: My name is Jayann Sepich, I want to thank you, for letting me testify today. We all know that DNA can solve crimes, and one of the things we really need to talk about is the privacy issue, and how the system truly works. You should be receiving a packet, but I don't think you may have gotten it yet. So I'm just going to hold it up. What are these numbers? These series of numbers. Offshore bank account number? Super lottery? No, but these numbers. This series of numbers right here, holds more promise, more hope, to stop serial murderers and serial rapists in their tracks, before they can murder and rape again. Before they can bring unspeakable pain to another family. We have three families here who have been through that unspeakable pain, and I've lived it. My daughter Katie, This is Katie, was a 22-year-old graduate student when she was kidnapped, savagely beaten, brutally raped, sodomized, murdered, and set on fire. And it was numbers like these that finally led to identifying her killer, and putting him away where he could never do this again and again. These numbers are the only personal information that goes into CODIS. This is it. As a matter of fact, the next page, wish you guys had this handout.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 779, 'end': 784, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 794, 'end': 799, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Lovell: john kathy lovell on behalf of the association for los angeles deputy sheriffs, association of deputy district attorneys, california association of code enforcement officers, california college and university police chiefs, california narcotic officers, los angeles county professional peace officers, la police protective league, riverside sheriffs association. we're in support of this bill. think of this bill as essentially a cleanup bill making consistent two different measures that were adopted by californians. it is fact that the dna issue was never debated, never highlighted with the passage of prop 47. the subject matter discussion was completely different. prop 69 was all about dna. what this measure does is take two concepts both approved by californians and weaves them together so that they are both operational to reflect the views of californians.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dawn Koepke: Thank you Mr. Chair and members. Dawn Koepke, McHugh Koepke and Associates on behalf of Crime Victims United of California, in strong support.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 46, 'end': 59, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sean Hoffman: Sean Hoffman with the California District Attorney's Association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Tomashaw: Michelle Tomashaw representing Alameda County District Attorney's Office in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jonathan Feldman: Jonathan Feldman, California Police Chiefs Association in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Raul Rodriguez: Good morning, Mister Chairman, Raul Rodriguez Jr, America First Latinos support AB 16.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 48, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jim Bills: jim john bills, us navy veteran, support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robin Vitsten: robin jim vitsten, the remembrance project, strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Caliph Assagai: Good morning, Mr. Chair and members. Caliph Assagai on behalf of the California Public Defenders Association. First, I want to thank the witnesses for their testimony. I know it's difficult to come here and tell your story, and so we appreciate that. But I am here in respectful opposition of this measure on behalf of 3000 public defenders and private council who represent indigent defendants and criminal defendants throughout the State of California. It is our belief that this bill is inconsistent with the intent of the voters who overwhelmingly passed the ballot initiative, Prop 47. And that it will add when already disproportion number of racial minorities, whose DNA has been collected and added to the DNA database. As I believe you are aware, a number of studies have shown that despite the fact that people of color, particularly, African-Americans and Latinos, are far from more likely, excuse me, do not commit crime at any higher rate than white individuals, they are far more likely to be arrested and prosecuted for alleged criminal activity. Rates at which African Americans were arrested for violent offences and for drug offenses and for drug offenses were each approximately 3.5 times the rate of whites were arrested for those categories of offenses. Because people of color are arrested and prosecuted at higher rates than whites, people of color are disproportionately included in the DNA database. While some believe that if one is law abiding, there should be no real concern over having one's DNA in the DNA database, this is however patently incorrect. Existing DNA technology permits laboratories to obtain DNA results from samples that contain as few as 10 cells. And more importantly, from DNA that was left on items years before it was collected and analyzed. The type of crime in which DNA evidence is being collected is ever expanding. And now includes property crimes, such as, auto burglaries where a DNA profile emanates from skin cells left on an item of evidence at an unknown point in time. In other words, DNA evidence is no longer collected only from items from which it can be clearly established, that there is an association between the evidence and the crime being investigated. Increasingly, Items of evidence are being collected and analyzed from property found at the crime scene where the relationship between the evidence and the crime is not always entirely clear. Additionally it is no longer the case that only a single source complete DNA profiles are uploaded and searched against the database. Today law enforcement may request a search of inferred DNA profile that may be partial or incomplete. Such a search may result in more than one hit, or candidate, which may potentially result in the identification of an individual who is innocent of a crime being investigated or a crime lab analyst may fill in gaps of evidence and submit it for upload to the database. Consequently, when a DNA profile hits a profile in the DNA database, it is far from certain that the DNA match will identify the perpetrator of a crime. Nevertheless, that person will come under scrutiny by law enforcement, will frequently be considered a suspect, and will often be questioned and subjected to criminal investigation. This can be extremely traumatic for an individual who is innocent of a crime being charged or investigated and particularly for those who was included in the database for a non-violent drug or theft offense years prior and who has subsequently turned their life around, now to be considered a suspect in a serious criminal case. Because this will happen in a disproportionate way to minority populations, and will cause undue hardship and stress to individuals who are innocent of crimes, we urge your no vote when this bill comes up for consideration.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ronald Coleman: Good morning, Ronald Coleman. Director of Government Affairs with the California Immigrant Policy Center, and here in opposition on AB 16. We're extremely concerned about the disparities and impacts to communities of color, and immigrant communities. Given how information is shared in different databases, we're very worried about how immigrant communities could be further criminalized in this time where we know that immigration enforcement is rapid. We know that President Trump's deportation machine has essentially been kicked up into high gear and immigration enforcement is happening and tearing communities apart throughout California. We're very concerned about how this bill could further criminalize communities and further lead to the devastating consequences of deportation. And urge your no vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 477, 'end': 482, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mica Doctoroff: good morning, mr, chair, members, mica robin doctoroff on behalf of the aclu of california here in respectful opposition to ab 16. i would echo my colleague's comments. namely that we are very concerned at this time about giving law enforcement agencies new tools to investigate communities of color. particularly immigrant communities. i'd also like to address some of the issues that have come up in the previous testimony this morning. one thing that i'd like to address is the claim that this sort of restores the dna collection to the status quo pre-prop 47. that is not in fact the case. this expands dna collection beyond what it was before prop 47 was passed. a number of the prop 47 offenses were wobblers, meaning that they could be charged as misdemeanors or felonies and dna would only have been collected in felony cases. i'd also like to address some of the data that has been mentioned. we think that a lot of the data that's been described actually raises more questions then it does answers. first it is not clear from the data how many of the hits resulted from the same case with multiple charges, meaning that there were different offenses that a person could have dna collected for that may not be the misdemeanor offenses included in this bill. the data likewise does not indicate how many of the hits resulted in convictions. simply having a hit does not mean that a person was ultimately convicted for a crime or that the right person was convicted for a crime. we also don't know if the data indicates how many of the hits occurred after a person was already convicted of a crime without the use of dna evidence. as we've heard, dna evidence is only useful to the extent that crime scene dna is being collected and tested and we have heard in previous years that there is a back log of information of evidence being tested. we've heard about rape kits sitting on shelves in evidence rooms across the state. we have heard about resources not being dedicated to the other end of the evidence collection. there's no doubt that keeping our communities safe and bringing closure to the victims of crimes, and their families is of the utmost importance. however we do not believe that expanding the dna database in this way is appropriate. thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: Good morning Mr. Chair members, Ignacio Hernandez on behalf of the California Attorneys for Criminal Justice, the state wide Association of criminal defense attorneys. We are opposed to this bill because it extends the collection of DNA to misdemeanors.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicholas Gonzales: hello, i'm nicholas mica gonzales of the california civil liberties advocacy, we strongly oppose this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alissa Anderson: good afternoon, mr. chairman and members of the committee. thank you for the opportunity to speak today about the importance of strengthening the caleitc. my name is alissa, and i'm a senior policy analyst with the california budget and policy center. i want to point out from the outset that we're not an advocacy organization. we don't tend to take positions on policies and so we don't have a position on this particular bill. but i'm testifying because generally, we think it's a good idea to expand the caleitc. and that's because state earned income tax credits can enhance the well documented benefits of the federal earned income tax credit which is a proven tool for building economic security and opportunity. extensive research shows that this tax credit has benefits for families and children, and i've submitted to the committee a summary of this research for your reference. i think what's most striking about this research, is that it shows that the benefits of the eitc go well beyond just helping families get by day to day. they may actually extend into the next generation, helping to create a brighter future for children. so for example, several studies have linked the eitc to improved health for mothers and babies, including to higher birth weight for infants which as you may know, is a key predictor of children's future health, as well as their economic well-being as adults. the eitc has also been linked to better school achievement, like higher test scores and to greater educational attainment. so for example, children in families who receive larger earned income tax credits are more likely to graduate from high school and attend college and because of their greater school success, these children may even earn more when they grow up. so for example studies find that because of their greater school success, i'm sorry, because of modest increases in their families incomes. i'm sorry, let me start over. studies find that modest increases to low income families' incomes, regardless of the source, can lead to increased earnings when they grow up. so one study found that when their families receive $3,000 in additional income, when children were very young, those children went on to earn 17% more as adults. so essentially what this shows is that boosting low income families' incomes today could have a lasting impact on children well into the future. so i think all of this evidence strongly supports expanding our new version of this state eitc, because it would allow more families to reap these well-documented benefits of the federal credit. thank you very much.
[{'start': 166, 'end': 172, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Judy Darnell: mr. chairman and members of the committee, i'm darnell and i'm the vice president of public policy for united ways of california. i'm representing 32 local united ways across the state. i thank you for this opportunity to speak about the need to expand our state eitc. we at the united way, know firsthand from our vita sites and our working in the field that this is a needed tax credit that helps pay off debt, maintains and obtains secure housing. and pay urgent bills such as car repair to get to work. we know it incentives work. according to the united ways of california 2015 real cost measure in california report, one in three california households do not have sufficient income to meet their basic cost of living. the credit currently can provide as much as 2,000 additional dollars on top of the federal eitc. the average credit for households with qualifying children is around $830, which is a lot for these very, very low income folks. for a family living on a stifling low income, this additional money could mean the difference between putting groceries on the table, and making sure their children have clothes for school. two quick stories. one, 21-year-old single mother, ms. bergstrom with a two-year-old daughter, in sonoma county, received a caleitc refund of approximately $1,000 on top of her federal eitc refund of 2-
[{'start': 47, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1195, 'end': 1204, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michele Stillwell-Parvensky: Michele Stillwell-Parvensky, Children's Defense Fund California in strong support of this bill. I will be very brief and say that this is the CalEITC is really strong way to address child poverty, which is incredibly important in this state, with 1 in 4 children living in poverty. And extending this so that a family with a full time minimum wage worker will be able to qualify improves the ability for this credit to be effective in improving child well being, as Alissa just mentioned. But also improves its ability to be a work incentive for families with full-time minimum wage workers, so we strongly urge you to support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 466, 'end': 472, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Josh Friday: good afternoon, my name is josh jonah friday from golden state opportunity foundation and caleitc 4 me and we're in strong support of this bill and thank you for all of your support. thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 37, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ray Burnell: Ray Burnell, with the California Catholic Conference, in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : item josh number josh seven. josh due josh pass josh to josh appropriations, josh the josh bill josh is josh passed, josh six josh to josh one.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 33, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 38, 'end': 42, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 48, 'end': 52, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 56, 'end': 60, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 77, 'end': 81, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 96, 'end': 100, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 104, 'end': 108, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 117, 'end': 121, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 126, 'end': 130, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 134, 'end': 138, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nicole Wordelman: Nicole Wordelman on behalf of Social Compassion in Legislation and San Bernardino County Board of Supervisors. Clearly, this is a well-written, good bill and we appreciate its introduction.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sheila Johnston: good afternoon, mr. chair and members, sheila  johnston with animal rescue media organization, army, in support of the bill. we are a non-profit, 501c3. thank you. thank you.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 54, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nicolina Hernandez: How's that? Better? Nicolina Hernandez with protocol solutions of behalf of [UNKNOWN]manufacturer including pedigree [UNKNOWN]. Also in support, thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susan Riggs: thank you. good afternoon mr. chairman and members of the committee. i'm susan sheila riggs with the american society for the prevention of cruelty to animals. and we're here in support today of this really great effort towards adopting animals that are in the most need in our california shelters. i think it's really pertinent here that you guys were talking about the renter's credit earlier. many of these dogs and cats that are older in age, and especially with the cats, we have lots in the shelters that have been relinquished because of the cost of housing in the lack of alternatives of more winters in the market, especially when they need pet friendly rentals, so this will go a long way toward encouraging folks to adopt those animals, so we appreciate your support.
[{'start': 73, 'end': 91, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Samantha Corbin: Samantha Corbin on behalf of the California Tax Reform Association. Unfortunately, in opposition to this bill as we have been to similar efforts of the authors in the past. Definitely an issue with merit and one that's laudable, but ultimately we don't believe that this bill will incentivizing people to adopt animals they otherwise would not have. Particularly given that only individuals who can itemize on their taxes would be able to benefit from such a deduction, but we do appreciate your effort.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Speck: mr. chair, committee members, speck on behalf of the california association of realtors. we are in support of ab 198. we believe that it's a good step in the right direction to help first-time homebuyers to increase the ownership housing in california, which is currently at its lowest since 1940s. we're at 53%, we'd like to see that increase. happy to offer any technical assistance. we would request an aye vote from the members. just as a point of clarification, i see the committee is struggling and i'd like to offer a constructive consideration which would be to maybe change up to 125% area mean income to create sort of equity throughout the entire state for our high cost areas and our low cost areas. that way we have a baseline. but that's just from from a merely technical advisory standpoint from us. but we are not necessarily advocating on behalf of that, but merely providing some technical input for the committee to consider.
[]
Alyssa Stinson: Good afternoon, my name is Alyssa Stinson with the California Building Industry Association, just also offering our support.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Samantha Corbin: Samantha Corbin with the California Tax Reform Association, unfortunately, in opposition to this measure. We would also, to mirror your point, Assemblymember, be in opposition even with amendments to this measure. We just think, in general, there are numerous benefits afforded to homeowners, including mortgage interest deduction, and that this on the whole would do very little to incentivize home buying.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Wolfe: Mr. Chairman and members, good afternoon. David Wolfe with the Howard Jarvis Taxpayers Association, in support of the bill. And members, let me just say very quickly, and Mr. Chairman, thanks for giving me the extra time here to dive in and speak for just a minute. There is an affordable housing crisis here in California, and that goes without saying. One-third of California residents pay half of their takehome pay in rent right now. One-third of Californians cannot afford a medium-priced home. These are serious problems. We have a 180,000 home deficit according to the LAO and other state agencies that we need to build over the next 15 years. It's a very serious problem. Sorry, catch my breath here for a minute. I think the really neat thing about AB 198, and it's true for me as a homeowner as well, is I bought my first home four years ago, when I was 30 years old. I actually celebrate that anniversary this week, believe it or not. And to have a bill like this, where you're saving thousands of dollars in closing costs as a first time homeowner would've been incredibly beneficial to me. And incredibly beneficial, I think, for everybody trying to dive into the housing market here for the first time, especially with median priced homes continuing to go up. So I think this is a very good bill that supports homeowners and is very narrowly tailored. So I ask for an aye vote.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : Quirk, no, Brough?
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 11, 'end': 17, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bill Quirk: did i what? [inaudible] i thought it was fantastic. we're going to commence the hearing as a subcommittee, and as soon as we get one more member we'll establish quorum. would the sergeants please call the absent members? and i want to thank all of you who are here on time, very much. so, welcome to the first legislative hearing this year of the rev and tax committee. i'm not chair ridley-thomas, i know there's a striking resemblance. but this is bill susan quirk, and the speaker appointed me as the acting chair for this hearing only. and he's also appointed mr. calderon to the committee for this hearing only. first of all, we will hear the bills in sign in order, and for each bill, we're going to invite two primary witnesses to speak in support, and two primary witnesses to speak in opposition. primary witnesses will have two minutes each to present their arguments. although, if they want to split up the time differently, a total of four minutes for the two speakers is fine, just let me know ahead of time. after the primary witnesses, we ask those offering positions on the bill to state their name, organization, and position for the record. we now have a quorum, so i'd like the secretary to call the roll.
[{'start': 384, 'end': 397, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 450, 'end': 466, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 568, 'end': 576, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Julie Hall-Panameno: okay. hello, i'm julie jonah hall-panameno, lausd's equity and title ix officer just to keep it short. thank you for giving us the opportunity to speak here today. today you're going to hear opposition to ab 23 purporting it is against the law. authorities authorizes single gender instruction based on differing learning styles or stereotypes of males and females is based on faulty science. and it would result in potential harm to lgbtq youth and open the doors to segregation. these statements are false for the following reasons. first, california and lausd are the model of progressive lgbtq policies and law. and i'd especially like to share with you today that we published our first all gender restroom policy just this month. ab 23 will not allow programs to skirt nondiscrimination protections or discriminate on the basis of actual, perceived sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression. further, the bill will not be proposing the single gender instruction be allowed on the basis of different learning styles or stereotypes. instead it proposes the single gender instruction be allowed in narrow circumstances as espoused by title ix which has been in effect for 45 years. committee amendments make clear these programs will need to relate to an important governmental objective of improving educational achievement of its students through an overall established policy to provide diverse educational opportunities or to meet the particular identified educational needs of its students and in either case when the single gender nature of the program is substantially related to achieving that objective. lastly, the department of education previously advised, when it outlined suggested research standards in this area, that meta analysis is contraindicated. studies often have varying criteria, number of studies, and issues with statistical controls such as ruling out the very voluntary nature of the many programs identified or studied. there are legal, practical, and ethical implications in attempting to create randomized treatment and control groupings to develop quality studies. thus, research in this field is undebatedly mixed. however, it's unrefuted that females are under-represented in fields such as science, technology, engineering, and math and that programs that are inclusive of females and exposure to like role models are beneficial. again, ab 23 seeks to align state with federal law, which allows this narrow exception to single sex education, and does not allow for discrimination, thank you.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
George McKenna: Thank you, members of the Committee and Chair. My name is George McKenna. I'm the Vice President of the school board of LA Unified. I've also been the Superintendent in four separate districts including LA Unified, Pasadena, Compton, and Inglewood. I'm not only here as an advocate for the legislation, but as a practitioner, having been a principal of a high school in Los Angeles, and also would be the recipient of single gender classes in school when I was segregated in New Orleans, Louisiana. It was a Catholic school, it wasn't Catholicism that made it as great, it was the structure of young men. Now, this is a voluntary situation. So parents have choice. It would be inequitable to void the choice. To discriminate against them and not let them have the choice, for parents and students who cannot afford single gender private school tuition. It is an atmosphere for learning that emancipates. We are not trying to discriminate, we are trying to emancipate from stereotypes both girls and boys. Is not an imposition, it is an opportunity. And parents want it. We have a waiting list to get into the schools. It opens opportunities beyond the stereotypes and both young women and young men benefit from it. The girls will no longer be hidden figures reduced to believing that their perception of living their life fully is depending on men. That they should not have more limitations; both internal and external limitation, it freezes them. It is an empowerment for young women; they are not subordinated to anyone. And in my opinion, less emotional conflict in the school itself. More attention as parents, children wanted to do well in school. For the boys, I can tell you that it reduces violence, it reduces the competition, it reduces disobedience, it reduces suspensions and absenteeism. It teaches them to respect women, and is an ability when you have young men together in a group, anger management is a part of that. And they should not have to have bonding in a negative situation beyond sports. Many of these boys are fatherless. Who do you think they look to for leadership of the men? Where do we find these men? If they can't do it in a positive group of academic achievement going on, where would they seek it? In the streets? They've already done that. They've already proven that many people are afraid to come to our schools. And when other people are talking about choice, we are the group that they choose to walk away from, the people of color. Now this is not only for people of color. Right now we're asking for it in L.A. Unified. One is at L.A. High School which is in my district. The other is at Washington High School which is in my district. I happened to be the principal of Washington High School for 10 years. I have never found a single gender student graduate who regretted that experience. So, people who say it's not good for them, they never attended those schools. But they make laws about us. Now, having been the principal of Washington High, I need to say this to you, whether I can stay in the two minutes or not. This was the school district- the school- where the Crips gang was born in America in 1968, following the Watts Riots when I was teaching at Jordan High School in Watts; I was a brand new teacher. 10 years later, I got to school, with no plan, to emancipate the school. But I figured, since I knew what to do with a school that works, because I came from a school that works, and I still wear my high school ring to this day; it's the only ring I wear. I'm biased. I admit my bias but I'm trying to emancipate children. We save many lives of young men, and I have buried a lot of them too. I conducted male and female separate assemblies. I was the only adult in the room. Nobody missed my assemblies. 1,000 girls and 1,000 boys on two separate days, for two hours every five weeks around report card time. I preached my own gospel. I'm not apologetic about it. It was about how to be a better person and what they could do with everything. Sex, drugs, rock and roll, and academic achievement as well. So, I would say to you that when I got done with that school, before I was done, they made a movie about it. I'm not bragging about it, I'm just informing you in case you don't know, you might not know. Washington High School wound up with a waiting list to get in.
[{'start': 58, 'end': 72, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erika Hoffman: erika julie hoffman on behalf of the california school boards association. we see this bill as providing districts with an opportunity to look at an alternative program for students. this would still have to go through, to establish this, ensuring that they're title ix compliant, ensuring they've met the specifications in the bill. the reality, too, is for a lot of districts to make this kind of change, this will be a discussion within their lcat planning process. it's going to have a lot of public input, but it will provide students and parents potentially with the option of a different type of alternative education that we believe would still meet all the needs of students to succeed and excel in a broad-based education so we would strongly urge your aye vote on this. as we see it, as i said, it is the ability for a school district to provide an option and a choice that other types of education can provide, including charters schools. so, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Goodman: sure. hello. i'm melissa erika goodman on behalf of the aclu. this is simply a school choice that the california constitution does not allow. the california constitution prohibits separating and excluding students from public education programs because of their gender. creating schools that are tailored to boys or girls based on debunked science and stereotypes about how typical girls and boys learn violates state law and federal law. this bill seeks to align california with title ix but it ignores that our state constitution is actually far stricter than title ix, as well as the federal constitution. it's presumptively suspect and unconstitutional to exclude students from educational opportunity because of their gender, just as it is for race. prop 209, in addition, flatly prohibits treating students differently or giving them any preferential treatment based on gender even if it's meant to help them. the u.s supreme court struck down a single gender public college under a less strict constitutional standard than california's. separating students by gender won't meet constitutional scrutiny. overwhelming evident shows that single sex education is not more effective than co-education. this form of solution treats boys and girls as undifferentiated groups, as opposed to individuals with different needs and different attributes. amending out the language about gender based learning styles will not make this bill constitutional, it won't erase stereotyping that's at the root of single sex programs, and it won't make it okay to teach girls and boys differently. every classroom or school created under this bill will be very easily susceptible to legal challenge. the bill also fails to incorporate important title ix rules, like how every single gender class must be justified by solid evidence. public schools should not being telling young people that the most important defining thing about then is their gender or be harming gender non-conforming, transgender or non-binary students. california's 1990 single sex school experiment proved a failure and it happened before we had prop 209 on the books which has a very bright-lined rule against gender classifications in public education. we do need evidence-based reforms, just not discriminatory ones that open schools up to liability. thank you.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Humphrey: My name is Karen Humphrey. I'm President of the National Women's Political Caucus of California. I also was the administrator for the State for the 1990 Single Gender Academy's Pilot Program. I strongly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shana Habel: okay. good afternoon. my name is shana melissa habel and i am a k-12 art specialist in the los angeles unified school district. and i am here to support, strongly, ab-37. lausd has been the national leader in media arts education releasing a media art standards document in july of 2010. which provides a very compelling rationale for k12 media arts instruction. it reads: digital imaging in film certainly have solid traditions, however media arts rapidly expanding contemporaneous forms requires specific educational development. media arts has now a dominant vehicle first ethicaly expressing designing and knowing our world. the media arts are naturally engaging. and relevant for young people. so they should be made available to every student. not just the gifted, affluent, or technologically inclined. to that end. to, looking at specific educational development. to that end, lausd provides instructions in the media arts. and a majority of the courses that are offered do fulfill the a to g requirement. courses that we now have on the books include virtual game and web design, digital imaging, cartooning and animation, photography, filmmaking, documentary studies, movement and media, and even choreography and the camera. i'm very proud of that. over the past several years, the number of media arts classes offered at individual school sites not surprisingly has increased during this school year in fact almost 20% of all of the visual arts classes that are being taught in our district are media arts classes. lausd media arts courses at this point reference relevent standards in the other art forms. this is no longer acceptable. media arts is an ever evolving form, it's highly specialist and complex. enhance the traditional art standards don't and can't service it. one of our lausd visual arts teachers who actually who actually was on the riding team for the international core arts standards and media arts stated that media arts needs its own standards because of the complexity of the discipline while some visual arts programs include media arts the courses do not teach it at a level that would prepare students to be college or career ready in a media arts field. we need to do that.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 171, 'end': 176, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Matthew Simons: Good afternoon my name is Matthew Simons and I'm here to speak in support of AB 37. I'm a student at Sheldon high school locally a part of the Elk Grove Unified School District and concerning media arts I'm a member of an animation and media production class better known on its campus as K9 Studios. K9 Studios is an advanced media production class for students in classroom meaning the class is ran as if it were a professional studio. The annual goal of this high school studio is to create just one production of professional quality, either a short film or often an animated short film every year and this films are then entered in the film festivals and contests at the end of each year. Within the studio there are directors cinematographers, editors, concept artist, animators and sound designers. And from my part I'm producer. I'm the one to hold meetings, plan out our projects and make sure we're meeting the death lines that we need to meet in order to make our films happen. This is been an amazing opportunity for me personally and the act of taking a media arts class and operating in the larger machine of the production studio, is something which is filled a deep passion I have for film making and that is at least in part why media arts it's becoming so important to students in recent years. Pursuing the media arts is a way for students to come together with other young adults who share a similar passion for things like story telling and technical work in the film making medium. It brings people together. It's only now that working with my peers to make short films and productions that I think I've made some of my closest bonds of my high school career. I'm here today to represent my class, my studio, my community, and anyone else who's pursued to passion which has brought them to a community where they begin to feel a sense of belonging. And in supporting AB 37 to establish state standards in media arts and provide an opportunity for an education experience similar to my own to students across California. I'd like to thank the Committee for the time.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 26, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tom Adams: Tom Adams, Deputy Superintendent for Instructional Learning Standards, Support Branch of the California Department of Education. Just to let you know that the vote for AB 37 today is a vote for teachers, a vote for students, and a coalition of them saying they want to learn about the media arts.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sue Vang: sue shana vang on behalf of state superintendent of public instruction tom torlikson a sponsor of this bill in support, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 14, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 71, 'end': 84, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lynn Fox: lynn on behalf of the california music educators and the california arts educators who are the sponsors of the original vapa standards bill in support of this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicholas Garcia: My name is Nicholas Garcia. I'm a student at Sheldon High School in Elk Grove Unified School District and I'm in support of this bill. Thank you, sir.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sean Sullivan: My name is Sean Sullivan. I'm an animation teacher over 20 years at Elk Grove Unified School District and this is way overdue. Strong support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dennis Curry: dennis sue curry, ddsr employment plus, running an international award-winning video production digital program for adults with intellectual disabilities.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
William Bronstein: my name's dr. bronstein. i'm the 20 year director of the tower of youth and the digital arts studio partnership we represent an eight county program and i'd like to pass this to the author. these are the credits from the movie dr. strange. 40 pages, 26 of which are lists of 2,000 people that have digital arts capacity just for that one movie. this is our policy paper that came out of the digital art studio partnership and workforce development act. that was passed with mr. tolickson as the coauthor at the senate side to support this program. this is way overdue and profound. thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 478, 'end': 487, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kevin Trummer: Kevin Trummer, on behalf of county Unified School District, in strong support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Isabelle Garcia: Isabelle Garcia with the California Teacher's Association, with the clarification that the implementation of this bill will not require new credentials, we would take a formal support next week.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anna Shveda: hello. good afternoon chairman o'donnell and committee members. my name is anna, i'm a teacher, a mother, and a grandmother of a district of choice student. i teach in walnut valley unified school district, which is a district of choice. i have 26 1st graders in my class. i don't know who is district of choice, i have no desire to even care. i just know they're my kiddos. they all come to me, we teach them all the same.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 40, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 75, 'end': 79, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Donna Houston: myself and my sons please. pardon, my name is donna. i have two sons who attend the walnut valley unified school district, and we are in strong support for the district of choice.
[{'start': 46, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ryan Houston: my name is ryan dennis houston, i'm a 8th grader at chaparral middle school party unified, walnut unified school district and i'm in strong support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danny Kim: Good afternoon, my name is Danny Kim, I'm a strong supporter of District of Choice. I have two kids in the district and looking forward to two more coming this way.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : thank ryan you, ryan andrea ryan ball ryan here ryan on ryan behalf ryan of ryan the ryan shoreline ryan unified ryan school ryan district, ryan we ryan are ryan a ryan basic ryan aid ryan district, ryan we'd ryan like ryan to ryan see ryan the ryan bill ryan moved ryan forward. ryan do ryan you ryan have ryan concern ryan about ryan the ryan impact ryan on ryan the ryan basic ryan aid ryan districts. ryan thank ryan you.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 10, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 16, 'end': 20, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 21, 'end': 37, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 38, 'end': 42, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 48, 'end': 52, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 68, 'end': 72, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 76, 'end': 80, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 140, 'end': 144, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 148, 'end': 152, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 157, 'end': 161, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 164, 'end': 168, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 199, 'end': 208, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 209, 'end': 213, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 219, 'end': 223, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 227, 'end': 231, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 236, 'end': 240, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 255, 'end': 259, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 266, 'end': 270, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 280, 'end': 284, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 288, 'end': 292, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 297, 'end': 301, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 307, 'end': 311, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 320, 'end': 324, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 331, 'end': 335, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 340, 'end': 344, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 352, 'end': 356, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 360, 'end': 364, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 369, 'end': 373, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 380, 'end': 388, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 405, 'end': 409, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 416, 'end': 420, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Melanie Cuevas: melanie  cuevas on behalf of oak park unified school district. we thank the authors for their diligent work on this bill, we believe it's going in the right direction. as the transportation amendments stand now we're unable to achieve those requirements so we'd like to see that cleaned up and tightened up but otherwise we're in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ray Burnell: Ray Burnell with the California Catholic Conference in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julie Mitchell: good afternoon. my name is mitchell. i'm the superintendent on nolan unified school district, and we take an opposed unless amended position. we'd like to acknowledge the intent to address serious flaws and inequities in the current program. however, it's absolutely premature to pass ab 185 through today as presented to you. we do acknowledge the changes and some of the amendments that have been made but currently those are not sufficient. at its core district of choice is flawed. current law along with current practice and implementation of district of choice is not acceptable. originally drafted and adopted 24 years ago, it's frankly no longer applicable or necessary. today we continue to attempt to modify, correct, amend, reconstitute legislation that has outlived its purpose, and it is at end of life. there is no data to support the proposed changes that are presented to you today. this has been a repeated request, as mentioned since 2008, when it was reauthorized again. it took place in 2015, 2016, and today. data is necessary before there are any substitute changes to the district of choice. this data is needed to determine the details of program utilization when analyzing district of choice. it's evident that it is disproportionately put into place with accepting far greater caucasian and asian students that are above average academically and socioeconomically, as was notated by the chair. we're typically under represented populations including special education and english learners are not represented unfortunately with district of choice. the cap is something that is very important. the court of appeals had put this into motion and had solidified this cap, which creates a balance between district of choice and district of residence. these limitations provide crucial protections for both parties. also problematic in the bill are several items, including, but not limited to lack of communication between parent applying for a district of choice and the district of residence, lack of communication between district of choice, and district of residence, inconsistency with dates in the amended ab 185. these dates include but are not limited to dates for board resolution, application and notification to both the parent and the district of residence, provisional approval dates, final approval or admission dates. start date for changes with the program that are inconsistent with the intent of the program, lack of limit for enrollment in 2017 and the date to register as a district of choice. proposing an unbiased election process, while providing preferential selection for specific students and transportation language and provisions for providing transportation. so there are many changes in the current bill as is presented to you today that are flawed, that do need to be addressed. so in closing i respectfully request that ab 185 not be passed today and be sent back to the authors to take an honest, hard look at all of the unintended consequences of this flat and outdated program. to meet with both districts of choice and districts of residence to truly learn about what happened to the district of choice program. and afterwards, if still necessary to proceed with 185, make those necessary changes. mr. o'donnell says that there was a compromise in some of the language, but no district of choice was consulted or called or asked for input regarding this matter. now, clearly we have reached out, but there was no discussion in our compromise position. so again our position is opposed unless amended. thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 3259, 'end': 3268, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Liz Gian: thank you mr. chair. i'm liz melanie gian with public advocates and we oppose and i'm doing so with respect. i appreciate very much the changes that have been made, but in looking back at our work on this issue since 2008, 2009. we have been saying on behalf of low income students and students of color that there has never been an evaluation that this is a meaningful choice for them. there were issues around their access, but there's never been an evaluation of whether or not this is good for them and it helps them. in fact, through all the attempts at evaluations that have been made, at least three the best data provided is really from the districts of residence, and they reinforce what the lao found, which is that there's a segregative impact, and we don't think that's good for students and we think it's not something that the state should support. for those reasons, we oppose the bill and we your opposition your no vote. thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 701, 'end': 704, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Merish Neyazi: Good afternoon. My name is Merish Neyazi, I am from Azusa Unified School District, and I strongly oppose the bill. Thank you, ma'am.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maria Mesa: Hi, my name is Maria Mesa and I'm coming from Azusa Unified School District. I oppose this bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maria Munoz: My name is Maria Munoz. I have three kids at at Azusa Unified School District and I opposed this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Arturo Ortega: Arturo Ortega. I am the proud parent of two girls in the Rowland Unified School District I oppose this bill. Thank you sir.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Martinez: good afternoon, martinez, superintendent pomona unified school district. i oppose unless the amendments are considered. thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Caesar Castor-Oliviez: good afternoon, castor-oliviez, pomona unified school district, strongly oppose.
[]
Shay Lohman: good afternoon, shay liz lohman, president of the association of rowland educators. i'm also here speaking on the behalf of the local unions in hacienda la puente, azusa, pomona, the charter oak, and we are opposed to ab 185. thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maria Orozco: Good afternoon, my name is Maria Orozco and I'm a proud parent of children of the Azusa Unified School District and I oppose the bill.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mira Rico: my name is rico. i am parent to three students at azusa unified school district and i strongly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Kamensky: good afternoon my name is linda. i'm the superintendent of the azusa unified school district and i oppose the bill unless amended.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Enrique Ruacho: enrique, on behalf of the los angeles unified school district, in support. there you go.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Trommer: you gotta earn your pay. you got it. kevin shay trommer, on behalf of the compton unified school district, in support.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeff Vock: Okay, Jeff Vock representing Riverside County Schools, in support.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christina Marcellus: christina kevin marcellus with the san bernardino county office of education and the districts in san bernardino, county, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ron Rapp: ron christina rapp on behalf of the california federation of teachers, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ray Burnell: Ray Burnell with the California Catholic Conference, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Isabelle Garcia: Isabelle Garcia, CTA taking a formal support next week.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Underwood: underwood on behalf of the fresno unified school district in support.
[]
Dorothy Alther: Thank you. I'll go first. Thank you very much. As assemblymember pointed out, my name's Dorothy Alther, I'm the Executive Director for California Indian Legal Services. I appreciate this opportunity to address you. California Indian Legal Services is confronted almost every graduation season with calls from Native American students and their parents. Concerned that the school has denied them the right to wear, not only maybe an eagle feather, but some other type of cultural or traditional adornment. These cases come to us usually, sometimes a couple days before graduation, sometimes the day before graduation. And it's very challenging to have to try and remedy the situation with such a short timeline. Generally, we've been able to negotiate with the school and they have been willing to allow the student to wear the Native American regalia. But we have had to file lawsuits and we have litigated this issue. All we're trying to do is have a uniform standard practiced throughout the state. There was an opposition filed behalf of the School Board Association. And they had stated that AB 233 isn't necessary because the schools do allow the wearing of eagle feathers and other types of religious or cultural adornment. With all due respect, that is just not accurate. And you'll hear the testimony of a young woman who just last year, had an eagle feather removed from her graduation cap. Another concern raised by the School Board Association was the desire to keep these issues at a local level, at a policy level within the school and to allow them to make the decision. AB 233 would not take away that discretion. Thank you.
[{'start': 88, 'end': 102, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bo Mazzetti: good afternoon committee. my name is bo. i'm chairman of the rincon band of luiseo indians. i'm also the vice president of the southern california tribal chairmen's association. which has been around since 1974. the last 25 years, we've been presenting the eagle feather to our graduates. now what that means to them, it's a recognition by their tribe of their achievement and the move to the next phase of life, the next journey that they have to take. i think the assemblyman should be commended for the purpose of the fact that if you can reduce potential lawsuits, that money then is available to the kids, that's for education. so what he's trying to do is clarify a section in the code that is obviously not clear. down our way, we haven't had many problems. okay, but in other areas they have. so if you can reduce, this committee, by passing this bill forward, lawsuits, you're saving the school districts' money. that's really what this comes down to. it's a way to reduce litigation, which we all, i think, want to do. thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paula Treat: Paula Treat on behalf of Pechanga Band of Luiseo Indians and the Colusa Indian Community, in favor. Strong favor. We've had problems.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
James Jack: Mr. Chairman and members, James Jack here on behalf of the Sycuan Band of the Kumeyaay Nation and also the Santa Ynez Band of Chumash Indians in strong support of Mr. Gloria's bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 167, 'end': 173, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Melanie Cuevas: Melanie Cuevas on behalf of Habematolel Pomo of Upper Lake and the Viejas Band of Kumeyaay Indians, both in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 28, 'end': 44, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Carolyn Veal-Hunter: carolyn ron veal-hunter on behalf of yocha dehe wintun nation in strong support of the bill. thank the author for the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Fred Jones: I will be brief again. Fred Jones, California Council for the Social Studies. We appreciate the author and his commitment to this issue. Last session we figured we worked on it and connected it to the classroom, classroom instruction, the opportunity for students to be able to consider their service. It's not just community service, it is tied to instruction and curriculum. And for that and many reasons we support this bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
James Schwab: james carolyn schwab on behalf of the secretary of state alex padilla. there's a clear connection, research has shown, between when students are civically engaged and whether or not they're going to vote. and a clear indicator of where we are at on that is in 2014, 8% of 18- to 24-year-olds voted in the gubernatorial election. so, when you're elected our governor, our congressmen, many of you, only 8% of 18 to 24 years old. that means they were more likely to be arrested than actually cast a ballot in 2014. so we have a long way to come in getting students involved and active in our community, and service learning is an important factor for getting students active and registered to vote. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 57, 'end': 69, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ray Burnell: Ray Burnell, with the California Catholic Conference. We strongly support this bill to engage our students. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erika Hoffman: hoffman on behalf of the california school boards association. we've taken a support if amended position. we understand where you're going with it. we believe it is something that students should have, but it's the issue of mandating it for every school and every student in high school. the issue for us is we would love to see the department of education come up with a curriculum and guidelines so that schools that are interested would have that type of information available. the other side of this, and this isn't just for mr. low's bill but a of number others out there too, in talking about adding things the graduation requirements for students, if we're going to do that, we need to have a large discussion on what it is and what is needed to graduate from high school. schools have a hard enough time reaching all the requirements and providing all the instruction to students in high school. to add one more thing into that for a lot of students and a lot of schools it's going to become an impossible issue. but, as i said, we are supportive of the issue and concept. just a few little details in there. thank you very much.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 533, 'end': 536, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
James Schwab: schwab, on behalf of secretary of state alex padilla. i was an advisor for several years for the ymca's youth and government program. and their motto is democracy must be learned by each generation. the question is well, where do students learn democracy? i think often times it falls on the family. i know my parents encouraged me to register to vote and to vote. and i saw them voting and they even took me to the polling place a couple of times. but for millions of children, that's not the experience they have. either through socioeconomic status or because they're from a family of immigrants and their parents weren't citizens and eligible to vote, there's millions of children that grow up in families that don't have a history of civic engagement and voting. i think schools must act as that great equalizer and ensure that all students can be engaged in our democracy. as we think about college and career readiness for all students, we should also think about readiness to become active citizens in our democracy. the secretary of state supports ab 24 as we believe it encourage more students to engage in civic education, voting, democracy and improve the low turnout that we've historically seen among 18 to 24 year olds. thank you.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 52, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Fred Jones: Members Fred Jones on behalf of the California Council for the Social Studies. Those social studies instructors you heard referenced earlier In support of AB 24. We see that our civic discourse is kind of low right now and we teach on a regular basis the skills and dispositions how to civilly disagree, how to seek out facts from fiction. The problem is our particular area of education has been marginalized to other areas of education. Anytime a school steps up and provides these skills and dispositions to their kids, we ought to recognize them. Thank you.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ron Rapp: Good afternoon, Mr. Chair, Members of the Committee. My name is Ron Rapp, speaking on behalf of California Federation of Teachers in strong support of AB 410. The California Federation of Teachers is a proud sponsor of this very important piece of legislation and we'd like to thank Assembly members Cervantes for authoring the bill. Assembly bill 410 would very simply prohibit local educational agencies from charging new teachers to participate in a state mandated teacher induction program, which is required by the Commission on Teacher Credentialing in order for new teachers to obtain their clear credential. As you are all aware, California's facing a severe teacher shortage. According to the Learning Policy's Institute Report released in 2016, addressing California's emerging teacher shortage, an analysis of sources and solutions California School Districts must hire between 60,000 and 135,000 new teachers in the coming years, beyond their other hiring needs. In addition, enrollment in teacher credentialing programs has dropped 76% From 2002 to 2014. In addition, the number of teachers with substandard permits and credentials continues to increase. According to the LPI Report, the number of substandard credentials and permits grew from approximately 4,700 in 12-13 to nearly 7,700 in 14-15. This is an increase of 63%, comprising more than one-third of all new credentials issued. This means that California's classrooms are increasingly staffed by under-prepared teachers and teachers teaching out of their field. There are a number of reasons why California's facing such a severe teacher shortage, including lingering massive budget cuts during the Great Recession. The relatively low pay provided to teachers as compared to their peers with similar levels of education and the length of time and cost that's required of perspective to become fully certificated. A major disincentive for perspective teachers to enter the profession and new teachers that stand in the classroom. Is the fact that in some schools districts new teachers must pay thousands of dollars out of their own pockets to participate in the state mandated BITSA program in order to obtain their credential. According to the Commission, I'll summarize. So they're paying up to $3350 out of their own pockets. We must discontinue this unfair and overly financially burdensome practice in California if we are to address our teacher shortage crisis. We have an obligation to parents, students, and communities to provide each child with a highly qualified teacher.
[{'start': 64, 'end': 72, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 300, 'end': 309, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rico Tamayo: hi, my name is tamayo, and i'm president of the early childhood tk-12 council for cft, but before that, i've only been doing this two years. i was president of el rancho federation of teachers in pico rivera. i did it for 10 years. down the road from where you're at chair and i had an early childhood teacher, single mother of four, come to me crying because she could not afford what the district was charging her for her beginning teacher induction program. $3,000, that may not seem a lot to you, but an early childhood teacher, she was barely making $30,000 a year. she had four kids, her mother helped to babysit. she's crying. the best i could do at the time was to get the district to charge her monthly $200 a month is maybe what she could afford. can you imagine paying $200 a month for almost four to five years? i mean if anyone does that maybe it's to get a living room set or a car, but not what she had to go through. it was horrible. this woman was born in pico rivera. she has family in pico rivera. she knows the kids in pico rivera. she's homegrown. that is the best example of getting someone from a community that can help the community bridge to being a teacher and staying put. i wanted to give you that very specific example, but kind of person that you would be helping. i'm in support of ab 410 and i thank you for listening to me. thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Liz Gean: Good afternoon. Liz Gean with Public Advocates. We support the bill.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Young: Michael Young with the California Labor Federation, Mr. Chair and Members, I apologize for not getting our letter in on time, but we're in strong support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ray Burnell: ray james burnell, with the california catholic conference, in strong support of the bill, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carlos Mechata: my name is carlos ray mechata, i'm with the california school board association. we are opposed to the bill. our districts are working hard to encourage more teachers, to find more teachers to fill the vacancies in our school districts. induction, and the cost of induction is an issue that could be addressed within the collective bargain agreement. often, our districts do work with the local union representatives to try to address these costs. it's critical, too, that districts have flexibility over these costs. what it does is it allows districts to provide induction locally for teachers if they can share those costs with the teacher and for these reasons, we urge you to oppose this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Harold Spikes: Okay, thank you for having me hear today to speak upon AB 10 bill. My name is Harold Spikes and I'm from Parents Voices of Oakland. But let me give you a little background about myself. In 2000, my wife died and I had to raise four young girls. Neither one was on administration. And when my oldest daughter, her friend came to visit her, she was embarrassed and she was ashamed, because I was a man, and she didn't know how to approach her father.  But I sat her down, I explained to her this is what young girls go through, when they reach a certain age. So that was the first time that I was introduced to feminine hygiene and products and stuff. But now let me tell you about the second part of my adventure. I went to work for the Unified School District of Berkley as a janitor. And through the course of doing my choirs and stuff, my everyday duties, I walked into the facilities of young ladies restroom and there was a young lady coming out the stall, and the look on her face took me back to the same look I saw on my daughter's face.  So I knew that look. So I kind of brushed it off and I continue to go ahead and clean up the restroom. And as cleaning up, I looked through the garbage and I was looking at the garbage. And I'm seeing things that no child have to go through. No child should have to go through to be embarrassed like that. They used did use substance that's not appropriate for the things that they have to use. So my daughters, they was going through the Unified School District of Berkeley School District. So I talked to them about things, and they was telling me, it costs, the dispensers that give you the products the cost was too high for, yet some young girls they couldn't afford it. So they had to supplement it by using other things, like she said causes diseases and causes things that they don't have to go through. So I'm just here to explain some of the things that I experienced, and some of the things that young girls go through and they don't need to go through that because every child needs to stay in school not to be embarrassed, not to be ashamed, not to miss education, not to miss the lessons. So, in short, thank you for having me here, and my name is Harold Spikes
[{'start': 78, 'end': 91, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2206, 'end': 2219, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cindy Castillo: Cindy Castillo with the Faculty Association of California Community Colleges, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Elysia Lewis: elysia carlos lewis on behalf of the american congress of obstetricians and gynecologists of district nine. proud support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gregory Cramer: Mister Chair and members, Gregory Cramer with Planned Parenthood Affiliates of California in strong support.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathy Sher: Kathy Sher on behalf of the ACLU of California in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Moyle: Mary Moyle with the CSSU and we don't have an official position yet but we look forward to working with the author.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Annie Lasko: Annie Lasko from Conscious Period in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Margo Lange: Margo Lange from Conscious Period in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Adriana Morro: Hi, good afternoon, Adriana Morro with the Latino Coalition for a Healthy California and here in strong support.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Amehet: hi, i'm kimberly elysia amehet, this is for the latino coalition for a healthy california and a second year student at sac state and i support.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Hudgenson: my name is sarah kimberly hudgenson and i work for act for women and girls in tulare county and i support this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lucia Gonzalez: my name is lucia sarah gonzalez and i'm a part of act for women and girls, i support this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Saleem Moinuddin: Saleem Moinuddin on behalf of the student senate for California Community Colleges, I show strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sheryl Fabio: fabio, i'm with parents voices oakland in oaklnd california and the organization and our parents are in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Genesis Gonzalez: I'm Genesis Gonzalez for Act for Women and Girls and I strongly support this.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Freddie Estrada: my name is freddie, i'm from act for women and girls, and i support this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marissa Marietta: hello i'm marissa lucia marietta from woodland, california with the acts for women and girls, and i am strongly for this bill.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Elliot Andrade: i'm andrade from act for women and girls in tulare county and i support this bill.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : Ms. Weber.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 9, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Marrone: good morning chairman allen and members of the committee. my name is jennifer jonah marrone, the food service business manager at san diego unified school district. i've been in school food services for about 10 years, and my role at the food services department at san diego unified includes overseeing the free and reduced-eligibilities, which includes direct certification through calpads and the local county match. it also includes the free and reduced-meal application. in may, 2015, our district started on the usda pilot program for direct certification, this program allowed our districts, and 13 other districts, to directly certify students, not only by snap, calfresh, and tanf calworks, but to start including students that were receiving medi-cal and also met the free and reduced income eligibility guidelines. the first download had an immediate impact on our direct certification percentages. from may, 2015 to june, 2015, our direct certification rate went up 7.39%, which is a total of increase of 30%. from april 1st, 2015, which is the state, excuse me, the date that the usda uses for community eligibility provision, to april first 2016 the direct certification percentage increased 12.87% which is a total increase of 53%. the impact of these great increases in students being directly certified affected our department and the students in many ways. for our department, we were able to process 16% fewer meal applications from 2015 to 2016. also, the percentage of students chosen for additional verification dropped 30%. these both helped reduce administrative costs and streamline the eligibility process. it was very helpful for the families to not have to fill out an application and it reduced the amount of negative balances. the greatest outcome of the medical demonstration project for our students is that now we currently just put 18 new schools on the community eligibility program to eat breakfast and lunch at no cost. having these 18 schools on cep has already increased participation and we're planning on implementing breakfast after the bell in the following school year. these 18 schools have about $20,000 in unpaid charges, which will also not be incurred next year. meal service is now quicker, and there are fewer stigmas to eating school meals. school districts as a whole, benefit from increasing the number of students directly certified for free reduced meals because they receive more concrete data for lcff, and title one purposes. i do not have to chase either the school meal application, or the alternate income form. in fact, you have to choose the alternate income form, which would be in a cep situation. the form is much easier to fill out than the school meal application. the alternate form only requires a box being checked and a signature. in summary, direct certification with medicaid and increasing universal free school meals are important fiscal strategies for school districts and food service departments, the major benefits for students and families. thank you for your time and i'd be happy to answer any questions.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 69, 'end': 91, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ray Burnell: Ray Burnell with the California Catholic Conference, in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dennis Cuevas-Romero: Dennis Cuevas-Romero with the American Heart Association, American Stroke Association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kat DeBurgh: deburgh with health officers association of, california, in support.
[]
Michele Stillwell-Parvensky: stillwell-parvensky, children's defense fund california, in support.
[]
Monica Zemi: zemi, with california alternative payment association, and we are in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shanti Prasad: Shanti Prasad Alameda County Community Food Bank, in strong support. Our policy team works closely with Alameda County school districts to find ways to enroll students in need and this bill provides the most effective solution that we can find so far. We estimate that SB 138 would make available meals to an additional 74,000 people within our county. Providing over 26 million meals during the school year, thanks.
[]
Kimberly Rosenberger: Thank you. Kimberly Rosenberger, Service Employees International Union, in strong support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Aslanian: Coalition of California Welfare Rights Organization, Kevin Aslanian, in strong support.
[{'start': 53, 'end': 67, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Derek Lennox: Good morning, chair and members, Derek Lennox on behalf of the Small School Districts Association. Moving forward, we're going to be in support, strong support. We haven't had an opportunity to take a position yet, and we're going to continue to work with the author's office, as well as the California Department of Education, to work out any logistical and administrative issues, so that implementation can occur smoothly.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stephanie Haffner: thank you. thank you, chairman allen and members of the committee. my name is stephanie jennifer haffner, i am an attorney at western center on law and poverty. western center is a cosponsor of this legislation. and in addition to representing low-income californians in state legislature in budget matters, western center serves as a support center for legal services programs and legal services attorneys throughout the state. this legislation would ensure that food is not used to punish children, nor is it used to humiliate children or treat them differently when their parent or legal guardian is not able to pay for a meal. we became alerted to this issue after learning of instances when a child had been denied food as the result of a disciplinary action and we later learned of cases in which children were denied meals as a result of their parents' unpaid school debt. we learned that this was happening not because of rogue decisions by school nutrition workers, but because district policies were either silent or they directed staff to deny a meal or provide a less than complete meal to children. in review of policies in your district, mr. chair, we found school districts that direct staff to withhold a meal to children who come to school on a single day that they don't have the amount required for complete payment. and we found that these same policies direct school nutrition professionals to provide instead of a regular meal, a cheese sandwich. and in one case, a half of a cheese sandwich. while the premier policy to ensure that children don't miss a meal is community eligibility, that makes all children eligible without payment. this option is not available to every school district, nor is it taken by every school district that can. so existing law includes protections from unfair treatment of a child already certified for a free or reduced price meal, but there's no current law to protect children who are not already certified for free or reduced-price meal. and there's no current law that helps schools insure that children do not suffer, because of the debt of their parents or their caregivers. sb 250 simply requires the department of education to ensure that districts make a locally determined appropriate policy for ensuring that children are not treated differently or left to go hungry and to make that policy public. and when families find themselves unable to pay, this legislation also requires districts to exhaust options to help the family get certified for a free or reduced-price meal in case lack of information is the issue. this legislation is timely, it provides direction to cde for how it should implement usda guidance and fair treatment of children in school as to their access to meals without shame or humiliation is a value we all share. sb 250 helps insure that this value will be adhered to in the school environment through clear, fair and public policies. for this reason, we're proud to sponsor this legislation and we urge your aye vote. thank you.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 36, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 78, 'end': 104, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michele Stillwell-Parvensky: Good morning, Michele Stillwell-Parvensky, Children's Defense Fund California and proud to co-sponsor this bill. No child should be denied food or punished because their parents have not paid school meal debt. It's never ideal for a student to go hungry and try to learn on an empty stomach. Currently, there's no policy protecting children who are not certified for free and reduced-price lunch from being punished for unpaid school meal fees. And as we heard, policies at school districts vary, highlighting the need for a statewide law protecting children. We've seen the media reports of a child's hot meal being thrown in the trash because her lunch account was past due. In some districts, as mentioned, the written policy is to give a child with an unpaid school meal debt a lesser meal like half a cheese sandwich. SB 250 simply states that no school official may delay or deny food to punish students for any reason and requires schools to publish their policies for notifying, and collecting that debt from the parents. This actually happened to me as a third grader. When I went up to get my lunch and the cafeteria worker told me that I couldn't have a meal, because I hadn't paid for my lunch in the past. I tried again the next day. And again, didn't get a lunch and it went on for several days. I was probably hungry those days, but what I remember the most vividly was being very embarrassed about what was happening. Thinking that I had done something wrong, but not knowing what it was. And I remember telling my friends that I just wasn't hungry that day to explain what was happening. Eventually, my teacher noted that I hadn't been eating lunch and connected with my mom who then talked with the school cafeteria workers and they found out that it had just been a mistake. But this is clearly an instance where it should have been something that we're addressing directly with the parents first rather than punishing or withholding meal from a child. This bill would provide that protection to all California children. So that rather than schools denying meals or shaming students, it can instead publish and create those policies to notify the parents and collect the debts directly from the parents. For me, I was fortunate that I had a breakfast and a dinner at home. But for some children, a school lunch is the only meal that they have during a day. We know that school meals are incredibly efficient at fighting the devastating effects of student hunger. SB 250 seeks to make sure that every child who needs one receives a meal and prevents the use of a school meal as punishment for students or to coerce the child's parent to pay a debt. I urge your aye vote and thank you for the opportunity to testify.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Aslanian: yeah, good morning. kevin, coalition california worker rights organizations. we represent calworks recipients who are living at 33% at the poverty level. and many of them run out of food stamps the last week of the month, and can you imagine how devastating it is for these kids to go to school and not even be able to get anything to eat? and we think that this is a great bill, and we urge an aye vote. thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Scogland: John Scogland with the Children's Law Center of California, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Rosenberger: Kimberly Rosenberger with Servers Employees International Union. We represent classified workers, including cafeteria workers who are especially appreciative of this language, as well as the training that is included for workers. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ken Berrick: Senators, my name's Ken Berrick, I'm the founder and CEO of the Seneca Family of Agencies and I've been doing this work for over 30 years. Seneca started working with kids who had been failed by every system, and we were the deep end intervention. We were the intervention of last resort. We worked with kids where the system had failed, and we were the most expensive program in the State of California. And I want to talk to you, I'm the resident wonk, here. I want to talk to you about the intersection between our failure to intervene early and the cost of that failure to intervene. We could not be doing a better job of creating costly interventions than we are right now because of the way that we've structure our interventions not to be available to Students at an earlier stage. Seneca had the privilege of piloting through a competitive Federal Grant, an I3 Grant, a program we call unconditional education with an outcome of study by SRI, which has some depth of experience with doing this. And what we found was that we can find ways to intervene earlier, and we don't just get better mental health outcomes, we get better academic outcomes. And there is an intersection. Now, I know that there have been a lot of people that have sat in front of you and said, gee, if we invest earlier, you'll save money. And I know that, often, that that doesn't pan out in the way that you can see in concrete ways. We're seeing this in our study in the first two years. That were able to divert students from more expensive interventions. And then we're able to create a tiered intervention system that allows us to provide lower level, broader interventions that changes the culture of the school, the climate of the school. That allows you to identify students who both internalize and externalize, but also ends up integrating with education in a different way to get better outcomes. Our system is currently designed as a fail first system. You get an intervention if you rise to the top in a way that identifies that you have deep needs. And that misses both on an academic level and on a social-emotional level. That negates our ability to intervene in targeted ways at more opportune times. If you look at a student that's struggling in the way that you just described, and you intervene at the first identified opportunity point, the intervention cost over time is significantly lower. So I encourage you to look at the opportunity that this legislation creates and I encourage you to move the bill forward, thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 946, 'end': 949, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rusty Selix: Just we're now down to just name and purpose Rusty Selix California Council of Community Behavior Health Agencies, just to briefly state that the types of programs that Seneca's providing is why the bill is needed, the Committee asked, why do we need this bill? Because unfortunately only a handful of school districts and county Bay Area health departments are committed to making this kind of model happen. They could be doing it, they're not doing it, and so the Legislature needs to intervene to create state incentives so that counties and school districts will partner to create more of these types of programs. So that we can create more of the successes that benefit both the schools, and the counties, and the students. Has been presented and have less of the fail first which seems to be the norm right now.
[{'start': 45, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kelly Hardy: hardy with childrennow. we're very pleased to cosponsor the bill and especially proud that it would target mental health resources towards kids who are most affected by childhood adversity and trauma. thank you.
[]
Linda Nguy: linda stephanie nguy with western center on law and poverty in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Howard: Brian Howard, California Federation of Teachers. We don't have a formal position on the bill yet, but we are recommending a support on this very important bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anna Hasselblad: good morning. hasselblad with the steinberg institute. we are in strong support of sb 191 and encourage the activity to move from a fail first to a care first system. thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erika Hoffman: erika linda hoffman, on behalf of the california school boards association. we have been working with senator beall's office. we had a very good discussion with the senator yesterday on the measure. i don't have a formal position. we've got a couple of technical amendments we'd like to see in the bill, but i am taking this for at least to support if amended to get the technical issues addressed. to my legislative committee next week, we do believe this to be very important to try to get that early intervention going. hopefully, at some point, we will be able to reduce in the special education cost at the other side of the issue for these students.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 110, 'end': 115, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Karen Micalizio: Good morning, my name is Karen Micalizio, I'm Dean of Financial Aid in Special Programs at Butte College. I also serve as the EOPS Director in this role. I am here today to express my strong support of Senate Bill 12, which will make college possible for California's foster youth by improving access to financial aid. I have worked with students for 34 years. For the past nine years, I have worked directly with foster youth. During that time, I have assisted hundreds of foster youth, and have come to understand why just half of foster youth at California community colleges receive the Pell Grant, when 85% are eligible. The first reason is a lack of preparation. Foster youth arrive at Butte College with little knowledge of the financial aid process. Many have not completed the free application for federal student aid, known as the FAFSA, or have completed it incorrectly, and received no financial aid, which quickly leads to disenrollment. Senate Bill 12 will change this by requiring each use case plan to identify an individual to assist the foster youth in the college and financial aid application process starting at age 16. A second reason for low rates of Pell Grant received among foster youth is the financial aid verification process. At View College and the other 112 community colleges in California, we require foster youth to hunt down a piece of paper documenting their foster care status to confirm that they are independent students as required by federal regulations. Many are unable to do so in a timely manner, and the financial aid process comes to a halt. SB 12 will change this by requiring the California Student Aid Commission to automate the verification process, using data provided by the California Department of Social Services. This has worked for the Chafee Education and Training Voucher and it can work to improve access to other forms of financial aid as well, including the Federal Pell Grant. Finally, SB-12 will expand an effective program for foster youth on campuses called the Cooperating Agencies Foster Youth Education Services program, known as CAFYES. CAFYES was created by Senate Bill 1023, authored by former Senate Education Committee Chair Carol Lou. SB 1023 authorized the California Community College Chancellor's Office to award up to 15 million annually to 10 community college districts. These 10 districts were selected in the fall of 2015, and implementation began in 2016. Since then, CAFYES has delivered positive results to 1,157 participating foster youth. 88% of youth reported that CAFYES helped them enroll in the right classes, 83% reported it improved access to priority registration, and 71% report that it has helped them remain enrolled full time. CAFYES has been particularly effective in improving access to financial aid. Foster youth on CAFYES funded campuses are 46% more likely to receive the federal Pell grant than the state average. And fortunately, the vast majority of foster youth, 73%, don't attend a CAFYES -funded campus. This includes the 75 potentially eligible foster youth on my Campus at Butte College. Other community colleges with large numbers of foster youth enrolled that are not funded by CAFYES  include those represented by Members of the Committee. Santa Monica Community College, Antelope Valley, and Victor Valley Colleges, Modesto Jr. College and San Joaquin Delta College, San Bernardino Community College, Cerritos and Rio Jando Colleges and American River Sacramento City College and Cosumnes River College and Westhills College. Like Butte College, these colleges are struggling to meet the complex needs of foster youth on campus. This is in spite of the fact that 6 million of the annual $15 million budget for CAFYES is unspent and could be used to support vulnerable foster youth. SB 12 will change this by authorizing the chancellor's office to fund up to an additional 10 community college districts to this available funding. SB 12 will open the door to college for thousands of Foster youth and do so using currently untapped federal funds, the Pell Grant. With SB 12, Foster youth are guaranteed to get information about financial aid earlier and an estimated 7,000 additional Foster youth will receive the Pell Grant which provides students $5700 annually for college expenses, leading to increased retention in graduation rates. Thank you and I very much urge you to support SB12.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2200, 'end': 2209, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Luise Hernandez: Good morning, my name is Luise Hernandez. I am a student at San Francisco State University majoring in liberal studies and minoring in criminal justice. I entered in the foster care system when I was 15 years old. After living with my foster parents for three years, I emancipated and decided to move to San Francisco to pursue my education. When I was in high school, nobody talked to me about college. How expensive it was or how important it is to fill out a FAFSA application. So, in my first years of college, I was not getting financial aid because I didn't have anyone there to tell me how to fill out the complicated FAFSA form. The FAFSA application is incredibly hard to fill out, and many youth, including myself, had a hard time finishing. The FAFSA is the most used application for federal grants, such as Pell Grant. It is also the application for work-study funds. And even poor scholarships. So the first year of college, I couldn't afford to pay my rent or apply for any scholarship. Not knowing how to fill out the FAFSA application not only affects my education, but also my personal life. By that time, it was impossible for me to survive without any income. Which led me to be homeless for several months. The challenge for Foster youth in college are not only not knowing how to fill out the FAFSA application but also not being able to obtain the foster care verification letter on time. I had to wait one semester until I started my classes at Cedar College of San Francisco because I didn't get the foster care verification in time to receive the program. I withdraw from my classes and I have no one who was there to help me with that situation. By the time that I obtain the verification letter, it was too late to register for classes. If SB 12 bill had been implemented at that time, my transition to college would have been less challenging. Fortunately, after overcoming those challenges, I found campus support to help me keep my academic goals on track. Campus supports such as guardian scholars and Extended Opportunity Program Service, EOPS, helped me to learn how to navigate the FAFSA website, which has helped not only me but other students, too, because I can help them now, as well. Having Campus Resources program in college made the transition from foster care to college so much easier. At City College of San Francisco, I was able to get resources such as textbooks, support, tutoring, mental health services and a special counselor that helped me to make my educational plan. Being part of Guardian Scholars and EOPS is helping me to grow personally and academically. I'm very lucky to have these incredible resources. Unfortunately, only 26 of 113 campuses has this kind of campus support programs. I can't imagine how hard it must be for those students to be successful in a school without having a support program that can help them with all the challenges that we face in college. I have to say, that if it wasn't for the campus resources program, that CCSF have, I wouldn't be where I am today pursuing higher education. SB 12 is an easier solution to the big problem. Having someone to help the youth fill out the fax application, giving the youth the ability to have their foster care status be automatically verified. And having campus support programs that provide unique and specialized services to foster youth through the state will tremendously help to support youth to succeed in school. I fully believe that this bill will improve the personal and educational outcomes of thousands of foster youth in California. For this reason, we will love you to support this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Howe: brian erika howe with california federation of teachers. we're in strong support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alexis Berries: My name is Alexis Berries, I'm a former foster youth. I spent 18 years in foster care and in strong support of SB 12.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Annemarie McGovern: My name is Annemarie McGovern. I'm a former foster youth attending Berkeley City College and I would just like to testify to the point that CAFyES has helped me to stay in sustainable housing and to continue school.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jonathan Lily: My name is Jonathan Lily and I am a current foster youth attending Sierra College. And I am in strong support of the SB12.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rosalie Adams: my name is rosalie from cosumnes river college. and i am a foster youth, as well as a student help in the financial aid office, so i know first hand that this is a very important bill, and i am in much support of it. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tony Tran: My name is Tony Tran. I'm a former foster youth. I'm also the student body President of my college Cosumnes River College. And I just wanted to say that if it wasn't for financial aid and the resources available to us, I would not be in college.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alicia Lazoya: Hello, my name is Alicia Lazoya. I'm a former foster youth and I currently attend Sierra College. I have, this is my second semester. I benefited from CAFEYS and I hope to see a lot more from our foster youth benefit also and I support this bill.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kai Morton: Hello my name is Kai Morton and I'm of full support of SB 12 and also for if it wasnt for inspired scholars and the resources I wouldn't have navigate college fairly well so thank you.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Johnny Wilkins: My name is Johnny Wilkins. I'm a current foster youth attending Butte College, and I'm very grateful for CAFEYS, and I would like to see it spread out to other college campuses throughout California. I support SB 12.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Corla Linneck: Good morning. My name is Corla Linneck, and I'm a former foster youth. I recently graduated and transferred from Butte College on to California State University Chico. As an advocate for current foster youth, I can personally say that it's very easy to find any roadblocks for continuing education. And thanks to advocates and programs that have been available at my college, they've been able to really encourage my success and make college and my education possible for me. Thank you so much.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jacqueline Oliver: hi, good morning, my name is jacqueline. i'm a former foster youth. i go to the diablo valley college in pleasant hill. our program there is called the start program. and being an older person, going back to school, the start program has not only made me feel comfortable, but they have also allowed me to know that just because i did grow up in foster care i do matter and i am important to the school. so i do support sb 12 and i thank you guys for being here.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tiffany Madrigal: thank you. hi, good morning. my name is madrigal. i am now a case manager, however i am a former foster youth. receiving financial aid has helped me give back to current foster youth now and having that one on one of personal experience that i can share with them and help them overcome those boundaries, so i am in support of sb12.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vance Edwards: Hi, I'm Vance Edwards. I'm from Butte College. Thank you so much for your time. Just wanted to express our support for SB 12, and let you know that campus programs throughout the state our barely getting by, and precarious. And with the expansions of CAFEYS it's really giving us hope that we can support more students in being successful on campuses. Thank you, so much.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Benjamin Cadjunell: good morning, esteemed committee members. my name is benjamin brian cadjunell, i'm the director of resource development for the foster care program at woodland community college. and i also run the independent living program, as well the guardian scholarship program there. and we are in strong support of sb 12, and feel that every available dollar that we can spend on foster youth should be spent in as many colleges as possible.
[{'start': 53, 'end': 77, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Dean: hello, my name is dean, and i am the program coordinator of the enriched scholars program at cosumnes river college. i am also a former foster youth, and i can personally attest how important these types of programs are. i am currently finishing up my master's, and it wouldn't have been possible without these types of programs. and i'm, from talking to other campuses that have had access to kps i know that my students and other students who do not have this access could absolutely benefit from this. i am in complete support of sb 12, thank you. thank you.
[]
Katie Lemley: katie benjamin lemley with john burton advocates for youth in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 27, 'end': 38, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Josefina Ramirez Natsuna: josefina katie ramirez natsuna with children now in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Malay: malay, california alliance of child and family services also in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Deborah Prewett: deborah josefina prewett, john burton's advocates for youth and an instructor in the community college system for about 18 years and i just want to say in support of sb 12, every young person needs mentoring and coaching through all of those barriers to get into and through college successfully and to stay persistent and sb 12 will do that. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tony Rice: good morning, rice on behalf of the los angeles area chamber of commerce and strong support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrea York: Andrea York on behalf of the California Community College Association for EOPS and we don't have an official position at this point. We are supportive in concept and worked very closely with the author and the Chancellor's Office on the bill. We do have a couple of concerns about the expansion. We want to make sure that moving forward that we go back and take a look at it and make sure that we're working with other services that are offered on campus and that we have an opportunity to review best practices, lessons learned, and look at the age eligibility requirements also. Thank you for working with us and we look forward to the conversation.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marina Wiant: Thank you, Marina Wiant with the California Housing Consortium. I'll be brief since the Committee is well aware of the deep affordability crisis that the state is suffering from. But I want to note that together both this Bill with SB 2 and the couple of housing funding measures that the Assembly has, together still do not make up what the investment the state had towards affordable housing development was back in 2008, and today, we're in a crisis that is even deeper where we have incomes, incomes are lower, the state's number one in poverty, and our own HC director has claimed on the ground this is a crisis that no one has seen yet. I urge your aye vote today, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Rhine: good afternoon, mr. chair, members. jason jonah rhine, league of california cities. we greatly appreciate the chairman's efforts on this much needed bond. we're going to have a robust discussion this year on some of the reforms and the barriers that need to be addressed at the local level, at the state level. and we certainly welcome that, but we can't lose sight of the fact that we have a tremendous funding need this bill, along with sb 2, will go a long way to meet that need and to meet the need for those that are most vulnerable in our community. and we believe that it's something that needs to be done together and we're certainly up for the challenge and we recommend that you support this bill.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tiffany Fan: Tiffany Fan on behalf of Bridge Housing and also Straw Investment Group, strong support.
[]
Tim Shawn: mr. chairman, member shawn on behalf of the san francisco rapid transit district also in support.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roxanne Miller: roxanne jason miller on behalf of mayor sam liccardo and our entire city council, city of san jose. we want to thank the author. time is of the essence. trust the voters. we'll do it together, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 40, 'end': 52, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Megan Rose: rose, with leading age california, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sylvia Saleesha: Sylvia Saleesha on behalf of the City of Los Angeles and on behalf of the City of Santa Monica, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Harms: harms with the national association of social work, california chapter, in support.
[]
Tyrone Buckley: Tyrone Buckley with Housing California, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anya Lawler: Anya Lawler on behalf of the Western Center on Law and Poverty, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Augusta: augusta on behalf of the california rural legal assistance foundation, in support.
[]
Tim Frank: Tim Frank on behalf of the Senate for Sustainable Neighborhoods, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Hammond: Richard Hammond on behalf of the cities of Oakland, Hayward, Emeryville, and Walnut Creek in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Peter Cohen: peter roxanne cohen for the council of community housing organizations in san francisco in support. thank you, senator beall.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 119, 'end': 124, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jared Sanchez: Jared Sanchez with the California Bicycle Coalition in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maria Garcia: maria peter garcia with ... representing 13 different groups of that, have come together for housing coalition or for housing policy, and we are very much in support of additional funding for the purpose, so, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Silvio Ferrari: good afternoon. sorry. good afternoon mr. chairman, committee members. i am ferrari with sacramento advocates actually here on behalf of the california building industry association today. and again, we're here in very, very strong support of this measure. first and foremost, we want to thanks senator atkins, the sponsors, the huge and growing list of supporters for really their continued effort on this policy. we are all well aware and we see it every day out in the real world just how grave the housing crisis is over the past several years. as we had this debate, that crisis is only growing and is only getting worse and we're seeing it each and every day. we are seeing in both the for sale and rental market that the ability to get into housing is becoming out of reach for more and more californians. and that is certainly why the california building industry and across the spectrum of our members from large publicly traded members to our mom and pops to our contractors to our design professionals have stood in strong support of this measure since assemblywoman atkins, back then, first brought it forward. and that is why we are prepared to do our part by paying this fee on a host of real estate transactions that we engage in every day. the facts on the ground out there, they're ugly. it's estimated right now that we have a backlog of 2 million units that needs to get into our market right now. we need to produce, on average, between now and 2025, 180,000 units annually. we haven't been producing that in over a decade, and we've been fortunate in the last two years to just barely get above 100,000. so we're nowhere where we need to be. home ownership rates are as low as they were in the 1940s and half of californians right now can afford the cost of housing in their local region. as senator atkins said, we have a historic housing problem on our hands and the things that we should be focusing are just like this bill, sb 2. things that go after that supply, things that are going after the ability to increase that overall supply housing. but don't get me wrong, this is not just a housing bill, this is a bill that's good for the economy. this is a bill that is great for california's businesses as we try to attract a workforce and keep that workforce as they are being strangled everyday by the cost of housing. so we implore you, as we have in previous years, this is a very important bill for the housing industry. it is a very important bill for californians. and we hope to garner all of your support, urge you to vote aye. thank you.
[{'start': 303, 'end': 309, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1078, 'end': 1084, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1821, 'end': 1827, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cesar Diaz: Mr. Chairmembers, Cesar Diaz on behalf of the State Building and Construction Trades Council. Also very much honored to be here in support of this legislation. There is no question that income inequality is exacerbating also the inability of people actually access quality home. And often times, you'll find that areas in which people are working aren't actually places where they actually live. And so, I think that with the dissolution of redevelopment agencies and the problems that we've seen since then, This is an important bill to kind of really address one of the many aspects which is funding true affordable housing projects. I think as my colleague Silvio mentioned earlier, we do need supply but we also need supply and focus on the actual true problem. And that is the affordable housing problem that exists. Income inequality has provided to that, the recession provided even more. I think our members were hit twice with ballooning mortgage interest loans and then they lost their jobs. And then the recession also didn't come back for us. Well we were the first ones to feel the recession and the last ones to actually get out. Now that we have this opportunity, we see the opportunity here in the number of jobs that are created. 29,000 per $500 million, that's a lot of prevailing wage apprenticeship opportunities for a lot of individuals. And that's a lot of individuals that may actually build the facilities, but also build the homes, that are going to be for the future of the workforce. So we definitely appreciate the opportunity to be here. We can't stress enough how much important the housing package is that is in front of you today. We support both bills, and definitely urge your support in SB 2, thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 660, 'end': 666, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Speck: mr. chair, jennifer maria speck on behalf of the california association of realtors. we are in support of sb 2 and we'd like to commend the author for continuing the agreements that we had last year in ab 1335 and request your aye vote.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Hao: hao with california federation of teachers. we're in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shawn Topaikin: shawn jennifer topaikin with the california apartment association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: kyle of sierra club california in support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Margo Parks: Margo Parks on behalf of the California Council for Affordable Housing, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Harms: Jennifer Harms of the National Association of Social Work, California Chapter, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anya Lawler: lawler on behalf of the western center on law and poverty and the california rural legal assistance foundation in support.
[]
Peter Cohen: cohen for the council of community housing organizations in san francisco in support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sylvia Celise: Sylvia Celise Shaw, on behalf of the City of Los Angeles and on behalf of the City of Santa Monica, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tiffany Fan: Tiffany Fan, on behalf of Bridge Housing and also Stroud Investment Group, strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Megan Rose: megan shawn rose, on behalf of leading age california, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Shaw: Tim Shaw on behalf of the San Francisco Bay Area Rapid Transit District in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Lane: lane with the non-profit housing association of northern california in strong support.
[]
Holly Fraumeni: Holly Fraumeni with Platinum Advisors on behalf of Habitat for Humanity California representing 42 affiliates throughout the state in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Lee: Chris Lee on behalf of the California State Association of Counties in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Lang: lang on behalf of mayor edwin lee and the city and county of san francisco in support, thank you.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 33, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rob Wiener: Rob Wiener, California Coalition for Rural Housing in very strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Frank: tim megan frank for the center for sustainable neighborhoods, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jerry Sanchez: sanchez with the california bicycle coalition and we're in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maria Garcia: garcia with greenberg traurig here on behalf of a coalition of 13 different groups that have come together to move forward with a comprehensive housing package. and so on behalf of those 13 groups, we are in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marina White: Marina White with the California Housing Consortium in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tyrone Buckley: Tyrone Buckley with Housing California, please co-sponsor, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gregory Diaz: thank you for the.>>push the button. okay, [inaudible]. yeah, you have the floor. yeah, okay, great, thank you. thanks for the opportunity. my name is gregory tim diaz, nevada county clerk court recorder, also president of the county recorders association of. california. i have two quick points i'd like to make. first, on behalf of the association, a basic tenet for our association is that we must support fees that are not related to the function of the recorder's office. this fee is to be applied on documents unrelated to the transfer of a house. there is no connection between the fee and the documents. if there was a desire to create an access, the fee and the bill will need to be flipped on its face. the fee to support affordable housing, would apply to those documents associated with the transfer of housing, the purchase, and sale of a home. my second point is explaining a ground view level of what's going to occur the way this bill is presently written. in nevada county, i have the beautiful town of truckee. i'm going to have a buyer come in buying a $1.5 million second home. there going to be documents thrown at us and right now none of those documents are going to be subject to this fee. two weeks prior, there's an issue with the roof. the buyer finds a roofer. the roofer fixes the roof and then the buyer doesn't pay him. the poor roofer's going to come into my office, there's a constitutional right for him to record a mechanic's lien and i have to hit this guy up with a $75 fee. we just don't think that's right. i can't really speak on behalf of the association but there needs to be more equity. and i'd like to see this fee apply to all documents being presented to the recorder's office, thanks.
[{'start': 151, 'end': 167, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Craig Page: mr chairman, committee members, my name is craig gregory page and with the california land title association. represent the title insurance industry in california. first of all, i want to state that we're certainly sympathetic to the issue of affordable housing and completely support the governor's publicly stated efforts to streamline, eliminate red tape delays, and bring down the cost for affordable housing. and we support that effort wholeheartedly. the current bill in front of us though we're concerned about, for many other reasons that were stated by the recorders association in that we really view this is as a regressive fee. you're going to have, there's a carve out in the bill right now where if it's not related, if it's related to a transfer or sale of a home or commercial property, it's completely exempt which is essentially a logical application of the fee. it's going to make it difficult for title companies and i think many consumers to know, when do we pay the fee, when do we not pay the fee? in transfers they'll know. but maybe a week later there's a reconveyance that's recorded to show that the lien has been paid off on the mortgage in full, is that subject to to the transfer fee, i mean to the affordable housing fee or is it not? it's going to be difficult right now with the carve out for recorded fees associated with transfer tax, those exclusions. we're finding that they're not being recorded or being charged uniformly across the state. in some cases, it's very hard to tell whether it's connected to a real estate sale or transaction. we think it's going to be regressive and hit low income home owners pretty hard. if they go to refinance their house, they're going to have a $225 recording free charged because most of the time it's going to be multiple documents, multiple pages that will easily get the $225 cap in the bill. we think they're going to be facing pretty erroneous cost to just record those documents. i think from clta's perspective and we've raised this before with sponsors, we would be also in the position, i think where we'd be better off by eliminating the exclusion on recorded documents for sales under the bill and make it apply to all documents. bringing that fee down from $75 to a lower fee, put it across the board on all recorded documents. and then it would be easier for us from a software standpoint, consumers would know and then we will be able to have an easy to ascertain, easy to run program rather than what we have in front of us now. for those reasons we oppose the bill currently written. okay, thank you.
[{'start': 43, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lexi Howard: lexi on behalf of the california escrow association, the california mortgage association, and the united trustees association, associating our comments with cltas also opposed. okay.
[]
John Caldwell: caldwell on behalf of the american resort development association, also opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roxanne Miller: Excuse me, Mr. Chair and members, Roxanne Miller representing Mayor Sam Liccardo and our City Council in San Jose, I apologize for the order here. We're in very strong support of this bill however, thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 68, 'end': 80, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ted Gaines: senator ted, senator ted, ted. yes. i want to thank you, senator atkins for focusing on the housing issue and the challenges that we have here in california. my concern is the taxation nature. and i worry about the regressive nature, too, in certain situations. so, for instance, a foreclosure proceeding. also and maybe you can clarify this for me. but it says that, in my analysis that the fee could be higher in the event that, the timing of the document is such that they are not all addressed at the same time. so, could you clarify that for me just in terms of how that would work. would there be additional transaction fees that could go beyond 225?
[{'start': 8, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 21, 'end': 24, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 26, 'end': 29, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 65, 'end': 71, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Keith Dunn: thank you, mr. chairman, members of the committee. keith craig dunn here for the self-help counties coalition. i'll be very brief and just tell you that the self-help counties coalition, now 24 members throughout the state, save hundreds of millions of dollars utilizing this authority. if you want to look at providing reforms that deliver projects faster, save money, and are good for everyone in the state of california, this is an easy one. i'd ask for your aye vote, happy to answer any questions. thank you.
[{'start': 51, 'end': 67, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melanie Perron: melanie keith perron, legislative director for caltrans. good afternoon, members, chair. we are in strong support of ab28 and express our appreciation to the author for carrying this important legislation. since 2007, we have seen good results with this delegation authority. it has allowed us to deliver projects faster, which then allows us to approve more projects, which ultimately benefits job creation and the economy. as the chairing -- as the author has indicated, that without the ... authority by march 31st, we would have to reapply to the federal administration for this authority, and we would not like to see that happen. so we would request your aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrew Antwih: mr. chairman, members, andrew melanie antwih on behalf of the los angeles county metropolitan transportation authority, and the fresno country transportation authority in support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jonathan Cline: jonathan andrew cline on behalf of the county of san diego in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Steve Walker: Steve Walker on behalf of the Alameda County Transportation Commission and the Napa Valley Transportation Authority in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eugene Erbin: Eugene Erbin, on behalf of American Council of Engineering Companies, support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eric Thronson: eric, on behalf of the california transportation commission, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Caitlin O'Neil: Caitlin O'Neil, Legislative Analyst's Office. Good morning, Madam Chair and Senators. I've been asked to provide you with a brief overview of the recent efforts California has made to reduce its inmate population. You should have a handout called Impact of Recent Criminal Justice Policies on the State Correctional Population. And my presentation has three components. First I'll provide a history of the federal court oversight that has led to the reductions in the inmate population. Second, I'll discuss recent policy changes that have allowed the state to make these reductions. And finally, I'll present a chart to illustrate the size of these reductions. On page one, you'll see an overview of federal court oversight of the state's inmate population. In 1995, a federal court ruled that the states' provision of mental healthcare to inmates was in violation of the 8th Amendment of the US Constitution. This case is now known as Coleman v Brown. Similarly, in 2005 a Federal Court ruled in a case now known as Plata v Brown that the state's provision of medical care to inmates was constitutionally inadequate. In 2006, the plaintiffs in the Coleman and Plata lawsuits filed motions to convene a federal three judge panel, to assess why the state was unable to provide constitutionally adequate care to inmates. In 2009, the panel declared that prison overcrowding was the primary reason why the state was unable to provide adequate care. In 2010, the three judge panel ordered the state to reduce the population of its state owned and operated prisons to 137.5% of their design capacity. And in 2014, the panel ordered the state to develop and implement various population reduction measures, to achieve and maintain compliance with the cap. If you turn to page two, you'll see that the state has used and continues to use various other means in addition to the court-ordered measures, to reach and maintain compliance with the cap. These include housing inmates in contracted facilities, because contracted facilities don't count toward the capped population. And constructing additional capacity in the state-owned and operated prisons to increase their design capacity and therefore, increase the number of inmates that the state is allowed to hold in these facilities under the cap. And finally by enacting several policy changes that have allowed the State to reduce its inmate population. And along with several voter approved measures, I will discuss these policy changes on page three. And specifically, I'm going to talk about five policy changes. The first was the 2011 Realignment, which limited who could be sent to state prison, so instead requiring that certain lower level felons serve their incarceration terms in county jail rather than state prison. It also required that counties rather than the state supervise lower level felons when their released from prison. Second, Proposition 36, which was approved by the voters in 2012, changed California's Three Strikes law to impose a life sentence on a third felony conviction only in cases of serious or violent crimes. It also allowed for re-sentencing of inmates who were serving life sentences under California's Three Strikes law, for a non serious, non violent felony. Third, Proposition 47, which was approved by the voters in 2014, reduced penalties for certain non violent, non serious drug and property crimes and allowed people who were previously convicted of these crimes to apply for re-sentencing. And fourth, as I mentioned, the three judge panel ordered the state in 2014 to implement various population reduction measures. These included expanding inmates' eligibility to reduce their prison terms through credits that inmates earned from good behavior. Creating new parole consideration processes for elderly inmates and non violent second striker inmates, and expanding parole eligibility for medically incapacitated inmates. And the fifth and final population reduction measure I'm going to talk about today is on page 4, and that is Proposition 57 which was passed by the voters in November of 2016. And is expected to allow the state to further reduce its inmate population through expanding inmate eligibility for parole consideration. Increasing the state's authority to reduce inmates' prison terms through credits that inmates earn through good behavior and participating in rehabilitative and educational type programs. And mandating that judges determine whether youth be subject to adult sentences in criminal court. And on page five, you'll see a chart which illustrates how these policy changes have affected the state's correctional population. The shaded portions of the columns show how the inmate and parolee populations have declined since 2011. And the dashed lines show what CDCR estimated these populations would be absent the various population reduction measures. So between 2011 and 2016, the state's inmate population declined by 21%, and the parolee population declined by 52%. Absent the various population reduction measures that took place over this timespan. The inmate and parolee populations were both expected to each be about 34,000 higher than they actually were in 2016. And this concludes my presentation, I'd be happy to take questions at the appropriate time.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1150, 'end': 1157, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1162, 'end': 1167, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Drew Soderborg: drew jonah soderborg, legislative analyst's office. so, the department has taken a sort of preliminary look at the effect of substance use disorder treatment on recidivism rates, but there hasn't been a more widespread evaluation of the effectiveness of the programs they're implementing. i would also note that, while many of the programs that they're implementing are evidence-based, which basically means that, when implemented in other jurisdictions, they've been shown to reduce recidivism and reduce costs. that sort of analysis of programs hasn't been done here. also, while the department is in the process of contracting with results first, it's important to note, results first won't do an evaluation of the way california implements its programs. instead, what they'll do is look at the portfolio of programs that california has. and say, if california got the results that other states have with these programs, what would we expect? but the sort of more empirical question of, in the way california is operating its programs, what result are we in fact getting, is something that generally remains unanswered. though they did take a look at the substance use disorder treatment programs, in a little bit more depth.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert Garcia: thank you, ms. mitchell. my name is robert. i work for the jesuit restorative justice. i'm the assistant executive director and i'm also a formerly incarcerated lifer inmate who did serve 21 years in prison. so, what i wanted to share a little bit, is a story about how prison was like before these recent changes and how it is today. back in 1992, i was 16 years old. i committed a very serious crime for which i was charged as an adult and i was sentenced to 25 years to life. at that point in my life, they've always told me i was never going to get out. and that prison was until i die. so, with no hope, and no inspiration, and no incentive, i believed that. so, i gave my life to the prison culture and i did whatever the biddings were of the prison culture. 10 years later, i started hearing about discussions about people in the general public that wanted to see change. that didn't want to see kids thrown away. for the rest of their lives, that they wanted to see kids who never committed a crime before to give an opportunity to give a second chance and they told me that if i really applied myself i may one day be paroled and just with that little hope and that little motivation. it really inspired something in me to change. when i started hearing about senate bill 9, about changing for our life for the children, i was like you know what, this is real. so i applied myself, i started going to self-help programs, and at that time cbc was making more programs available. i was in a maximum security facility and it was kind of challenging at first, because the overcrowding, they were into housing the gens. first it was double bunks, then it went to triple bunks. then the waiting list for a support group was six months. there was a lot of chaos going on within those facilities. so, the department tried to make enough room available, so we can have our groups, and it was hard, but we managed to do it. then, i started hearing about senate bill 260, and i was really, this is real and the environment, the culture started changing, where now people said, you know what, there is hope for me. i am redeemable, and i can do something better with my life. so, i got involved more. so, i started facilitating groups. at that point i was facilitating about four different groups. anger management, breaking barriers, alternatives to violence, criminals and gang members anonymous and all that was helpful. the environment started changing. the next thing i got involved was jesuit restorative justice. so, i started saying yeah, because this is not a cookie cutter rehabilitation thing, so i was getting all the education and i was learning about the anger, but when i was working with the jesuit community, i started learning about healing, spiritual healing within myself. so, once i had that learning, i started seeing all the errors of my ways and feeling really true remorse for all my actions that i committed with the community outside and in the community inside, for disrupting operations within the prison culture too, and the most defining moment i've seen is when senate bill 260 passed. everybody in that facility was saying, bobby i want to join your groups because you know what? i really want to make a change in my life. so, i sponsored a lot of these men and we delved deep within the core issues. the criminal activity was one thing, but what caused it? so we started getting to the root of the problem. what caused your destruction to hurt a lot of people? victimize the community. so in 2014, i was granted parole by the board of prison terms and i was given a second opportunity. since that second opportunity, i said what can do to give back, i need to give back. so, i started getting involved with that risk youth, i joined the jesult restorative justice, i started going into the juvenile wall, and then we asked if he would entertain the thought of me going inside the prisons again as i mentor, to help in the retreats to show that change is possible, and i was granted that access, i go to four different prisons, twice a month, and i work there with the man showing them that change is possible. i'm not longer the inmate in blues, i'm actually a citizen who's out here dressed normal trying to change is possible. i also thank cc for like investing, because i was even struck in the back when they had a summit meeting in sacramento to find ways to help the population. so, i'm sitting there with another former lifer, with 10, 11 different wardens, and i told him, my colleague from work. i said, would you ever think that we would be here today? you know what? we've gotta share this with the prison community that people are really invested and that has worked wonders. every time i go into these places, we're performing graduations, we're giving certificates. i said, would you ever think that we would be here today? you know what? we've gotta share this with the prison community that people are really invested. and that has worked wonders. every time i go into these places, we're performing graduations, we're giving certificates. so, i provide them like with arc, and other organizations, we send them to where they need to go, and they provide housing and they help them out. so, my story is to be an example that change is possible. rehabilitative programs do work. i'm very grateful. i'm a father. i'm going to cal state, dominguez hills to get my bachelor's in psychology and i'm giving back to the community and i just want to share that, thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 23, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 36, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 3154, 'end': 3159, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Therese Labersh: my name therese drew labersh, and i am affiliated with arc. i was arrested when i was 18 years old, and i served a little over 20 years in prison. i recently paroled in march of 2015 from ciw for, thank you, the worst mistake that ever happened, and i used to look forward to walking into a room. not introducing myself that way, until i realized that the worst thing i've ever done in my life was the most important thing that could open doors like this and to bring the recognition needed to those of us who are paroling, and i am a minority, not because i am a white woman who lives in san diego, because i am the largest growing population of people being released. female ex-life term prisoners, we are a greatly underserved population. 33, 34 prisons in california and we have 3. the worst thing i've ever done has been a very defining moment, and i have learned the meaning of true remorse. not in the beginning, in the beginning i had family members and everybody who knew me saying look, poor you, and i believed that for a while, until my ability to change clicked. programming, going into groups, i had no idea what that was, no need at 18. there was no tunnel, much less a light at the end of it, to go into a group and have somebody tell me, take responsibility for yourself. i don't know one adult 18 year old, much less anybody else. so to be able to do that, and to have the ability afforded to me by a program inside of prison where i was taught that has been exponentially advantageous. it did not happen overnight, it took me not wanting to be angry and feel such despair in such a lonely isolating place, but it took me wanting that for myself. people say all the time, where is your rock bottom? when is enough enough? i found that in myself and wanted change and sought it out, diligently sought it out. it was not just given to me and handed to me. there are seeking abilities that people must strive for. not everybody who goes into prison gets the r. while i was in there i became cadc certified drug and alcohol counselors, cadc ii. i was involved with a lot of the programs that help people not recidivate. lifers coming back into the community are less than 1% of the population that will ever go back to prison where the minor offenses, if you will, are 70% recidivism rates, insane. since then, coming home, reintroducing myself and other people into society, i have had the ability to work with the anti-recidivism coalition, and help other people do that. i needed handholding after 20 years. never worked a cell phone, walked into a walmart and never saw a wall. i have had the ability to go and help other people experience that. i did handholding that i needed that wasn't there upon release. that i wasn't prepared for inside to come home and in having the ability to do that, i have spoken at numerous colleges to criminology students in their third and fourth years, humanizing the fact that crime is not on paper. crime is a person, victims are people, both sides of that coin suffer. some far less. the families that do the time with us are in need of just as much counseling and support as the people who have been the victims and the people inside do not create more victims upon release and the programming that i received was more than beneficial to that. i learned that inside, but continuing to learn that outside with people is the most beneficial. i currently go back into ciw monthly with parole and i help run and facilitate a group for female life term prisoners currently serving their sentences. every month i go in, and the amount of hope that is brought for that is unbelievable. when i was incarcerated, this program that i speak of, it was the freedom to choose program, they're a current nonprofit. i saw my first female life term offender, come back into prison, and i looked at her and i said, that will be me and my life changed, and now that is me. i have the opportunity even if it's to bring a spark of the hope that i received that day and seen her and i'd known her for years inside. to have that ability, to do that, to work with parole, i get to bridge, i get to be the catalyst between parole and currently serving populations. there are questions that only parole and somebody who has been in a life term position can answer and i can't ask somebody who's done three years who continues to go in and out of prison because their parole is different than mine. i do not have the same responsibility to the public that i believe they are lacking, i have a greater one. the things that i do today, i go and i speak to 96th percentile schools and these at risk children, i teach them about the choices they make. i am a shining example of that for them, and not because i'm white, and they are typically african-american and hispanic, but because i'm relatable, because i have been there, and because it could happen to them. and i could be your sister, your daughter, your cousin, your neighbor. it happens, unfortunately, and fortunately and unfortunately i will always have a skill thank you to cdc because there will always be addiction and the need for the help with that. there will always be the abuse, the abuse of power, the abuse of victims, and victims don't ask to be victims. they are created by ill-informed people, ill-prepared people, and i have had an amazing opportunity afforded to me by the state and in what i am doing now, and thank you arc for helping support my dreams. while i was inside i was mandated by the parole board to work with at risk youth, really? a felon, a murderer, going into work with children on purpose? thank you for making my life easier because that was my intention the entire time. thank you for your time and i welcome any questions. thank you very much, we're going to hold questions until the entire panel is finished. thank you very much and mr. mendoza.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 5863, 'end': 5870, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
George Luna: Good morning, let me begin by saying, what an honor it is to be here today. Thank you and I greatly appreciate this opportunity to speak before you. My name is George Luna and I'm Elite Facilitator for the Group Training Institute for Mr. Jack Rodon of the Inside Out organization. I am presently teaching the curriculum in three separate prisons, DVI, Mule Creek and Avenal State Prison. Yes, I am a formerly incarcerated man. Someone who over the past 25 years was a consumer of the services provided by CDCR. I was a man who was doing a life term on the installment plan, as they say. And yet, if I had not awoken and had not changed my belief system, I would have been sent back and picked up a life term already. The group teachers I received from Mr. Rodon, I credit for saving my life and I truly believe that from the bottom of my heart. Before I go any further, I have to do this. I understand that there have been victims present before this Committee in the past within this chamber, but there's no victims on our panels today. So I'd like to take this moment and invoke the presence as we work with many of them at the program, I'd like to take this moment to personally apologize to anyone in this room, to anyone on the Committee and anyone in the crowd who was ever been on the receiving into violence or has known anybody who has to endure a violent act. I want to apologize to each and everyone of you though, I'm not your offender, I was a violent man. And for that, I am very sorry. I am deeply sorry for any type of pain or scars that any trauma might have left behind. These things should never have happened to you. And today, I want to apologize to you. I had a very violent upbringing. And since violence is taught, I was a good student on that subject. I have stolen. I have robbed. I have home invaded. I have used and dealt drugs. I have been shot at. I have numerous attempted stabbings upon me and I have participated in the same types of acts, sorry to say. Some of the violence I speak of was even done against me by my own siblings. I come from a very dysfunctional and rough background, and that background I speak of became unfortunately my foreground, and my reality. Pain and violence was rampant, and it was the norm in my environment. I started getting locked up at the age of 10 or 12 and that led to arrests ultimately repeated prison terms. Today, there is no justifying my behavior. As I look back upon my past, I now realize and understand where my violence came from. I had no right to hurt others. It was until I did my work that I learn how to prevent my past to become someone else future and the group program,we have a same that goes, hurt people, hurt people. Yet as well, we say, heal people, heal people, heal people, heal people. Due to the fact that I have stared down my demons and sat in that fire, I am a healed man today and that man is no longer an offender. He is now a servant, a servant of good. That man now works pastorally of helping others, so they too can heal themselves and then pass it on to others. I come from a small farming community near central coast. I'm from Orange, California where I grew up in the movement with Cesar Chavez in The United Farm Workers. My father was one of the Cesar's main organizers. Even though my beginnings come from a movement of that preached non violence, I unfortunately became a very, very violent man. We recently had the discussion in my socially and conflict resolution classes and I understand exactly now where my violence comes from and the determining factors that weigh in on that environment, but I don't only apologize. I now give back to the places I took from in my community. I am a change agent now. Teaching what I've Learned to [INAUDIBLE] so many brothers and sisters that are still incarcerated, and also by reaching out toour youth to prevent more victimization, and incarceration. I would like to take this opportunity to address these steps. We all roll up our sleeves and work down in the trenches to deliver programs that are making the urgent case of evidence-based rehabilitation programs to be the cornerstone, the cornerstone of how corrections is done in California and not a marginal activity as it still is presently. Much of the progress that has been done is due and thanks to the funds earmarked by the Legislator. For the first time in decades, a bundle of volunteer organizations is now increasing rehabilitation services for the 130,000 men and women residing in our state prisons. We must do and we can do that outsourcing of critical element of public safety to be largely in the hands of groups of volunteers. Look, we're in the same business, preventing re-victimization, no less. The program that it worked for GRIP, Guiding Rage Into Power is the year long comprehensive offender accountability program of which over the past five years had 65 of our first 300 graduates, most of them violent offenders released from prison logic to the parole board. 0% of them have returned to prison. Let me say it again, 0% have returned to prison. At an annual cost of over $6,000 per year, that is a set tax dollar saving of almost $4 million each year, all while improving public safety. We have to understand that 95% of prisoners will be released to somebody's neighborhood. So, the question is how do you want them to come back and return? Now, let's increase the possibilities for those that are young when they came to prison. Let us also focus on these three topics. We need to commit to a serious increase of funds or programming. Two, deeply invest a true culture change in the department, so that everyone working there is trained to be proud of being pro-programmed. Three, we need to make available research funds to measure the program to show that it works. Now, today's either going to be an interesting afternoon at the capital building or a memorable hallmark of how we advanced the cause of public safety by supporting qualified professional prison program providers. The time has arrived for us for fully to take this task on. We propose that the legislative compose and action prevented designs win, win solutions. A Committee that includes us and fellow prison program providers. Before closing today, I would like you all to know something. I like who I am today. I truly do and I know that I have value, and worth, and I have a passion to give back now. And as crazy as this sounds, when I was an offender, I chased the crazy life with everything I had. And today with that same determination, I am just as passionately committed to be of service and to give back and to make a difference in the world. God, he has said, be the change in the world that you want to see change in the world. So, that's what I am. I'd now live by a model of which I don't get mad, I get motivated and I will continue to do the work they love for dearly and that work is to be an inspiration and example that others can follow and emulate. I just want to be part of the solution and express my love instead of my violence. I am a father of three and grandfather of eight. Excuse me, and the ultimate goal is to create a better society for mine, yours and all our children to grow up in. While it hasn't meant to me, it has meant a world to be here today. I once came here years ago when I caught my first view of the capitol building through the eyes of a snot nosed little kid. Witnessing history being made while marching along with my parents in [INAUDIBLE] Chavez, being led in a sea of red upon these grounds. Now I have the opportunity to speak within the walls of this great facility. I truly am pleasured and I consider it grateful for this opportunity. At my college, Dr. Ortiega taught me about governance and how to find my voice. Professor Vasan says, don't hesitate, communicate. Professor Jack Paloni who truly inspired me to be myself, just to be me and Professor Maringer, who always tells me, you still with me to which I always answer yes ma'am. So when I speak here today, they stand beside me along with Mr. Verdun and hundreds of GRIP students, tribe members and facilitators who have participated. And as well, the 130,000 state prisoners and the victims of both their families, I represent and speak for all of them today. As I thank you for hearing me today, I pray that in the future, I will be again thanking you for taking the actions that are needed. Thank you and it's been an honor to be here today.
[{'start': 160, 'end': 171, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 239, 'end': 249, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 757, 'end': 762, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3193, 'end': 3205, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7503, 'end': 7509, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7723, 'end': 7730, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7794, 'end': 7799, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7845, 'end': 7856, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7921, 'end': 7929, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8070, 'end': 8076, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Craig Watson: Very briefly, Craig Watson, Director of the California Arts Council, we are proud partners with Scott Kern and his CDCR. These last comments about research, I want you to be aware that Indeed is part of our interagency agreement. We're developing long term evidence space tracking systems to get at this question, to help answer these questions, that you legitimately have, working with UC Irvine, well known researchers in the field. And some more to come on that. But thank you for your support in all of this.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 96, 'end': 106, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dawn Koepke: Good afternoon, Madame Chair and members, Dawn Koepke with Mchugh, Koepke, and Associates here today. Actually, before you on behalf of three different clients. Slightly different issues. Crime Victims United of California. Starting with Crime Victims United, certainly appreciate the comments to today with regard to victims, and support for victims, definitely appreciate that and look forward to being more involved in the discussion going forward as part of the sub-committee process. Just would want to note a couple of things on their behalf. Found they are supportive of evidence based rehabilitation programs. And really have been talking a lot more the last couple of years about focusing more on a wrap around service, really intensive services. Both inside the facility and outside. We've met with the secretary on a few occasions to talk about re-entry programs and models that we feel very strongly work very well. That really focus on those wrap around services. And also have a measure of accountability attached to them for that particular individual whether it be in terms of accountability to their actual programming, and not just being in a position where they're just checking the box to gain the benefit of that for parole. But really actually investing that and we appreciated the comments of the panelists today who really have demonstrated that that is possible, to take that accountability for themselves to their victims and to the benefits that the policies that have changed Recently will provide for them. We would also, that said, just note that we are concerns just generally in terms of the policy discussions and debates, whether it be here in the capitol or at the ballot box, just a lack of discussion in more significant way about victim's impacts. Not all victims are created equal in terms of how they approach their victimization. I think that that's a really important thing to highlight. And so we really just would encourage the full Budget Committee, and certainly the Subcommittee that will review these in greater detail, to take that into account and certainly consider that. Specific to a couple of budget items we would note that the Governor's Budget does propose cuts to the victim witness assistance program grants. And that's of great concern. That provides a lot of wraparound services, intensive services, comprehensive services, for victims. And so we would just place a placeholder with the Committee on that particular piece, as well as other things around ending funding for the Internet crimes against children untasked forces, which is of great concern as well. And we'll certain follow up on other items, as well. And, in terms of the other two clients, just wanted to briefly mention we also represent the child abuse prevention center. It's an organization here, in Sacramento area umbrella organization, working with child abuse prevention councils in this state and family resource centers. They over the last number of years since realignment have seen an increase in terms of the individuals or families they're serving who have incarceration in their history. They've been doing some great work in that space and so to the comment about looking upstream a little bit more around prevention both for the end result and dealing with and helping those families that are struggling with, incarcerated family members. But also on the front end to avoid the victimization that some of the panelists perhaps alluded to today on the early side of life with child abuse and neglect. And so, we would also put a plug in to the subcommittees for additional look at child abuse and neglect prevention funding to kind of help to deal with some of those issues in a very proactive way. There's a lot of great work being done in that space. And then, finally, just with regard to the education component of this. We represent the California Council for Adult Education as well as the California Adult Education Administrators Association who are also working more collaboratively with CDCR on and their Superintendent for correctional education, Dr. Brant Chote, on working more collaboratively with the K12 adult education system and providing wrap around education services. Basic skills as well as short term career training for those that are coming back into communities. Again, though, I think overlying all of these clients' interests comes down to funding and the ability to make sure the programs put into place are certainly including a measure of accountability. But also providing funding so that there's that access. Madam Chair I'd like to thank you for your indulgence over the minute and I appreciate working with you all as we move forward this year. Thank you.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 59, 'end': 65, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 67, 'end': 73, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4104, 'end': 4115, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sabra Williams: I want to say something publicly because I think the public have often a misunderstanding. Please identify yourself. My name is Sabra Williams. I'm the Director of the Actors Gang Prison Project and directive engagement of the Actors Gang. I'm also a constituent. Very quickly I just wanted to say that everything is based around recidivism, right, the budget, the programming, and yet there's still not a definition of what recidivism actually means. And if we are talking about recidivism, people who commit murder less than 1% ever go back to prison again. And as was stated earlier, people with so-called non-violent crimes are the highest recidivists. So I really feel that this is something we don't talk enough about. And we muddle everything around. So, I would really like to ask our amazing Senators to please have this discussion. Please try to come up with a definition of what recidivism means because between the Attorney General's Office and the Senate, there is a disagreement as to what recidivism is. And how can we move forward in a Budget Committee or making legislation when we don't know what it is?
[{'start': 128, 'end': 142, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jacques Fredarin: my name is jacques therese fredarin. i'm the director of the great program. i want to thank the senators for having this hearing. i think it's important. also, this is the moment in the day where you go what do we go home with? and so, i'd like to ask the secretary, we could form an action committee that addresses three things. one, to see how we could make rehabilitation even more the cornerstone of how corrections is done in california, including investing more funds into it. two, to look at what can be done research wise. i know office of research is not staffed very largely. clearly it has been said by almost everybody here that we need better data. and to really get into gear about we can't just plunk programs into these prisons without creating some culture change. and so we formed an association, a bunch of us prison program providers, and i would love to sit with you around the table and work together for win-win solutions.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dan Kaplan: Dan Kaplan with the Legislative Analyst's Office. We've been asked to come here today to provide an overview of the state school facility program, how districts go about applying for funding in that program. And then provide an overview of some of the shortcomings with the current model. And then some issues for considerations as the Legislature begins to think about how to revamp the current school facility program. You should all be receiving a copy of the handout I'll be referring to throughout the presentation, called Overview of School Facilities Program. So to start with, one page one, you'll see a background of the school facility program, which was established by the Green Act of 1998. And what the Green Act really establishes is a cost-sharing arrangement between the state and local districts. Prior to 2016, the state has issued about $36 billion worth of funding for K12 school facility projects. However, it exhausted funding by 2012. As was mentioned earlier, Prop 51 was passed in November which provides an additional $7 billion for K12 facilities funding. Turning to page two of the handout you'll see a flowchart that describes the overview of the state school facility review process. And I want to highlight that this just covers the state's role. There's also a rather extensive role that local districts engage in before they even come to the state seeking funding. We break it up into three broad categories. The first is the process for obtaining approval of the site or the land that they plan to build on. The second is the actual design of the building and then the third is how they actually obtain the funding. To first jump into the site approval process, district's first go to the Department of Toxic Substances Control, which conducts a review of the plot of land to ensure that it's not contaminated. Assuming DTSC gives its approval, districts then move to the California Department of Education, which conducts a review to ensure that the plot of land is appropriate for a school. So this is typically a review to ensure that the plot of land is safe. We are looking to make sure it's a minimum distance from high voltage power lines, from airport runways, and a number of other factors. Assuming the Department of Education gives its approval, we then move into the the design approval process. And it's most efficient for a district to do dual track applications through both the State Architect as well as the Department of Education. The State Architect has the team of engineers which are reviewing the project, ensuring that it's structurally sound. While the Department of Education are reviewing the plans to make sure they comply with minimum standards for school facilities that we have in the state. Such as our classrooms of a minimum size, our science rooms equipped with the basic amount of equipment. Moving forward to the funding model, assuming that both the Division of State Architect, as well as the Department of Education, give their approvals, districts then go to the Office of Public School Construction, which determines both funding eligibility and the size of the grant that districts are eligible for. The OPSC conducts its review and makes a recommendation to the State Allocation Board, which is the body that formally votes on the project and votes to approve funding for the project. At that point, the district actually receives state funding and may proceed with the project. Turning to page three, you'll see a table of the median lengths of time that it takes each of these agencies to review projects. We highlight the three key agencies, being the Division of the State Architect, the Office of Public School Instruction, and the Department of Education. Just to point out a few findings here. We can see that processing times really vary by both project type, being new construction or modernization, as well as the agency conducting the review. What's not shown on the table, but we have seen through data from each of the agencies, is that larger projects tend to take additional time to review than smaller projects. For example, at the Division of State Architect, on average it can take about 100 days longer to approve a project that's over $5 million than a project under $1 million. All agencies we've spoken with have cited concerns with the role that districts play in the approval process. As they're conducting their reviews they might find deficiencies with the applications to which they'll need additional information from districts, which can take additional time. While all agencies have cited these concerns, only the Division of State Architect formally tracks this amount of time. And they find that for projects that are over $5 million, about half of the review time is associated with waiting for districts to respond to requests for additional information. Moving on to page four, we highlight some of the shortcomings with the approval process. And what I've hopefully conveyed is that the Green Act really establishes a fragmented review system, which can be rather confusing for districts to navigate, as they must submit applications to several different agencies. Our review also found that the state does not have any mandated timelines for each of these agencies to complete their reviews. Now there can be a number of different reasons why reviews take as long as they do. But some of the factors that we've found have been potentially insufficient staffing levels of agencies. The fact that the scope of projects that districts submit to the state can change throughout the review process. Basically, we can add classrooms to a site, remove classrooms, all of which might require further review. And there can also be delays with the architectural consultants that districts work for. Basically, these consultants have several different clients, one of which is the district. So the extent to which they need further work, there might be some delays. All these delays, however, can have some real consequences. It can mean that districts have to continue to use outdated buildings or else temporary classrooms or portables. It can also have real cost implications. For instance, in 2016, we found that construction costs statewide have increased four and a half percent. So the extent to which that the applications are tied up in state review process, we see that cost can increase on a daily basis. So taking all these factors into account as the Legislature begins to think about modifications to the current program, we would like to offer a few issues for consideration. Which you see on the final page of our handout. When it comes to streamlining the review process, we ask does it make sense to designate a lead a agency for school districts to work with such that they'll have a primary point of contact? Or does it make sense to have a common application such that they don't need to submit applications to each individual agency. If the state is interested in reducing the length of the actual review process, we ask, are there ways for agencies to operate more efficiently? Are the current staffing levels appropriate at each of the different agencies? Another way we could potentially streamline the review process would be to potentially modify regulations. But we ask, what are the tradeoffs of doing so? The extent to which we potentially reduce the requirements of building code might have some safety implications. When it comes to the district level, we ask, how can the state better prepare districts or better work with districts up front to submit more complete applications, so there's less delays? As agencies have to go back to districts for follow-up information. We also have found that while some agencies collect robust data on how long it takes to complete each phase of their internal review process, many do not. So it is possible for the state to collect better data so we can see where within each of these agencies are the delays occurring. Finally, the question that we want to pose to the Legislature is should the state potentially set some sort of formalized expectations as far as how long each of these reviews should take? And with that I conclude my presentation, and I'm happy to answer any questions.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Golaszewski: and, i would- i'll just add, paul jonah golaszewski from the lao. there have been other studies of ways to streamline the process. so for instance, i know a number of years ago, and i think it might have been even more than 10 years ago. the little hoover commission looked at ways to streamline the administrative process of the program. so it has been reviewed at some points in the past, just not within the recent past, since the state didn't have any money for the program.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 249, 'end': 255, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Juan Morales: Good afternoon, Mister chair, Mister Vice Chair, Members of the Committee. Again, my name is Juan Morales, I'm the Director of the school facilities and transportation services division at the California Department of Education. It's a privilege to be here today to provide you a brief overview of our role in the School Facilities Program. I wanted to start off by sharing our vision for public schools facilities. We, the Department of Education, envision school facilities that enhance the achievement of all students. That they are safe, learner-centered, sustainable, and centers for the community. And this is what we keep in mind when we fulfill our role in this process. Now the law requires us to review school sites and to provide the school district's governing board a list of recommendations in order of merit as they relate to education, safety, traffic and conformance to the general plan. We are also charged with the responsibility to develop school sites election standards that are used by school districts in order to meet the objectives in statute. Furthermore, the law also requires us to establish standards for school districts to use to ensure that schools are designed to be educationally appropriate and to promote safety. The standards that we developed are part of the Title 5 regulations. And I'll be speaking more about that during my presentation. Now, the school sites election and acquisition process is a combined local and state process. In fact, the state's role is quite limited as most of the time during the process is spent at the local level. There are other statutes that outline the process that school districts have to go through. For example, education code section 17211 requires school districts to hold a public hearing and approve sites that are consistent with our Title 5 standards. Education code section 17212 specifies that school districts will select sites by validating all factors that affect public safety and not just based on cost. It's important to note that all school districts must select sites that are consistent with Title 5 standards. They must also meet California Environmental Quality Act requirements. School districts are the lead agency when it comes to this process. And they must meet other applicable laws. And there are many other local laws that they have to meet. I'm not going to go through the list in the interest of time. But there's also required communication between the school districts and other city and county agencies, such as the county planners. All of these requirements are outside of jurisdiction. However, if the school districts are requesting state funding, then the law requires them to receive our approval for site and plans. And they must also receive the site approval from the Department of Toxic Substances Control. Some of the requirements currently a part of the Title 5 regulations that we use for these sites include things like Mr. Caplan mentioned earlier in terms of requiring additional analysis if school sites are within a certain proximity of pipelines, railroads, power lines. And the idea here is that Title 5 regulations steer districts away from school sites that may pose a risk to the students, to the staff, and to the campus users. We also review the site size and shapes, and the compatibility of surrounding land uses. And just to give you an idea, as a general rule of thumb site sizes are 10 acres for a 600 student elementary. 20 acres for a 900 student middle school and 40 acres for a 2,000 student high school. Now, by no means are these requirements or are they minimums. This is just to give you an idea of the general site sizes. On slide nine and part of your packet we have a very high level flowchart of site of approval process for the state funded projects. The first step is evaluating the need to build a school. Many school districts use a Facilities Master Plan. The Facilities Master Plan often includes enrollment projections. They include an inventory of existing classrooms. They assess the condition of the existing classrooms. And sometimes they include prioritization of projects. Unfortunately, a lot of school districts don't use Facilities Master Plan. And this is something that we're taking a close look at to see if we can provide additional technical assistance for the school districts. As we believe that it's a necessary tool in planning in order to be able to make wise, multi-million dollar capital investments. There are many other factors that districts consider such as community growth, land availability. But once the district determines that they do need a new school, then they identify potential sites for my staff to review. We then review all school sites using our standards. And we rate them in order of merit. The school district then identifies the preferred site and they complete any other required studies. Such as proximity to railroads, that we mentioned earlier. And they also need to get the approval from the Department of Toxic Substances Control. School districts then obtain a governing board approval and they forward a packet to our offices for final approval. Once our approval is granted, then they use a letter to go along with the other funding requirements, to submit a funding request to the office of public school construction. Again, I want to highlight that the Department of Education does not identify or select sites. We review and rank sites for compliance with law and regulations. The new school plan approval process is somewhat similar. School districts may still be required to obtain other agency approvals such as DTSC and CEQA approvals unless it's a minor addition, eligible for certain exemptions. However, if districts are pursuing state funding, then they do have to submit their plans to us for approval. And when we do review plans, there are several areas that we review such as classroom size. This is an area that we're looking at very closely to take a look at to see if we need to update this definition since today's educational space differs from the traditional classroom design of yesterday. And I'll speak more about this a little later in my presentation. But we also make sure that the adequate support facilities are included in the plans, such as libraries, fields, and multi-purpose rooms. On slide 12 there's another flow chart that outlines a new school plan approval process. In this case, school districts usually begin by developing their educational specifications. The process for additions to an existing school or a monitorization project they typically don't require an educational specification. Then they submit the preliminary plans to my division for review to ensure that they're consistent with Title 5 standards. Oftentimes we'll provide comments and the districts respond to those comments. And then they submit the plans for our final approval. And again just like site approvals, school districts must obtain our approvals before they can submit a fund request to the office of public school construction. Finally I wanted to highlight a couple of initiatives that we're currently executing. The first one is in the area of sustainability. The department administers the state's green ribbon schools program that recognizes school districts that excel in three main areas or pillars as they're called. The first is that they reduce the environmental impact and cost, the second is that they promote the student health and wellness, and the third is that they provide environmental education. Each year school districts submit applications to us and we review and score them. The top five schools or districts are then nominated for federal recognition at the US Department of Education. And the remaining schools or districts that score above 55% receive either a gold, silver or bronze recognition from the State. Another initiative is our review of Title 5 regulations that we talked a little about earlier. The regulations, as the state Superintendent mentioned, they have not been updated since 2000. And we all know that there's been a lot of changes since then to our education. We started accepting input in October from all stakeholders. We're going to continue to receive inputs till the end of this month. And then we're going to take that input and analyze and develop a proposal for the state board of education consideration. We invite anybody to provide us input on how we can improve Title 5 regulations. And again, this includes our site selection process and plan review process. And lastly, I just wanted to highlight what the school superintention mentioned earlier, we have started reaching out to the small school districts in an effort to provide them assistance with their facility needs. And again, we recognize that a lot of the small school districts, they don't have the same resources that the larger school districts have, so we want to be able to try and provide them any assistance that will allow them to access the state bond funds. Both the Division of State Architect and the Office of Public School Construction will be joining us in this effort. We look forward to working with them to help the small school district community. That concludes my presentation, I'll be happy to answer any questions.
[{'start': 93, 'end': 105, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2947, 'end': 2953, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lisa Silverman: Thank you. Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today, Mr. Chair and Vice Chair of the Committee, and remaining Members of the Committee. I'm Lisa Silverman. I'm the Executive Officer of the Office of Public School Construction and the State Allocation Board. And with me here is Barbara Kampmeinert. She's my colleague here and she's a deputy executive officer for the Office of Public School Construction. The office does manage the program on behalf of the state education board, but it also administers a program on the behalf of [UNKNOWN] Services. As you know, the school facility program that was shared earlier, it's a match program. And so the locals have the ability to participate contingent on a match. This program actually is designed to provide the district the most flexibility as far as how they use their funding. But it's also up to the districts on how they prioritize those funding needs as well at the local level. We did provide you some charts as part of our packet. And to share with you that out of the $34 billion allocated, we had actually provided over 3,600 projects and we built 51,000 new classrooms. That represents $18 billion in new construction that has been allocated since 1998. As well over $11 billion have been awarded for modernization projects and that equate to a 134,000 classrooms that also have been modernized through the program. As far as career tech education, we also provide some handouts with that, just to share with you that $469 million have been awarded for projects. And charter program allocations have amounted to $960 million in awards. You have seen highlights as far as what the program has funded out of voter approved initiatives since 1998. And that was part of your handouts as well, but we want to give you an update as to where we're at with the program. As you know, Proposition 51 did allocate $7 billion for the School Facilities Program, but we also have remaining bond authority. $121 million remain from the prior bond initiatives and that breakdown is $58 million in the Seismic Mitigation Program funds. And we have over $31 million in existing charter funds and $14 million in the Overcrowding Relief Grant Program. And $10 million in new construction, $5.7 million in modernization. And equally $900,000 in each of the buckets for career tech education and hardship funds. As you know, there's six active programs which are new construction. Modernization, facility hardship, seismic mitigation program, charter schools, and career tech education. But we want to highlight, I know it hasn't been touched on, is about the list that we have. So, just to give you some background, the program did establish three lists. And one of the lists is called the unfunded list, which is lack AB55 loans. This represents projects that have already been approved and have a bond allocation provided. So the application for funding has been processed by our office and again has been approved by a state allocation board. And the purpose of this list is to summarize as far as cash needs for the program. So we have provided those allocations as far as the awards are sitting out there. So as of December 2016, there's $63 million and 18 projects that are waiting for bond proceeds to be sold. And the second item we want to share is the second list. We have what we call the unfunded list. And unfunded list represents a project that came through our office prior to October 31st, 2012. At that time, we realized we were running out of bond authority. And so the board had regulations in place to process applications. So the board did change the regulations. So prior to that, the board accepted these applications in the new construction and modernization program. And with that, we have 26 projects in the new construction program that represents $178 million that have been processed. And these projects, again, we're waiting for bond authority. And we have 103 projects in the monetization program. That's nearly $190 million. Again, these projects were accepted and processed and so these projects are waiting for bond authority. The last list we wanted to share with you is to acknowledge that after November 1st, 2012, the board did move forward with changing regulations to establish this list. And this is what we call the acknowledged list. So as of December 31st, 2016, we have nearly 259 projects that represent over $1.3 billion in new construction funding application requests. Also, we have 383 projects representing over $683 million in modernization funding applications requests. Again, the purpose of this list was just to acknowledge that, again, we do have projects that were waiting for bond authority. And again, there was no committment at the time that the projects were submitted that they would be bond authority in the future. Again, they had to have the approvals in place from the Department of Education and also have the proper approvals in place from the division of State Architect. The one thing we did want to share with you is, I know the process of the funding has been explained to you by several different individuals. But again, we should highlight to you that the system we have in place is really designed for construction ready projects. So once the board has approved the funding application, again these projects are waiting for bond proceeds. So there's two sales that happened in spring and the fall and again our program does receive those bond sales. And we were able to allocate funding to those projects. I also wanted to highlight that we also do have other applications that don't go through the normal process of having a division State Architect approval and The Department of Education approval. The Career Tech Education Program and the Charter School Facilities Program, they can submit their approvals at a later date. So there's one differentiation from the funding process as it was explained earlier. So with that, I'll switch it over to Barbara Campmeyer. She can answer any
[{'start': 153, 'end': 167, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 291, 'end': 310, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5980, 'end': 5997, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jeff Bell: good afternoon, mr. chair and members, i'm bell from the department of finance. i'm joined by my colleague, chris ferguson, here. thanks for the opportunity to present before you today.  we'll have some opening remarks and then be available if any question you may have. of course, with the passage of prop 51, there's going to be additional resource that i will announce for civil construction. as you probably saw with the opening in our a pages, when we address school facilities, i think some of the things that we're thinking about in terms of additional accountability measures. those are some of the concerns that i think we want to make sure are in place. as these additional resources go forward, we have some grant agreements we're thinking about developing over the spring. followed by some additional requirements that we would like to put into the audit guide. going into the next several years, so that folks will have those accountability measures that we think that the voters would want in place as these additional resources are spent in their communities. chris will be providing additional details surrounding those efforts. chris?
[{'start': 43, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 108, 'end': 122, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1074, 'end': 1079, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1144, 'end': 1149, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Chris Ferguson: chairman, chris paul ferguson with the department of finance. over the past several years the administration has noted a number of concerns with the school facility's program. ranging from the complexity of the program to the first in first out nature advantaging more sophisticated districts in accessing available school bond funds. subsequent to that, proposition 51 has passed, which provides $7 billion for k through 12 school construction. proposition 51 also included two particular caveats, and that is it restricted the program to the statutory language that was in place for the leroy greene school facilities act as january 1st, 2015. which really hampers the ability of the state to address some of the noted concerns with the program. it also froze developer fees in place until december 31st, 2020, or until all of the bond funds are exhausted. so, the developer piece statues were held in place as well. subsequently, or just prior to the passage of proposition 51, the office of state audits and evaluations noted some deficiencies in the school facilities program in an audit that they undertook. in particular, they noted that there were roughly $3 billion in proposition 1-d school construction projects that went un-audited. they noted that there were roughly $3 million in ineligible expenditures found in some of the construction projects that were funded through the school facilities program. these ineligible expenditures ranged from cleaning supplies to the purchase of vehicles and trucks. then we get to the 2017-18 governor's budget, and i think what the budget summary lays out is that the administration expects the development of grant agreements. which will make it much more clear for districts that are participating in the school facilities program. what the expectations of the program are, what the eligible expenditures are, what the state will be looking for in terms of backend audits with the k-12 school facilities through the k-12 audit guide process. so that we're very upfront and transparent with how the program works, what the expectations are. certainly, at the january state allocation board meeting we appreciated the swift action of the members of the board in directing staff to come back quickly with a grant agreement that would be transparent and help districts understand. what the requirements of the program are and the expectations of the program are. i think, with that, we viewed the grant agreement and using the existing k-12 audit guide process as streamlining measures because it makes it much more transparent for districts. it also utilizes an existing audit model. that is used an independent audit model that is used for school districts on the fiscal side of their house today. then, we would also note that we are certainly open to any conversation to address the administration's concerns with the program within the context of the proposition 51 restrictions. but we don't have any specific proposals as to how we would address those concerns at this time.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jenny Hannah: Yes, I'm Chair of Cash. Thank you. Thank you very much. I appreciate the invitation to speak to you today, chair and Members of the Committee. My name is Jenny Hannah. I am the current Chair of the Coalition for Adequate School Housing. We represent a good portion of the school districts across California as well as the industry of school construction, planning, design, the whole picture. And what you heard today, and I don't know if your eyes were glazing over about our review of the program, but that's about as concise an overview as I've heard in a very long time. And in this process Is a lot of work and the folks who are sitting here are all practitioners in this process, I am. I just recently left a County Office of Education, and I represented many small rural school districts in the Central Valley. So I know directly how those types of districts benefit from these state school dollars. And possibly making some recommendations to make that a little easier access for those districts as well as a more global view of what could happen for all school districts in the State of California. As you know Cash was a proponent for Prop 51, and the reason that we were is we believe this state School Facilities Program works. We believe it has been quite successful over the years since the first inception SB 50 there has been a lot of regulatory changes that have moved the program in a direction that while many things have been good and necessary, some things have added regulation and layers of redundancy. And things of that nature that we believe could be changed administratively. It's important to underscore the concepts identify that I'm going to talk about We believe do not require legislation. And some will necessitate a change in how state agencies process the filing and management of applications, while others will require a change in regulations adopted by the state allocation board. One of the things that I, as was stated in previous testimony and I promise I won't be too redundant but, as a practitioner I can say that cash and also from my personal experience we believe that collaboration between the big 3 CDE or PSC and DSA is paramount to the success of streamlining this process for school facilities people and school districts in California. DSA's done a wonderful job with the box. I understand CDE is adopting that methodology Technology. The technology that we have today that can allow for a streamlining of the application process. So I, as a district, am not submitting the same information to three different agencies for a similar redundant review, would be really important. It is also a recommendation of proposal from CASH that we'd like to see some support for districts that are new to the program, not just small school districts. There are many districts who have not had growth. Until recently or not had a project age in to modernization. And we've all seen in the recession, our industry sort of evaporate. Our technical people, our people with experience have gone and found other careers. And so there's a big learning curve in this program. We want to see some Agency support and ombudsman. I can't ever say that correctly. And potentially CDE to serve in that role. We think they'd be well suited to help districts being introduced into the School Facilities Program.  Get knowledge of how all the roles work. Small school districts, and it was mentioned earlier in the current program, there's an ability to obtain a, I believe it's called a Administrative grant. It's basically a grant to get them started to look at how could they qualify? What do they need to do to be involved in the state School Facility Program? Those are districts that are under 2580 and theres many of those in the state. The grant is probably not enough money, so that could be something that maybe could be explored by the ligation boards to look at how to look at making a healthier amount to really help facilitate that support. With dollars on the street and all of the successful local bond measures that have happened, we anticipate capacity issues in our school district personnel, in our state agencies, in the vendors that we hire to do all of this work. With that, we believe that delineated guidelines to consolidate the process are really important. Some self-certification measures, and we'll follow up with some recommendations on that for the school district to certify that they followed all of Title V requirements in selecting a site. That they know what the specific requirements are, and that they can self-certify to those. I'd also like to identify that one of the areas that we believe could help benefit the flow of money and actually get out addressing these school facilities issues quickly. Is identifying that one of the agencies that deals with the review of those applications Is currently very under capacity. That agency, Office of Public School Construction is traditionally has been funded out of the proceeds of school bonds. So doesn't come out of the general fund of the State of California. Cash also supports CDE screen ideas and we would be concern about making sure that those planning ideas with title five are not prohibited to the facilitating the process to getting school sided. As you know, Senator O'Donnell or Assemblyman O'Donnell, we can't turn away children when they turn up on our doorstep. We have to make sure that we have classrooms, safe, clean appropriate classrooms. Yes, sometimes those are portables, but we have to make sure that those are available for the students that turn up at our door. We also believe that schools, with regard to Title V, are a response to growth. We don't cause growth per se, that we're responding to growth of developments and that's partly why we have the funding partner with our development community with developer fees. With that, I'd like to just wrap up this and say we will follow up with a letter of some real specific recommendations and thank you for your time.
[{'start': 154, 'end': 166, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 5291, 'end': 5300, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5316, 'end': 5325, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alan Reising: good afternoon, again, my name is alan chris reising. i'm the executive director for facilities, development and planning for long beach unified school district. first, i want to thank you for the opportunity to come here and address this committee and talk a little bit about the vitally important topic of school construction funding. i want to start by saying that i firmly believe that working together, all of us that are involved in school facilities construction, we can make some critically important and meaningful improvements in the program, really. and keeping an eye on, as we always do in long beach, keeping an eye on the impact to our students, because that's really what we're here for and ensuring that, we're always thinking in terms of the students themselves. i do support the voices from ms. hannah, ms. allen, and ms. becker. and i believe that their suggestions are suggestions you've heard about. program-wide, ombudsman could really have a significant impact to all districts, both large and small, to be able to help us with that greater level of interagency collaboration it really just transcends the different apartments in this table to help them collaborate. there are further improvements that i want to talk about. i'm not going to go into detail for a lot of these. we've been here for quite a while, and i know you've heard most of these already. but working with the office of public school construction and creating ways with the opsc to identify funding earlier in the process could greatly help districts. it allows us to work on our budgeting and our fiscal analysis to be able to really figure out and get a finite number that helps us budget, too, as we begin to look for ways that we're going to raise matching dollars to be able to come up with those dollars. whether that be looking for future local bonds or other avenues of funding. being able to clearly identify that upfront and some mechanism by which we could get some surety that those funds would be available once we get to a point where our monies are available to move forward. it would greatly help districts as we move forward. secondly, exploring some methods to establish a much more robust level of self-certification. districts, and my board members, specifically, are the ones who are actually ultimately responsible for the safety and well-being and compliance of my district. each of the agencies that we heard, although they have significant review and oversight and approval, none of those are actually the ones who are ultimately responsible for the safety and well-being of the students, my board is. so building, in each of these levels, opportunities where we can include self-certification in the process to allow portions of the work to be able to move forward in a timely manner. now, this does not mean that we're avoiding evaluation and review. but we want to have a parallel or concurrent review and audit program, so that it doesn't preclude the program from moving forward, but yet we have self-certification to be able to move beyond some of the roadblocks that we see in these. this can be used for our department of toxic safety control, substance control, excuse me, department as we look at site certification. it can be used with our california department of education as we look to title v compliance. and all of those different issues that we have to, the hoops that we have to jump through in our process. i'd also like to talk a minute about exploring ways that we can expedite plan review. i know chet whitham was up here just a little while ago, and i personally would like to applaud dsa for their efforts to improve their service. it has been dramatic, and it has definitely been noticed in the field by those of us that work with them. but i think that there's rooms for improvement. i think that ways that we can identify projects for self-certification could improve that. maybe we identify smaller level projects. there's been a number bantered around about 10,000 square foot projects or less, something along those order. our water control processes is that we now have in place. those allow us to do so to a level of self-certification. so we should be able to model some of that on abilities for plan reviews to go through. as mr. whitham had mentioned, the districts are still responsible for bringing in licensed and trained professionals who provide these designs for us. and they alone hold the burden for the quality and the safety of that plant. although dsa does review that for compliance with the code, they don't have that ultimate responsibility and authority. that, again, is vested in my board and in my architect and professionals that i hire. so allow us the opportunity, in some cases, to self-certify to be able to move those things forward. i understand these may require some legislative action, but these would be areas where we could greatly improve some of our processes.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 814, 'end': 820, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 826, 'end': 831, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 841, 'end': 847, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3538, 'end': 3550, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4283, 'end': 4290, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Moira Topp: Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Members. Moira Topp here on behalf of the California Charter Schools Association. And first just want to really thank you and the Committee for holding this hearing. As we've said over and over, facilities are probably the number one challenge charter schools have. I know you don't want to talk about need but it really is our biggest need and we very much appreciate you highlighting these issues today. In terms of the bond program, it is an important component. We have a large panoply of issues that we deal with in terms of facilities. Bonds are just one component of it. And as we heard, the program does require a 50% match, even from charter schools. And unlike traditional district schools that have the ability to bond their match, we obviously don't. Those dollars have to come from within the classroom. And so one challenge we'd like to talk about is trying to deal with and figure out a more appropriate mechanism to create a match for the charter school program, because it really is hindering a lot of our schools participation. And as you've talked about a workload or a stakeholder group we certainly would very much like charter schools to be part of this discussion. Thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Watts: mister chairman and members mark today representing the contra costa county board of supervisors. and i apologize in advance if my comments that i'm about to go through are a little discordant with the spirit of the committee. the board of supervisors just asked me to bring to convey the message that is in this letter that was just drafted this morning. i was barely able to get a copy to mister thurman's office before this committee started and it's being distributed to the rest of you. but the essence of it is contra costa county is experiencing a very very deep disconnect between the school siting process as it's been outlined. and what we're seeing being approved in our district. we'd like to see if that could be folded in somehow into your streamlining process here as well. i understand that the focus here is how to get that money out the door. we don't want to get in the way of that. but we are having some very difficult problems, a disconnect between schools and other state policies, greenhouse gas reduction, [unknown], complete streets, issues that are challenges to the county. i'd just like you to take that into consideration. thank you very much.
[{'start': 398, 'end': 405, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Paul Golaszewski: Thanks, Paul Golaszewski with the Legislative Analyst's Office. As the Chair described, the 2016-17 budget directed our office to prepare a report on options for what's being called a Debt-Free College Program that would reduce and eliminate student loan debt and we published a report last month and delivered copies to your office and the sergeant just distributed copies, as well. The reporting language as the chair described set the parameters for the program as additional state aid to pay for all college costs, so this would be tuition, living expenses, and books. After factoring in three things. First, apparent contribution. Second, a string contribution and third, all of the existing state and federal gift aid. You've heard a bit on the previous panel about a lot of the existing state grant-hood programs. Though it wasn't specified in the reporting language our understanding was for the intent for the program to focus on students at UC, CSU and community colleges so that's what we based our analysis on for the most part. Although we did, at the end of the report, consider students attending private colleges, as well. The reporting language did not necessarily direct us to assess the manageability of current student loan debt levels or to explore other ways to reduce student borrowing such as reducing college costs. But we think that those are important issues for you to consider. For example, the federal government currently, and making efforts to make student loan repayments more manageable by basing repayments on income and also you might want to think of ways to explore reducing college costs, in addition to increasing aid, but those were outside the scope of the report that we did. So with that said, I'll provide an overview of the findings from our report. First, I'll briefly describe the assumption that we used. Second, I'll walk you through the result that we found, and lastly I will leave you with two overarching thoughts to consider as you think about this proposal. First, on the assumptions, as I mentioned, we were starting with total college costs of both tuition, living expenses, and books, and as you heard previously, this is little bit of a departure. Today, most state aid programs are focused primarily on tuition and this new program will be all encompassing all college costs. We use the, for tuition it's pretty straight forward with costs array we know from ECSU and community colleges what it is, for living expenses we used the estimates as prepared by the segments themselves so they survey students and ask how much their living expenses are, rent and food, etc, and that's how they come up with their student budgets. And then they do this for base periodically and some are older than others, but if they are older they update them for inflation. So that was our starting point. For the parent contribution portion, we used, we based on the federal needs methodology, so the federal government actually has a formula that drives off of the FAFSA, which you heard about earlier. It's based on a family's income, their assets, their household size, how many students they have in college. It's a bit complicated, but essentially what it does is it provides a number that they think that parents could contribute based on these various factors. So we stuck with the federal methodology, which is used for most existing programs today. Next, for the student contribution, we assumed that students work 15 hours per week during the academic year and we based that on a review of the academic research looking at how children employment during the academic year affected outcomes such as GPAs and persistence and a lot of studies seem to indicate that working 10 to 20 hours per week during the year did not adversely effect students outcomes, which is 15 hours per week and during the summer, we assume students work 40 hours per week. After factoring in expected taxes and some summer living costs, we estimated that students could contribute $7,300 per year towards their education and the last part of the equation is the existing state and federal grant aid. So we factored in all of the Cal Grants that you just heard about. We also factored in all of the institutional aid that UC, CSU, and the community colleges provide. They have their own aid programs, we factored that in. We also factored all of the federal grant aids students are receiving, which primarily is the Pilgram. We do not factor in federal tax credits to do some methodological challenges, but that's another source of aid that might want to consider building into the program. And we had two additional assumptions beyond this, first we assumed that only students taking six or more units will participate and that's consistent with the aid programmer such as Cal Grants and it's intended to focus on students who with regard pursuing degrees and certificates and are not more casual students and finally, we didn't assume any changes in enrollment although if the state were to significantly increase financial aid in the form of grants, we would expect it might attract more students to enroll and we think it could also change their decision on segments they attend, and as well as their living arrangements, but we weren't able to quantify those. So based on these assumptions, we estimated the new program would cost $3.3 billion annually. So this would be on stop of all existing gift dates. On top of what we're spending on Cal grants, which you heard about, on top of what the universities are spending, on top of what the Federal government is spending, this would be additional dollars, and that amount consists of $2.2 billion for community college students, $800 million for CSU students, and $300 million for UC students, and the difference across the segments primarily is due to differences in the number of students. There are far more community college students. That's why the number's far higher at community colleges as well as some differences in the amount of aid students receive at each of the segments and you heard on the earlier panel that community college students tend to receive a little less aid currently as compared to students at the other segments. These amounts that we estimated don't necessarily match the amount that students are currently borrowing for a couple of reasons that it's important to note. One is that some financially needy students right now they tend to borrow, they, some of them don't borrow right now they might be working more than the amount that we assume right? They might be working 20 or 25 hours a week. There's probably some students like that. Conversely, some right now might be choosing to borrow more and working less. So if you compare our estimates to the amount is currently being borrowed, they don't exactly map one to one for those. After our initial estimate, we then said, well, what if we limit the program to full-time students, which generally is defined as students taking 12 or more units. And if we did that, we think it would cut the program costs roughly in half, so it would be about 1.6 billion. Primarily, it would exclude a lot of community college students who tend to go part-time more frequently than students at the universities. We also suggested the Legislature consider having a time limit consistent with current programs, as well as some academic achievement, making minimal academic progress, as another requirement. Which would reduce the cost somewhat, but we weren't able to factor that into our estimate. And then finally, we laid out a couple of options for the Legislature to phase in the program if it wasn't going to fund it fully. You could target awards to the neediest students first, as defined by the federal formula I eluded to earlier. You could target the program at a particular institution first. So you could start, for example, maybe at the community colleges. You could also take an approach like the state did with middle class scholarships where it set a fixed budget in state law, and then just rationed awards if the program couldn't be fully funded. That hasn't happened yet to that program. So those were some of the phase and options we considered. In closing, two points in particular that we wanted to highlight as you think about this proposal. The first is that we concluded that the program probably would significantly reduce student loan debt. We don't think it would necessarily eliminate student loan debt for a couple of reasons, and that's because of the way the program is structured. So for example, it relies on the expected parent contribution. But you can't necessarily force all parents to contribute. There might be some parents who don't, so a student might have to borrow in that situation. In addition, we did have our assumption on how many hours students work. And students wouldn't be required to work. Some students might choose to borrow instead of working the number of hours that we assume. There could also be circumstances where some students can't find jobs, particularly maybe in a recession where jobs are scarcer and students can't find them, so they might still have to borrow. The second closing point that we wanted to highlight is that the program is a big change, as you've heard from focusing financial aid on tuition coverage as the state has done historically to also include in living costs, which we haven't done of as much in the past. And this does raise some questions about cost control, the state has more control over tuition. The Legislature actually sets tuition in state law for the community colleges for using CSU, the governing boards set tuition. But the state has a lot of influence over tuition level student budget. With living expenses, the state has less structure control over those costs, obviously. It also could create some, perhaps, unintended, consequences. Some students who maybe right now are living at home to save on cost, if there's a new state program that's going to fully fund them, maybe they would choose to move off-campus because the state would pay for it. So we think those are important considerations to keep in mind as you think about expanding aid to cover living cost in addition to tuition. And with that, I'll take any questions.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Weir: Good evening. Chairman McCarty, Chairman Medina, honorable members, thank you for this opportunity to speak with you. My name is Kevin Weir. I'm a Professor of sociology just down the street at Cal State University, Sacramento.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 30, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 41, 'end': 47, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 129, 'end': 139, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Weir: kevin jonah weir.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Noelia Gonzalez: Good afternoon. My name is Noelia Gonzalez. I'm the Director of Admissions and Financial Aid at California State University, Stanislaus. I'm here representing Stanislaus State as part of the 23 campus California State University system. And as a system, we are committed to providing access to a high quality education, while maintaining affordability. While the tuition at the CSU is among the lowest in the nation, we recognize the financial challenges many families face and provide aid in several forms. The CSU does set aside about 1/3 of our new revenue from tuition fees to assist economically disadvantaged students. In the 2015-16 academic year, 372,000 students received nearly $4.2 billion in financial aid and 75% of our CSU undergraduate financial aid recipients have their tuition and fees fully covered by grants or waivers. A little information about our campus. We have seen a steady demand for enrollment growth. And our undergraduate student population is growing steadily. As a campus, we are committed to provide access and affordability to our students. Although we have students on our campus from everywhere in the state, 80% of our students do come from our local six county area, Stanislaus County, San Joaquin, Merced, Tuolumne, Calaveras, and Mariposa. 43% of our undergraduate students are very low-income, with an average income of $16,000 a year. 74% of our students are first generation college students. We have thousands of students that are the first in their family to go to college. And these students are not only achieving their goals, but their family's dreams. And they're often the torch bearers that light the way for their younger family members to follow them into higher education. Our financial aid outreach programming does begin fairly early in the student's career. Us, along with the admissions counselors, we begin working with prospective students and their parents as early as the elementary grades to teach them about the availability of financial aid programs. We host early outreach programs and parent programming, so that by the time the students are getting ready for college, and ready to apply for college, they are well aware of the financial aid application process. We work with Cal-SOAP and with local high schools to hold FAFSA workshops beginning in October of a student's senior year to help the students and their parents through the financial aid application process. We have about five financial aid advisers on our campus for almost 9,000 students. Each of those advisors also handles a special program. We have two representatives that cover the counter and phones. There, also, we have some system people that help work with our programming and all of the reporting we have to do to book the state, the federal and the chancellor's office. We are very automated and which we have to be in order to manage that work load. We strive as our student population has grown, our staffing levels have not, but we do strive to process files in a timely manner so that we can make sure that the majority of our financial aid students have their funding in place, so that they're able to purchase books and pay for their living expenses. We provide student workshops on financial literacy, budgeting, and how to apply for scholarships. We go over teach grants, and loan repayment options to their students academic career at the University. We are also active participants in the CSU Graduation Initiative 2025. We worked closely with academic advising team to improve our graduation rates by educating students on the time to degree. And enrolling course work that will keep them on the graduation path and the cost of staying in school longer. We don't just talk about the additional cost of staying in school an extra year or two but also the opportunity cost that they're missing out by not joining the work force. We, at Stanislaus State, promote access and ensure affordability for students with the least ability to pay. We award student grants and scholarship first followed by federal work study and student loans last. The campus does contribute about $200,000 towards the work study program, as our federal allocation is not very large. We also fund raise heavily for our scholarship programs and have raised over a $1 million in the last three years for our one purpose campaign which is focused on providing scholarships. Next year, we are starting a scholarship fund for our first generation college students and this effort is being super headed by our President, Dr. Ellen Junn. 93% of our undergraduate students receives some type of financial assistance. The majority of that assistance is in the form of grants. In fact, 76% of our student have their state tuition fees fully covered by a grant. We have seen a steady growth in the grant funding for our students due to our commitment to ensure that college remains affordable. We have partnered with high schools and organizations in our community to ensure that students and their families are aware of the availability of financial aid funding and how to apply. To the extent that our resources allow, we deliver this information and the language spoken in the home of our students, for example, Spanish, Assyrian, and Hmong. And since the 2008-2009 academic year, we have doubled the number of students receiving a Cal Grant and have increased the number of students receiving a Pell Grant by 72%. For our students that are receiving a Cal Grant, a grant funding. Students, we fund them with Pell Grant which is a Federal Grant and either a State University Grant or a Cal Grant. So they get Pell Grant and they get SUG, State University Grant or they get Pell Grant and a Cal Grant. 66% of our students receive a Pell grant. 38% of our students receive a state University grant, and an additional 38% receive either a Cal Grant A or a Cal Grant B. About 10% of our students receive a middle class scholarship. 76% of our undergraduate students have their system why tuition fees covered by a grant. So they're not actually paying for their tuition or fees.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 4547, 'end': 4557, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Norman Caito: Thank you, Chairman Medina and McCarty and members thank you for inviting the representative of the Associations of Independent California Colleges and Universities to speak today. My name is Norman Caito and I'm the Director of Financial Aid at the University of San Francisco, a Jesuit Catholic non-profit university educating students since 1855. I started somewhat after that and I've been working in the financial aid office now in various roles for about 22 years. So close to that. USF is one of 79 extremely diverse, non-profit, private universities that are part of the AICCU. We are a typical Cal Grant receiving university. In terms within this sector of size of endowment and of the limited resources that we have to help meet the growing needs of California students. Our private sectors serves over 186,000 undergraduate students, 76% of those in our sector are California residents. So I make that point that's to remind everyone that we are educating California residents who perhaps are not able to get into the state colleges or who made a choice for a different type of education. We've passed around a couple of documents that give some information about our school and our sector, and hopefully, you have those. At USF, part of our mission is to support access for a diverse student body countered to the myth that our sector only serves predominately wealthy Caucasian students. The numbers prove really otherwise. In our private sector, 28% of our students are Pell-eligible students. 15% are Cal Grant recipients. 45% of our Pell Grant recipients are first-generation college students and over 70% of those are students of color. The USF percentages are very close to that or sometimes higher. As a sector, our private institutions contributed more than $1.8 billion in institutional aid in the 15/16 school year. And over 80% of our sector's undergraduate students received some type of aid. At USF, specifically, over 72% of our undergrads receive financial aid. And we contribute well over $62 million in institutional grants. Many still assume that all private school endowments can cover the cost for our low and middle income students. But that's not the case for most private institutions. At USF, our endowment is just $300 million and when you compare that to $22 billion at Stanford, it's a drop in a bucket. That breaks into about $27,272 per-
[{'start': 20, 'end': 26, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 31, 'end': 38, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 192, 'end': 204, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Greg Peterson: good afternoon. my name is greg kevin peterson. i'm vice president for student support services at long beach city college. and i am thankful for the opportunity to speak on behalf of the california college system in long beach city college. as was mentioned earlier by tcos, there are four primary types of financial available to community college students. so at the federal level, there are the pell grant in loans at the state level. the cal grants and the board of governor fee waiver. these sources of data are very important to our students as in 2015-16, up to 2.4 million students we served, 60% of them received some type of aid. long beach is very similar so in that same year 15, 16 out of the 35,000 students that we serve over 60% of our students received some type of federal or state financial aid. which isn't surprising as more than a quarter of the families, long beach residence that year earned an income below the poverty level. so in addition to economic challenges, many of our students are first in their family to attend college. so between the financial cost and between the unknown of college, many [unknown] believe that college for them was not an opportunity, okay? in 2008, long beach state college partnered with california state university long beach and long beach unified school district to create the long beach college promise. and a key component of the promise was to ensure that every local student believed that college was an option that he or she would go to college by creating the long beach college promise scholarship. which really symbolically established that we were removing the barrier cost for every student going to college. while local funds were raised to support the scholarship, the scholarship was primarily made possible through the board of governors fee waiver, which covers the enrollment fees for our priority students. the, as you now the national [inaudible] is a national model that's been recognized. as well as a model for mini communities across the state. as these communities and colleges are really stepping up to find a way to support our students in the local community to make access available. the long beach college promised that it was much more than just a scholarship program. in fact, covering enrollment fees for students as was mentioned earlier by ticas is just a small portion of the financial equation for our students. if you look at the net price calculator for a long beach city college, we estimate so $1100 for enrollment fees of the total $18,000 estimated annual cost. so that's just a small portion. so the lumby college promise really looks at how do we change our structures to help students be more successful in moving through our systems so looking at reducing the cost by increasing the time, decreasing their time to achieve their goals. our students are also similar to our uc and csu counterparts where our students are struggling with food and security, housing and stability. they struggle with health, childcare, transportation costs, as well as textbooks and materials and supplies. so as also was mentioned by debbie cochran, sadly there are for some of our students it's more expensive to attend the local community college than it is to attend the uc due to the packaging of some of our state and federal aid resources. so with this said, i just want to leave two important points with you as your fugitive in future as you deliberate around this complicated issue of college affordability. the first one is, is that the promise movement is very variable. and it really symbolically sets the stage, really pursuing students to know that college is accessible and that they can do that. however, it's just starting point, there's still great unmet financial need for financial students to progress and complete once they. once they enter and moving through our system. and the second point i want to leave with you is that as assembly member avacadri mentioned, there's not enough money to fund everything. so thinking smarter brings us to think about how our systems and our structures are set up at our colleges. as was mentioned earlier, guided pathways, how we create systems that helps students be more successful? i wanted to share a quick example, so in 2011, 2012 we created a more structured promised pathways for our first year for students as they entered into college. a part of that was that scholarship and what we did is we encouraged students. that we would provide them opportunity access courses a full of courses but we expect them take full load. so on 2011 about 50% of the incoming high school students were tending full time. when we created structure that provide them a full load that number from 50% to 85%. so there's often this believe that committee catch students don't want to attend full time. it's the structures clean that i believe for them to attend full time. so with that, just really thinking of the structures of how do we build guided pathways that align across the three institutions? how do we help students achieve those goals? and i'll leave that with you. thank you. okay, thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 3120, 'end': 3134, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3953, 'end': 3961, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ralph Washington, Jr.: Sure, I can, thank you very much, Chair Medina. I appreciate it. Good afternoon, everyone. Thank you. My name is Ralph Washington, Jr. I'm President of the UC Student Association, and I'm also a graduate student in entomology. So, I hope you'll forgive me if I wax a little entomological. All right. Not at UC Riverside? Riverside? No. Davis. I think we're all here today because we recognize that education is critical to the future of our society. We need to also remember and recognize that students can't take full advantage of their educational opportunities if they can't afford the full cost of attendance. The majority of the cost of education nowadays is beyond tuition and fees, it's cost of room and board and the cost of food. And students are currently struggling very much to find a safe place to sleep and enough food to eat. College is a time when we can go through so much important growth and development in our lives. And it's a lot like metamorphosis. A safe environment is critical. It requires a lot of stress and energy to deal with. And additionally your form and identity before the process is often very different than what it is afterwards. I think it's important to remember that whether your a caterpillar or a college student, the outcome of any growth and development you experience is greatly dependent upon the context in which it occurs. So I'd like to share a little bit about the context from my own growth and development. I grew up just a few miles from here in northeast Oak Park. My feelings about Oak Park are a bit bittersweet, because it's where I first found insects but also where I first Learned what it's like to feel true hunger. In high school, I decided that I want to attend UC Davis because it's one of the best places in the world to study insects. But like many students who are hungry in Oak Park, I realized the cost of attendance would be a tremendous barrier to realizing my dreams. I got a scholarship and a Cal and Pell grant and that's the only reason I was able to go to UC Davis in the first place. Now I was really excited to study entomology at a major research University. But that's not the most meaningful consequence of me attending UC Davis. I vividly remember my first day in the dorms. I went to the dining commons, and I was told that every swipe of my meal plan gave me unlimited access to the food during the assigned hours. I want to let you know that for me this was incredible. When I got back to my room I wept with relief because I felt absolutely certain that I would never feel hungry again. I no longer struggle with food and security, but there are many students who still struggle every day. Students are skipping meals so that they can pay for books. Students are sitting in the back of class, so that they don't have disturb others with the growling of their stomachs. Students are struggling to take full advantage of all of their educational opportunities because they cannot meet a basic need. It might seem like student hunger is an insoluble problem, but I think that there are concrete things that we can do about it. We can increase the size of the Cal grant B award to what it could be if it had kept up with inflation. We can provide more awards to the more than 300,000 eligible students every year. We can retain the middle-class scholarship. We can supplement the efforts of campus food pantries. We can also put a lot of deliberate effort into acquiring the data that all of you requested earlier today. I think we're all very much interested in that data, because we want a realistic understanding of the situation. And getting that data might be useful, because it might help us recognize that these issues are of greater social import and are of our collective responsibility. But we have an additional responsibility as leaders, because I don't think that a leader is just someone who takes on additional, specific responsibility. I think a leader is someone who recognizes our collective responsibilities and chooses deliberately to take those responsibilities seriously. Thank you. Thank you.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 46, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 113, 'end': 134, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 336, 'end': 341, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Patrick Dorsey: good morning, honorable chairs, and assembly members. my name is dorsey, and i am the student body president at sacramento state. and i'm also the co-chair on the food and housing task force at sacramento state, and we've been working to address our students' housing and food and security needs. recently, we just created our emergency on-campus housing to provide shelter and food for students who are in crisis, need a place to stay. that can range from someone who was kicked out of their house for coming out as transgender to someone who might have had to evacuate because of the dam up in oroville. we are trying to make an effort on our campus to really solve these issues. but a little bit about myself. i'm a graduate student. i'm in the public policy and administration program. and i know we have another alum of the program in the room as well. but i did my bachelor's at sacramento state. yeah, yeah, i also did my bachelor's at sacramento state. and i graduated within two years from transferring from a junior college. but i really struggled at my junior college for quite some time. i'm a gay man and being from a very, a community that is very closed-off and not open minded, it was really hard for me to, to find the self worth. the feeling of security of who i was as a person and that i could actually make a difference. i didn't believe that i could achieve a college education let alone start to get my masters. so i'm incredibly proud of myself. but it really was because of faculty and staff who saw my potential. and they pushed me to really live out to that potential. they wanted to see me, to succeed. and i wanted to give back to california. and education through both the community college and now sacramento state has allowed me to do that. but the college experience today is changed. it's different from 20 to 30 years ago. many of you have attended the systems, or have affiliations with the systems, but there's so much anxiety. and i want i want you to think back. remember the anxiety you felt when you were doing your bachelor's. that anxiety of getting your classes, but also the anxiety of graduating and what you're going to do after, trying to figure out your life path. now i want you to imagine that, but imagine being a first-generation college student. imagine being a student that's having to navigate a very complex csu system or a community college system, filling out the fafsa, which has several long questions, is incredibly complex. but also trying to enroll in classes and sometimes not having those classes offered for you. this is what it means for a lot of the students today. they are working several jobs so you're able to pay not only for theirselves, but for their families and being able to support them. and so there's a lot of trade-offs that come for our students when they're deciding to pursue an education and whether they should pursue employment instead. the csu system has undergone a lot of changes to really make up for the changing of the demographics of the students we serve. we've gone through minority-majority now, that we're serving, and we're trying to address the unique challenges that they face. the graduation initiative 2025 and the student success plans of all 23 campuses, they really explain how they're trying to increase efficacy through data-driven decision making. but also, smart budget allocations that keep students focused. that means, opening additional course sections, that meets student demand for particular majors. and they're also developing career readiness initiatives to help prepare our students once they get through their classes, they're getting ready to graduate, but also to be prepared to serve employers and to work in the communities that the institutions are serving. but the css system is severely underfunded. and the financial aid packages are not really meeting the needs that our students are having to pay. and that ranges from low socioeconomic but also middle income, and a lot of that has been talked about today. about three-fourths of what students are having to pay is not just the tuition, it's all the outside expenses. it's the close of living, it's rent. and right now, california is facing a housing affordability crisis. and that is trickling down into rental properties. and what we're trying to do is get students into, because not a majority of students live on campus, and they have to pursue housing elsewhere. and with increasing rents in many of the cities where our csus are located it's becoming incredibly difficult. but, there's other instances where there's inequities that exist. for example our, stem majors are actually more expensive. it costs more to educate someone in engineering or one of the sciences. and a lot of cases, campuses have had to increase fees for these particular majors to make up the lack of funding from the state. so to provide a field trip to go to an infrastructure project so a stem major can learn how to become an engineer, they're going to have to pay additional fees for that. or lab supplies, so they'll be able to do experiments inside the lab and become a chemist. that takes a lot of money away from financial aid that students are already using to help supplement their income to be able to provide for their cost of living. and so this is creating barriers for a lot of students who are from underserved communities. and they see the huge sticker price of some of these other majors, and they're having to change their career goals for that to make adjustments. for myself we've talked about the food insecurity and the homelessness the one in five and the one in 10. but if you were to do the math in the csu system, that means that 120,000 students in the california state university system are not getting enough to eat. 120,000 students. if you do the math again 48,000 students are worried about where they're going to stay tonight. that's an incredible amount of students quite frankly. and it's quite alarming when we're talking about graduation rates, timely progression to degree. because i'm sorry if they're in class and they're worried about where their next meal is coming from or if they are going to have to sleep in their car again or find some sort of shelter, that stress is going to take away from anything to do with completing the class and getting an a so they can succeed. at sacramento state, like i said, we been trying to address these problems and other campuses have been doing the same as well. between the student housing, with providing micro grants, we've talked a little about that previous panelists. finding grants for students who are facing an emergency crisis. and those grants are available for the students if there's an unforeseen consequence. but there is more that the state can do. i truly believe that we need to increase the amount of the cal grant b access award to provide the much-needed support for our long-time students. those are the students that are using that financial aid to survive and to help keep their own families afloat. i also believe that we should increase the amount of the competitive cal grant so that more eligible applicants will receive the award so more students can have additional access. i also believe that we should ensure the continuation of the northwest scholarship. i know i'm asking for a lot here. but i do believe that the middle class scholarship really provides that additional funding for those students as we are noticing in california the shrinking middle class. and a lot middle class families are not able to afford even the $500. a recent federal court showed that families do not have $500 to spare in case of an emergency. but i think the most important thing that we need to focus on is funding for the csu. that is one of the most critical things that we can do to address some of the budget shortfalls. we need to focus on long-term and sustainable funding. recently i spoke at the trustees meeting. and addressing how sacramento state students are opposed to the tuition increases right about 1,000 signatures and surveying, most students most students replied with what they would do with that additional $270 is pay towards rent. it is the cost of living that students are most effective with and we need to look at many miles, so we can prevent that in the future. it's important. because if the state fails to do so, it's a loss. it is a loss for the state in additional tax revenues and it's continued economic vitality, but it's a loss for the health of the communities that need a well educated workforce to meet employer demands and it is a loss for students and families that are seeking the california american dream. it's a loss of hope for many students that have seen higher education were affordable and accessible for previous generations of californians. thank you.
[{'start': 65, 'end': 71, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Zachary Awe: Thank you, Chair McCarty. Thank you, Chair Medina. Members of the Committee, thank you also for inviting me here today. I am Zachary Awe, I am the Legislative Affairs Director for the Student Senate for California Community Colleges. I was chosen out of 2.1 million students to speak here today for the community college system and I may be a little bit biased, but I think the community college system is the greatest in the world. We are refuge for people. We are the first chance. We are the last chance. Personally, I don't think I would be here today if it wasn't for the community culture system. I wasn't a good students in high school. I got a 2.8 GPA, even though all of my teachers said I had potential, and you could also say it was because of the army but I think that the community college system is the reason that I'm here today. However, it's not meeting its mark and I don't think, it's not at its fullest potential yet. I am from a college where 50% of our students have food insecurity, and I believe that is only because they understand what food insecurity is. I come from a college where we have countless numbers of students that are homeless. We have countless numbers that live in the woods right behind my school. AB1995 was probably one of the greatest things to ever pass for those students because now they can have access to hygiene. They can have access to just being able to wake up in the morning and be able to be clean.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 24, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 43, 'end': 49, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 125, 'end': 136, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Rosenberger: sure. kimberly greg rosenberger with service employees international union state council. everything that's been said today we support, so i don't want to really harp on that. i just want to hit some snapshots of our members. the current state of the system, we have a member who is an eligibility worker, and she was having a conversation with the director about how she has two young children. they're about 10 and 12. and she went to me to see how much money she needed to set aside to save for her kids to go to school. they told her $554 a month per child. that is the entirety of her paycheck monthly. so at this time she's stored away all she can but, there's limits to what she has. the laos option today was $20,000 that the parents would contribute. that's per child. so a quick snapshot of one of our members, a classified employee at a k through 14 school averages $22,000 a year. a third of them are already college educated people. that 20,000 for one child makes the access for their kids a further than a reality. i think the concern today is not only we can introduce access for low income and not putting that burden completely on the parents or completely on the students but also for the middle income. there's a complete attack on the middle class, and if we remove that access, we are not going to see the workforce improved in california. so just really want to harp on the fact that i know we have to choose where that money comes from, but it's something that our low income workers need, and something that our middle workers need. it's no longer just a greater good, it's almost an expectation to have higher education when you enter the workforce. thank you.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kristin McGuire: Good evening, my name is Kristin Mcguire with Young Invincibles, we are a national policy and advocacy group. We are based in Oakland and in Los Angeles here in California. I am also a product of the CSU system, Go Toros. I'm here today to say that Young Invincible supports proposals that give all students a pathway to a debt-free degree through various reforms that decrease the cost and expand support. And as we've heard today, tuition costs have increased, and the cost of attendance sometimes can be made up from 60 to 90% of non-tuition fees. We believe that free community college tuition is a part of the solution but more importantly we're interested in a debt free college plan, which would cover the non-tuition expenses like room and board, and food, and transportation. With just free tuition, low-income students would still carry an excessive debt load, because all of these non-tuition expenses like you've heard today. With this said, a free University tuition in our opinion is definitely regressive, as higher-income students will mostly benefit. Because low-income students already receive the free tuition. So Young Invincibles urges you today to strengthen need-based financial aid by increasing the number of competitive Cal Grants and the size of the Cal Grant B Access Award. Thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 215, 'end': 220, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Amparo Diaz: Good afternoon, Members of the Committee. My name is Amparo Diaz. I'm here on behalf of the California State Student Association. We represent students in the CSU system. I really appreciate the Committee's leadership on affordability, and I want to urge you to continue to invest in the Cal Grant program, specifically in the Cal Grant B program that really addresses the cost beyond tuition and fees. Additionally, I would urge you all to support the CSU's fully funded budget request so that the shift of a public higher education cost of attendance doesn't switch from the state to students and if we further let the burden of cost for running a public institution be put on the back of students we're really hindering access to a an affordable higher education system. Thank you.
[{'start': 53, 'end': 64, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carty Medina: Good evening chairs, I'm Carty Medina. Member Irwin, of Austin Webster on behalf of the Faculty Association of California Community Colleges. We just wanted to thank both committees for convening this hearing today. Access and affordability are kind of the core of our values for our Association. We are very encouraged that this is an issue that we're definitely paying attention to here in the Legislature. Couple of quick things. We definitely support all of the comments that were made today. I would like to echo one really quickly about our students. And that is that a lot of this conversation has to do with full time students attending full time, but it's also important to make sure that we're including part-time students in this conversation especially in a community college system. A lot of those part-time students are older who are returning either first time college students or trying to just advance their careers so it's important to keep those in mind. Thanks so much.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 46, 'end': 51, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Andrew Medina: hello, andrew kimberly medina of the asian americans advancing justice-california. we're also part of the college for all coalition. last year we worked on college readiness funds as well as student support services and outreach programs at the uc. and in our implementation work, we have discovered that a lot of the importance of college affordability and access, just to a lot of students to be able to take their classes, is very vital in order for them to reach graduation. so we join the chorus of many today in terms of calling for financial aid services especially for the students of the most neediest, as well as ensuring that we take a holistic look of their needs, of financial needs, outside of tuition as well. thanks.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ling Zong: Hi, good afternoon. I'm Ling Zong with the Campaign for College Opportunity. In order to ensure that more Californians are able to get to and through college, we believe we must strengthen the Cal Grant program, which helps bring college within reach for thousands of students. For students at all public segments, the majority of college cost are beyond tuitions and fees. By increasing the size of the Cal Grant B Access Award and the number of competitive Cal Grants, we can help ensure that more low income students can cover the total cost of college and more eligible applicants receive an award, thank you.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Clara Medina: hello, good afternoon. my name is medina. i'm the legislative director for my campus, uc merced, and i also sit on the board of directors for ucsa. and i'm here to reiterate the point that was made. that the total cost of attendance is often not known to us when we even are accepted and start attending the university or any part of the higher education system. and this would include, as in particular, the non-tuition cost, which include cost of housing, cost of food. which is part of the reason why we're facing high levels of foods and housing and security through out the entire state. on my campus, it looks also really different. we're a student population of over 80% students of color, over 70% first generation students. i think we're pretty unique and the menu is revolutionary campus system. but the way that the cost plays in on our campus is that it also impacts our ability to help out back home, considering our background and our demographic. as an undocumented student myself, the california dream act was an opportunity for me to attend. and this year, the dream loan program was an opportunity for me to stay at the university and continue. so, i want to reiterate that it's critical that we focus on need-based aid to make sure that we have resources for some of our most vulnerable and at times, our most powerful communities across the state. and resources that they can tap into to not only get to the higher education system, stay in the higher education system, and eventually graduate. thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brenda Gutierrez: Hi, good afternoon. My name is Brenda Gutierrez. I'm currently this year's University of California Students Association Board Chair, UCSA, as Ralph spoke earlier. I'm traveling from Merced today and I want to share a little bit of my experience really quickly at UC Merced. As a first generation low-income student, I've directly benefited from need-based financial aid programs. My family makes $25,000 a year for a family of four. My estimated family contribution is zero. At some point last semester, I was working three jobs to sustain myself and make sure I was still sending money back home. Meanwhile, being a, maintaining my status as a full-time student. It was physically and emotionally exhausting as you all have heard. Unfortunately, my story is not unique. It's the same story for many students across the state. And we have to reinvest in the resources that allow students such as myself to succeed and complete our degrees. I want to emphasize the importance of access to funding for summer school to catch up, advance, and finish our education. Our time is limited not only through campus policy, but also via available funding. I also want to really reiterate that 60% of college cost go beyond tuition. So, even the tuition free model would have drawbacks. Thank you so much for your time and thank you for your service.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 134, 'end': 138, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 143, 'end': 148, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Erica Romero: good afternoon erica andrew romero on behalf of the association of independent california colleges and universities representing 79 wasc accredited non profit college and universities where we educate almost as many students as the uc, including 27,000 low income students. whether we are working on streamlining transfer or degree completion on a community college campus or we are working on courses that get students to nursing degrees or their teaching credentials faster, we are committed to college affordability. we look forward to working with the legislature to keep that affordability through the cal grant program and through ab 1166 assemblymember burke's college opportunity act. thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Thia Chamillio: Hi, my name is Thia Chamillio, and I attend UC Irvine. I just wanted to share my experience while being there. My freshman year of college was probably my hardest year, because I chose to live in on campus housing. That meant my family had to pay about $4,300 a quarter, which was more than my family's rent. And so that was a real burden on my family, and payment's couldn't be made on time every month, which meant that there would be a hold. I would have a financial hold. And that meant that I couldn't use my student ID to swipe in to Commons. I couldn't go to the cafeteria, I didn't have access to meals. So, I just want to reiterate that there are more costs to students that just tuition. There's housing security, there's transportation, there's food security.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alex Caliena: hello, my name is alex erica caliena and i am a student from shasta college. now, when i first moved to sacramento, i didn't really have the most stable living arrangements. i actually had to couch surf from one friends house to another, never really knowing where i would wake up the next morning. now, on top of that. i had to worry about keeping up with my college course work and also serving as the vice president of the state wide community college student association. now as everything by some of the things have been said here today, i now know that i was never alone when facing this difficulties. now, tuition cost make it very difficult for low income students to have equitable access towards higher educationw, which is why i respectably want to ask this state legislature to invest in low income students like myself because i know that i am not alone. by increasing the size of the cal grant b access award. assembly member mccarty, as your constituent and as hopefully a future sacramento state student, i know i would personally appreciate this. thank you chair. hope you guys have a good day.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 940, 'end': 947, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Paul Golaszewski: Thanks, Paul Golaszewski with the Legislative Analyst's Office. As the Chair described, the 2016-17 budget directed our office to prepare a report on options for what's being called a Debt-Free College Program that would reduce and eliminate student loan debt and we published a report last month and delivered copies to your office and the sergeant just distributed copies, as well. The reporting language as the chair described set the parameters for the program as additional state aid to pay for all college costs, so this would be tuition, living expenses, and books. After factoring in three things. First, apparent contribution. Second, a string contribution and third, all of the existing state and federal gift aid. You've heard a bit on the previous panel about a lot of the existing state grant-hood programs. Though it wasn't specified in the reporting language our understanding was for the intent for the program to focus on students at UC, CSU and community colleges so that's what we based our analysis on for the most part. Although we did, at the end of the report, consider students attending private colleges, as well. The reporting language did not necessarily direct us to assess the manageability of current student loan debt levels or to explore other ways to reduce student borrowing such as reducing college costs. But we think that those are important issues for you to consider. For example, the federal government currently, and making efforts to make student loan repayments more manageable by basing repayments on income and also you might want to think of ways to explore reducing college costs, in addition to increasing aid, but those were outside the scope of the report that we did. So with that said, I'll provide an overview of the findings from our report. First, I'll briefly describe the assumption that we used. Second, I'll walk you through the result that we found, and lastly I will leave you with two overarching thoughts to consider as you think about this proposal. First, on the assumptions, as I mentioned, we were starting with total college costs of both tuition, living expenses, and books, and as you heard previously, this is little bit of a departure. Today, most state aid programs are focused primarily on tuition and this new program will be all encompassing all college costs. We use the, for tuition it's pretty straight forward with costs array we know from ECSU and community colleges what it is, for living expenses we used the estimates as prepared by the segments themselves so they survey students and ask how much their living expenses are, rent and food, etc, and that's how they come up with their student budgets. And then they do this for base periodically and some are older than others, but if they are older they update them for inflation. So that was our starting point. For the parent contribution portion, we used, we based on the federal needs methodology, so the federal government actually has a formula that drives off of the FAFSA, which you heard about earlier. It's based on a family's income, their assets, their household size, how many students they have in college. It's a bit complicated, but essentially what it does is it provides a number that they think that parents could contribute based on these various factors. So we stuck with the federal methodology, which is used for most existing programs today. Next, for the student contribution, we assumed that students work 15 hours per week during the academic year and we based that on a review of the academic research looking at how children employment during the academic year affected outcomes such as GPAs and persistence and a lot of studies seem to indicate that working 10 to 20 hours per week during the year did not adversely effect students outcomes, which is 15 hours per week and during the summer, we assume students work 40 hours per week. After factoring in expected taxes and some summer living costs, we estimated that students could contribute $7,300 per year towards their education and the last part of the equation is the existing state and federal grant aid. So we factored in all of the Cal Grants that you just heard about. We also factored in all of the institutional aid that UC, CSU, and the community colleges provide. They have their own aid programs, we factored that in. We also factored all of the federal grant aids students are receiving, which primarily is the Pilgram. We do not factor in federal tax credits to do some methodological challenges, but that's another source of aid that might want to consider building into the program. And we had two additional assumptions beyond this, first we assumed that only students taking six or more units will participate and that's consistent with the aid programmer such as Cal Grants and it's intended to focus on students who with regard pursuing degrees and certificates and are not more casual students and finally, we didn't assume any changes in enrollment although if the state were to significantly increase financial aid in the form of grants, we would expect it might attract more students to enroll and we think it could also change their decision on segments they attend, and as well as their living arrangements, but we weren't able to quantify those. So based on these assumptions, we estimated the new program would cost $3.3 billion annually. So this would be on stop of all existing gift dates. On top of what we're spending on Cal grants, which you heard about, on top of what the universities are spending, on top of what the Federal government is spending, this would be additional dollars, and that amount consists of $2.2 billion for community college students, $800 million for CSU students, and $300 million for UC students, and the difference across the segments primarily is due to differences in the number of students. There are far more community college students. That's why the number's far higher at community colleges as well as some differences in the amount of aid students receive at each of the segments and you heard on the earlier panel that community college students tend to receive a little less aid currently as compared to students at the other segments. These amounts that we estimated don't necessarily match the amount that students are currently borrowing for a couple of reasons that it's important to note. One is that some financially needy students right now they tend to borrow, they, some of them don't borrow right now they might be working more than the amount that we assume right? They might be working 20 or 25 hours a week. There's probably some students like that. Conversely, some right now might be choosing to borrow more and working less. So if you compare our estimates to the amount is currently being borrowed, they don't exactly map one to one for those. After our initial estimate, we then said, well, what if we limit the program to full-time students, which generally is defined as students taking 12 or more units. And if we did that, we think it would cut the program costs roughly in half, so it would be about 1.6 billion. Primarily, it would exclude a lot of community college students who tend to go part-time more frequently than students at the universities. We also suggested the Legislature consider having a time limit consistent with current programs, as well as some academic achievement, making minimal academic progress, as another requirement. Which would reduce the cost somewhat, but we weren't able to factor that into our estimate. And then finally, we laid out a couple of options for the Legislature to phase in the program if it wasn't going to fund it fully. You could target awards to the neediest students first, as defined by the federal formula I eluded to earlier. You could target the program at a particular institution first. So you could start, for example, maybe at the community colleges. You could also take an approach like the state did with middle class scholarships where it set a fixed budget in state law, and then just rationed awards if the program couldn't be fully funded. That hasn't happened yet to that program. So those were some of the phase and options we considered. In closing, two points in particular that we wanted to highlight as you think about this proposal. The first is that we concluded that the program probably would significantly reduce student loan debt. We don't think it would necessarily eliminate student loan debt for a couple of reasons, and that's because of the way the program is structured. So for example, it relies on the expected parent contribution. But you can't necessarily force all parents to contribute. There might be some parents who don't, so a student might have to borrow in that situation. In addition, we did have our assumption on how many hours students work. And students wouldn't be required to work. Some students might choose to borrow instead of working the number of hours that we assume. There could also be circumstances where some students can't find jobs, particularly maybe in a recession where jobs are scarcer and students can't find them, so they might still have to borrow. The second closing point that we wanted to highlight is that the program is a big change, as you've heard from focusing financial aid on tuition coverage as the state has done historically to also include in living costs, which we haven't done of as much in the past. And this does raise some questions about cost control, the state has more control over tuition. The Legislature actually sets tuition in state law for the community colleges for using CSU, the governing boards set tuition. But the state has a lot of influence over tuition level student budget. With living expenses, the state has less structure control over those costs, obviously. It also could create some, perhaps, unintended, consequences. Some students who maybe right now are living at home to save on cost, if there's a new state program that's going to fully fund them, maybe they would choose to move off-campus because the state would pay for it. So we think those are important considerations to keep in mind as you think about expanding aid to cover living cost in addition to tuition. And with that, I'll take any questions.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Weir: good evening. chairman mccarty, chairman medina, honorable members, thank you for this opportunity to speak with you. my name is weir. i'm a professor of sociology just down the street at cal state university, sacramento.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 30, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 41, 'end': 47, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 129, 'end': 133, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Weir: Kevin Weir.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Noelia Gonzalez: good afternoon. my name is noelia jonah gonzalez. i'm the director of admissions and financial aid at california state university, stanislaus. i'm here representing stanislaus state as part of the 23 campus california state university system. and as a system, we are committed to providing access to a high quality education, while maintaining affordability. while the tuition at the csu is among the lowest in the nation, we recognize the financial challenges many families face and provide aid in several forms. the csu does set aside about 1/3 of our new revenue from tuition fees to assist economically disadvantaged students. in the 2015-16 academic year, 372,000 students received nearly $4.2 billion in financial aid and 75% of our csu undergraduate financial aid recipients have their tuition and fees fully covered by grants or waivers. a little information about our campus. we have seen a steady demand for enrollment growth. and our undergraduate student population is growing steadily. as a campus, we are committed to provide access and affordability to our students. although we have students on our campus from everywhere in the state, 80% of our students do come from our local six county area, stanislaus county, san joaquin, merced, tuolumne, calaveras, and mariposa. 43% of our undergraduate students are very low-income, with an average income of $16,000 a year. 74% of our students are first generation college students. we have thousands of students that are the first in their family to go to college. and these students are not only achieving their goals, but their family's dreams. and they're often the torch bearers that light the way for their younger family members to follow them into higher education. our financial aid outreach programming does begin fairly early in the student's career. us, along with the admissions counselors, we begin working with prospective students and their parents as early as the elementary grades to teach them about the availability of financial aid programs. we host early outreach programs and parent programming, so that by the time the students are getting ready for college, and ready to apply for college, they are well aware of the financial aid application process. we work with cal-soap and with local high schools to hold fafsa workshops beginning in october of a student's senior year to help the students and their parents through the financial aid application process. we have about five financial aid advisers on our campus for almost 9,000 students. each of those advisors also handles a special program. we have two representatives that cover the counter and phones. there, also, we have some system people that help work with our programming and all of the reporting we have to do to book the state, the federal and the chancellor's office. we are very automated and which we have to be in order to manage that work load. we strive as our student population has grown, our staffing levels have not, but we do strive to process files in a timely manner so that we can make sure that the majority of our financial aid students have their funding in place, so that they're able to purchase books and pay for their living expenses. we provide student workshops on financial literacy, budgeting, and how to apply for scholarships. we go over teach grants, and loan repayment options to their students academic career at the university. we are also active participants in the csu graduation initiative 2025. we worked closely with academic advising team to improve our graduation rates by educating students on the time to degree. and enrolling course work that will keep them on the graduation path and the cost of staying in school longer. we don't just talk about the additional cost of staying in school an extra year or two but also the opportunity cost that they're missing out by not joining the work force. we, at stanislaus state, promote access and ensure affordability for students with the least ability to pay. we award student grants and scholarship first followed by federal work study and student loans last. the campus does contribute about $200,000 towards the work study program, as our federal allocation is not very large. we also fund raise heavily for our scholarship programs and have raised over a $1 million in the last three years for our one purpose campaign which is focused on providing scholarships. next year, we are starting a scholarship fund for our first generation college students and this effort is being super headed by our president, dr. ellen junn. 93% of our undergraduate students receives some type of financial assistance. the majority of that assistance is in the form of grants. in fact, 76% of our student have their state tuition fees fully covered by a grant. we have seen a steady growth in the grant funding for our students due to our commitment to ensure that college remains affordable. we have partnered with high schools and organizations in our community to ensure that students and their families are aware of the availability of financial aid funding and how to apply. to the extent that our resources allow, we deliver this information and the language spoken in the home of our students, for example, spanish, assyrian, and hmong. and since the 2008-2009 academic year, we have doubled the number of students receiving a cal grant and have increased the number of students receiving a pell grant by 72%. for our students that are receiving a cal grant, a grant funding. students, we fund them with pell grant which is a federal grant and either a state university grant or a cal grant. so they get pell grant and they get sug, state university grant or they get pell grant and a cal grant. 66% of our students receive a pell grant. 38% of our students receive a state university grant, and an additional 38% receive either a cal grant a or a cal grant b. about 10% of our students receive a middle class scholarship. 76% of our undergraduate students have their system why tuition fees covered by a grant. so they're not actually paying for their tuition or fees.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 4553, 'end': 4563, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Norman Caito: Thank you, Chairman Medina and McCarty and members thank you for inviting the representative of the Associations of Independent California Colleges and Universities to speak today. My name is Norman Caito and I'm the Director of Financial Aid at the University of San Francisco, a Jesuit Catholic non-profit university educating students since 1855. I started somewhat after that and I've been working in the financial aid office now in various roles for about 22 years. So close to that. USF is one of 79 extremely diverse, non-profit, private universities that are part of the AICCU. We are a typical Cal Grant receiving university. In terms within this sector of size of endowment and of the limited resources that we have to help meet the growing needs of California students. Our private sectors serves over 186,000 undergraduate students, 76% of those in our sector are California residents. So I make that point that's to remind everyone that we are educating California residents who perhaps are not able to get into the state colleges or who made a choice for a different type of education. We've passed around a couple of documents that give some information about our school and our sector, and hopefully, you have those. At USF, part of our mission is to support access for a diverse student body countered to the myth that our sector only serves predominately wealthy Caucasian students. The numbers prove really otherwise. In our private sector, 28% of our students are Pell-eligible students. 15% are Cal Grant recipients. 45% of our Pell Grant recipients are first-generation college students and over 70% of those are students of color. The USF percentages are very close to that or sometimes higher. As a sector, our private institutions contributed more than $1.8 billion in institutional aid in the 15/16 school year. And over 80% of our sector's undergraduate students received some type of aid. At USF, specifically, over 72% of our undergrads receive financial aid. And we contribute well over $62 million in institutional grants. Many still assume that all private school endowments can cover the cost for our low and middle income students. But that's not the case for most private institutions. At USF, our endowment is just $300 million and when you compare that to $22 billion at Stanford, it's a drop in a bucket. That breaks into about $27,272 per-
[{'start': 20, 'end': 26, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 31, 'end': 38, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 192, 'end': 204, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Greg Peterson: Good afternoon. My name is Greg Peterson. I'm Vice President for Student Support Services at Long Beach City College. And I am thankful for the opportunity to speak on behalf of the California College System in Long Beach City College. As was mentioned earlier by TCOS, there are four primary types of financial available to community college students. So at the federal level, there are the Pell Grant in loans at the state level. The Cal Grants and the board of Governor fee waiver. These sources of data are very important to our students as in 2015-16, up to 2.4 million students we served, 60% of them received some type of aid. Long Beach is very similar so in that same year 15, 16 out of the 35,000 students that we serve over 60% of our students received some type of federal or state financial aid. Which isn't surprising as more than a quarter of the families, Long Beach residence that year earned an income below the poverty level. So in addition to economic challenges, many of our students are first in their family to attend college. So between the financial cost and between the unknown of college, many [UNKNOWN] believe that college for them was not an opportunity, okay? In 2008, Long Beach State College partnered with California State University Long Beach and Long Beach Unified School District to create the Long Beach College Promise. And a key component of the promise was to ensure that every local student believed that college was an option that he or she would go to college by creating the Long Beach College Promise Scholarship. Which really symbolically established that we were removing the barrier cost for every student going to college. While local funds were raised to support the scholarship, the scholarship was primarily made possible through the Board of Governors Fee Waiver, which covers the enrollment fees for our priority students. The, as you now the national [INAUDIBLE] is a national model that's been recognized. As well as a model for mini communities across the state. As these communities and colleges are really stepping up to find a way to support our students in the local community to make access available. The Long Beach College promised that it was much more than just a scholarship program. In fact, covering enrollment fees for students as was mentioned earlier by TICAS is just a small portion of the financial equation for our students. If you look at the net price calculator for a Long Beach City College, we estimate so $1100 for enrollment fees of the total $18,000 estimated annual cost. So that's just a small portion. So the Lumby college promise really looks at how do we change our structures to help students be more successful in moving through our systems so looking at reducing the cost by increasing the time, decreasing their time to achieve their goals. Our students are also similar to our UC and CSU counterparts where our students are struggling with food and security, housing and stability. They struggle with health, childcare, transportation costs, as well as textbooks and materials and supplies. So as also was mentioned by Debbie Cochran, sadly there are for some of our students it's more expensive to attend the local community college than it is to attend the UC due to the packaging of some of our state and federal aid resources. So with this said, I just want to leave two important points with you as your fugitive in future as you deliberate around this complicated issue of college affordability. The first one is, is that the promise movement is very variable. And it really symbolically sets the stage, really pursuing students to know that college is accessible and that they can do that. However, it's just starting point, there's still great unmet financial need for financial students to progress and complete once they. Once they enter and moving through our system. And the second point I want to leave with you is that as Assembly Member Avacadri mentioned, there's not enough money to fund everything. So thinking smarter brings us to think about how our systems and our structures are set up at our colleges. As was mentioned earlier, guided pathways, how we create systems that helps students be more successful? I wanted to share a quick example, so in 2011, 2012 we created a more structured promised pathways for our first year for students as they entered into college. A part of that was that scholarship and what we did is we encouraged students. That we would provide them opportunity access courses a full of courses but we expect them take full load. So on 2011 about 50% of the incoming high school students were tending full time. When we created structure that provide them a full load that number from 50% to 85%. So there's often this believe that Committee catch students don't want to attend full time. It's the structures clean that I believe for them to attend full time. So with that, just really thinking of the structures of how do we build guided pathways that align across the three institutions? How do we help students achieve those goals? And I'll leave that with you. Thank you. Okay, thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 3114, 'end': 3128, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3947, 'end': 3955, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ralph Washington, Jr.: sure, i can, thank you very much, chair medina. i appreciate it. good afternoon, everyone. thank you. my name is washington, jr. i'm president of the uc student association, and i'm also a graduate student in entomology. so, i hope you'll forgive me if i wax a little entomological. all right. not at uc riverside? riverside? no. davis. i think we're all here today because we recognize that education is critical to the future of our society. we need to also remember and recognize that students can't take full advantage of their educational opportunities if they can't afford the full cost of attendance. the majority of the cost of education nowadays is beyond tuition and fees, it's cost of room and board and the cost of food. and students are currently struggling very much to find a safe place to sleep and enough food to eat. college is a time when we can go through so much important growth and development in our lives. and it's a lot like metamorphosis. a safe environment is critical. it requires a lot of stress and energy to deal with. and additionally your form and identity before the process is often very different than what it is afterwards. i think it's important to remember that whether your a caterpillar or a college student, the outcome of any growth and development you experience is greatly dependent upon the context in which it occurs. so i'd like to share a little bit about the context from my own growth and development. i grew up just a few miles from here in northeast oak park. my feelings about oak park are a bit bittersweet, because it's where i first found insects but also where i first learned what it's like to feel true hunger. in high school, i decided that i want to attend uc davis because it's one of the best places in the world to study insects. but like many students who are hungry in oak park, i realized the cost of attendance would be a tremendous barrier to realizing my dreams. i got a scholarship and a cal and pell grant and that's the only reason i was able to go to uc davis in the first place. now i was really excited to study entomology at a major research university. but that's not the most meaningful consequence of me attending uc davis. i vividly remember my first day in the dorms. i went to the dining commons, and i was told that every swipe of my meal plan gave me unlimited access to the food during the assigned hours. i want to let you know that for me this was incredible. when i got back to my room i wept with relief because i felt absolutely certain that i would never feel hungry again. i no longer struggle with food and security, but there are many students who still struggle every day. students are skipping meals so that they can pay for books. students are sitting in the back of class, so that they don't have disturb others with the growling of their stomachs. students are struggling to take full advantage of all of their educational opportunities because they cannot meet a basic need. it might seem like student hunger is an insoluble problem, but i think that there are concrete things that we can do about it. we can increase the size of the cal grant b award to what it could be if it had kept up with inflation. we can provide more awards to the more than 300,000 eligible students every year. we can retain the middle-class scholarship. we can supplement the efforts of campus food pantries. we can also put a lot of deliberate effort into acquiring the data that all of you requested earlier today. i think we're all very much interested in that data, because we want a realistic understanding of the situation. and getting that data might be useful, because it might help us recognize that these issues are of greater social import and are of our collective responsibility. but we have an additional responsibility as leaders, because i don't think that a leader is just someone who takes on additional, specific responsibility. i think a leader is someone who recognizes our collective responsibilities and chooses deliberately to take those responsibilities seriously. thank you. thank you.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 46, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 113, 'end': 128, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 330, 'end': 335, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Patrick Dorsey: good morning, honorable chairs, and assembly members. my name is patrick noelia dorsey, and i am the student body president at sacramento state. and i'm also the co-chair on the food and housing task force at sacramento state, and we've been working to address our students' housing and food and security needs. recently, we just created our emergency on-campus housing to provide shelter and food for students who are in crisis, need a place to stay. that can range from someone who was kicked out of their house for coming out as transgender to someone who might have had to evacuate because of the dam up in oroville. we are trying to make an effort on our campus to really solve these issues. but a little bit about myself. i'm a graduate student. i'm in the public policy and administration program. and i know we have another alum of the program in the room as well. but i did my bachelor's at sacramento state. yeah, yeah, i also did my bachelor's at sacramento state. and i graduated within two years from transferring from a junior college. but i really struggled at my junior college for quite some time. i'm a gay man and being from a very, a community that is very closed-off and not open minded, it was really hard for me to, to find the self worth. the feeling of security of who i was as a person and that i could actually make a difference. i didn't believe that i could achieve a college education let alone start to get my masters. so i'm incredibly proud of myself. but it really was because of faculty and staff who saw my potential. and they pushed me to really live out to that potential. they wanted to see me, to succeed. and i wanted to give back to california. and education through both the community college and now sacramento state has allowed me to do that. but the college experience today is changed. it's different from 20 to 30 years ago. many of you have attended the systems, or have affiliations with the systems, but there's so much anxiety. and i want i want you to think back. remember the anxiety you felt when you were doing your bachelor's. that anxiety of getting your classes, but also the anxiety of graduating and what you're going to do after, trying to figure out your life path. now i want you to imagine that, but imagine being a first-generation college student. imagine being a student that's having to navigate a very complex csu system or a community college system, filling out the fafsa, which has several long questions, is incredibly complex. but also trying to enroll in classes and sometimes not having those classes offered for you. this is what it means for a lot of the students today. they are working several jobs so you're able to pay not only for theirselves, but for their families and being able to support them. and so there's a lot of trade-offs that come for our students when they're deciding to pursue an education and whether they should pursue employment instead. the csu system has undergone a lot of changes to really make up for the changing of the demographics of the students we serve. we've gone through minority-majority now, that we're serving, and we're trying to address the unique challenges that they face. the graduation initiative 2025 and the student success plans of all 23 campuses, they really explain how they're trying to increase efficacy through data-driven decision making. but also, smart budget allocations that keep students focused. that means, opening additional course sections, that meets student demand for particular majors. and they're also developing career readiness initiatives to help prepare our students once they get through their classes, they're getting ready to graduate, but also to be prepared to serve employers and to work in the communities that the institutions are serving. but the css system is severely underfunded. and the financial aid packages are not really meeting the needs that our students are having to pay. and that ranges from low socioeconomic but also middle income, and a lot of that has been talked about today. about three-fourths of what students are having to pay is not just the tuition, it's all the outside expenses. it's the close of living, it's rent. and right now, california is facing a housing affordability crisis. and that is trickling down into rental properties. and what we're trying to do is get students into, because not a majority of students live on campus, and they have to pursue housing elsewhere. and with increasing rents in many of the cities where our csus are located it's becoming incredibly difficult. but, there's other instances where there's inequities that exist. for example our, stem majors are actually more expensive. it costs more to educate someone in engineering or one of the sciences. and a lot of cases, campuses have had to increase fees for these particular majors to make up the lack of funding from the state. so to provide a field trip to go to an infrastructure project so a stem major can learn how to become an engineer, they're going to have to pay additional fees for that. or lab supplies, so they'll be able to do experiments inside the lab and become a chemist. that takes a lot of money away from financial aid that students are already using to help supplement their income to be able to provide for their cost of living. and so this is creating barriers for a lot of students who are from underserved communities. and they see the huge sticker price of some of these other majors, and they're having to change their career goals for that to make adjustments. for myself we've talked about the food insecurity and the homelessness the one in five and the one in 10. but if you were to do the math in the csu system, that means that 120,000 students in the california state university system are not getting enough to eat. 120,000 students. if you do the math again 48,000 students are worried about where they're going to stay tonight. that's an incredible amount of students quite frankly. and it's quite alarming when we're talking about graduation rates, timely progression to degree. because i'm sorry if they're in class and they're worried about where their next meal is coming from or if they are going to have to sleep in their car again or find some sort of shelter, that stress is going to take away from anything to do with completing the class and getting an a so they can succeed. at sacramento state, like i said, we been trying to address these problems and other campuses have been doing the same as well. between the student housing, with providing micro grants, we've talked a little about that previous panelists. finding grants for students who are facing an emergency crisis. and those grants are available for the students if there's an unforeseen consequence. but there is more that the state can do. i truly believe that we need to increase the amount of the cal grant b access award to provide the much-needed support for our long-time students. those are the students that are using that financial aid to survive and to help keep their own families afloat. i also believe that we should increase the amount of the competitive cal grant so that more eligible applicants will receive the award so more students can have additional access. i also believe that we should ensure the continuation of the northwest scholarship. i know i'm asking for a lot here. but i do believe that the middle class scholarship really provides that additional funding for those students as we are noticing in california the shrinking middle class. and a lot middle class families are not able to afford even the $500. a recent federal court showed that families do not have $500 to spare in case of an emergency. but i think the most important thing that we need to focus on is funding for the csu. that is one of the most critical things that we can do to address some of the budget shortfalls. we need to focus on long-term and sustainable funding. recently i spoke at the trustees meeting. and addressing how sacramento state students are opposed to the tuition increases right about 1,000 signatures and surveying, most students most students replied with what they would do with that additional $270 is pay towards rent. it is the cost of living that students are most effective with and we need to look at many miles, so we can prevent that in the future. it's important. because if the state fails to do so, it's a loss. it is a loss for the state in additional tax revenues and it's continued economic vitality, but it's a loss for the health of the communities that need a well educated workforce to meet employer demands and it is a loss for students and families that are seeking the california american dream. it's a loss of hope for many students that have seen higher education were affordable and accessible for previous generations of californians. thank you.
[{'start': 65, 'end': 86, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Zachary Awe: Thank you, Chair McCarty. Thank you, Chair Medina. Members of the Committee, thank you also for inviting me here today. I am Zachary Awe, I am the Legislative Affairs Director for the Student Senate for California Community Colleges. I was chosen out of 2.1 million students to speak here today for the community college system and I may be a little bit biased, but I think the community college system is the greatest in the world. We are refuge for people. We are the first chance. We are the last chance. Personally, I don't think I would be here today if it wasn't for the community culture system. I wasn't a good students in high school. I got a 2.8 GPA, even though all of my teachers said I had potential, and you could also say it was because of the army but I think that the community college system is the reason that I'm here today. However, it's not meeting its mark and I don't think, it's not at its fullest potential yet. I am from a college where 50% of our students have food insecurity, and I believe that is only because they understand what food insecurity is. I come from a college where we have countless numbers of students that are homeless. We have countless numbers that live in the woods right behind my school. AB1995 was probably one of the greatest things to ever pass for those students because now they can have access to hygiene. They can have access to just being able to wake up in the morning and be able to be clean.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 24, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 43, 'end': 49, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 125, 'end': 136, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Rosenberger: sure. kimberly patrick rosenberger with service employees international union state council. everything that's been said today we support, so i don't want to really harp on that. i just want to hit some snapshots of our members. the current state of the system, we have a member who is an eligibility worker, and she was having a conversation with the director about how she has two young children. they're about 10 and 12. and she went to me to see how much money she needed to set aside to save for her kids to go to school. they told her $554 a month per child. that is the entirety of her paycheck monthly. so at this time she's stored away all she can but, there's limits to what she has. the laos option today was $20,000 that the parents would contribute. that's per child. so a quick snapshot of one of our members, a classified employee at a k through 14 school averages $22,000 a year. a third of them are already college educated people. that 20,000 for one child makes the access for their kids a further than a reality. i think the concern today is not only we can introduce access for low income and not putting that burden completely on the parents or completely on the students but also for the middle income. there's a complete attack on the middle class, and if we remove that access, we are not going to see the workforce improved in california. so just really want to harp on the fact that i know we have to choose where that money comes from, but it's something that our low income workers need, and something that our middle workers need. it's no longer just a greater good, it's almost an expectation to have higher education when you enter the workforce. thank you.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kristin McGuire: Good evening, my name is Kristin Mcguire with Young Invincibles, we are a national policy and advocacy group. We are based in Oakland and in Los Angeles here in California. I am also a product of the CSU system, Go Toros. I'm here today to say that Young Invincible supports proposals that give all students a pathway to a debt-free degree through various reforms that decrease the cost and expand support. And as we've heard today, tuition costs have increased, and the cost of attendance sometimes can be made up from 60 to 90% of non-tuition fees. We believe that free community college tuition is a part of the solution but more importantly we're interested in a debt free college plan, which would cover the non-tuition expenses like room and board, and food, and transportation. With just free tuition, low-income students would still carry an excessive debt load, because all of these non-tuition expenses like you've heard today. With this said, a free University tuition in our opinion is definitely regressive, as higher-income students will mostly benefit. Because low-income students already receive the free tuition. So Young Invincibles urges you today to strengthen need-based financial aid by increasing the number of competitive Cal Grants and the size of the Cal Grant B Access Award. Thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 215, 'end': 220, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Amparo Diaz: Good afternoon, Members of the Committee. My name is Amparo Diaz. I'm here on behalf of the California State Student Association. We represent students in the CSU system. I really appreciate the Committee's leadership on affordability, and I want to urge you to continue to invest in the Cal Grant program, specifically in the Cal Grant B program that really addresses the cost beyond tuition and fees. Additionally, I would urge you all to support the CSU's fully funded budget request so that the shift of a public higher education cost of attendance doesn't switch from the state to students and if we further let the burden of cost for running a public institution be put on the back of students we're really hindering access to a an affordable higher education system. Thank you.
[{'start': 53, 'end': 64, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carty Medina: good evening chairs, i'm carty kimberly medina. member irwin, of austin webster on behalf of the faculty association of california community colleges. we just wanted to thank both committees for convening this hearing today. access and affordability are kind of the core of our values for our association. we are very encouraged that this is an issue that we're definitely paying attention to here in the legislature. couple of quick things. we definitely support all of the comments that were made today. i would like to echo one really quickly about our students. and that is that a lot of this conversation has to do with full time students attending full time, but it's also important to make sure that we're including part-time students in this conversation especially in a community college system. a lot of those part-time students are older who are returning either first time college students or trying to just advance their careers so it's important to keep those in mind. thanks so much.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 55, 'end': 60, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 65, 'end': 79, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Andrew Medina: hello, andrew of the asian americans advancing justice-california. we're also part of the college for all coalition. last year we worked on college readiness funds as well as student support services and outreach programs at the uc. and in our implementation work, we have discovered that a lot of the importance of college affordability and access, just to a lot of students to be able to take their classes, is very vital in order for them to reach graduation. so we join the chorus of many today in terms of calling for financial aid services especially for the students of the most neediest, as well as ensuring that we take a holistic look of their needs, of financial needs, outside of tuition as well. thanks.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ling Zong: hi, good afternoon. i'm ling with the campaign for college opportunity. in order to ensure that more californians are able to get to and through college, we believe we must strengthen the cal grant program, which helps bring college within reach for thousands of students. for students at all public segments, the majority of college cost are beyond tuitions and fees. by increasing the size of the cal grant b access award and the number of competitive cal grants, we can help ensure that more low income students can cover the total cost of college and more eligible applicants receive an award, thank you.
[]
Clara Medina: Hello, good afternoon. My name is Clara Medina. I'm the Legislative Director for my campus, UC Merced, and I also sit on the board of directors for UCSA. And I'm here to reiterate the point that was made. That the total cost of attendance is often not known to us when we even are accepted and start attending the University or any part of the higher education system. And this would include, as in particular, the non-tuition cost, which include cost of housing, cost of food. Which is part of the reason why we're facing high levels of foods and housing and security through out the entire state. On my campus, it looks also really different. We're a student population of over 80% students of color, over 70% first generation students. I think we're pretty unique and the menu is revolutionary campus system. But the way that the cost plays in on our campus is that it also impacts our ability to help out back home, considering our background and our demographic. As an undocumented student myself, the California Dream Act was an opportunity for me to attend. And this year, the Dream Loan Program was an opportunity for me to stay at the University and continue. So, I want to reiterate that it's critical that we focus on need-based aid to make sure that we have resources for some of our most vulnerable and at times, our most powerful communities across the state. And resources that they can tap into to not only get to the higher education system, stay in the higher education system, and eventually graduate. Thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brenda Gutierrez: Hi, good afternoon. My name is Brenda Gutierrez. I'm currently this year's University of California Students Association Board Chair, UCSA, as Ralph spoke earlier. I'm traveling from Merced today and I want to share a little bit of my experience really quickly at UC Merced. As a first generation low-income student, I've directly benefited from need-based financial aid programs. My family makes $25,000 a year for a family of four. My estimated family contribution is zero. At some point last semester, I was working three jobs to sustain myself and make sure I was still sending money back home. Meanwhile, being a, maintaining my status as a full-time student. It was physically and emotionally exhausting as you all have heard. Unfortunately, my story is not unique. It's the same story for many students across the state. And we have to reinvest in the resources that allow students such as myself to succeed and complete our degrees. I want to emphasize the importance of access to funding for summer school to catch up, advance, and finish our education. Our time is limited not only through campus policy, but also via available funding. I also want to really reiterate that 60% of college cost go beyond tuition. So, even the tuition free model would have drawbacks. Thank you so much for your time and thank you for your service.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 134, 'end': 138, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 143, 'end': 148, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Erica Romero: Good afternoon Erica Romero on behalf of the Association of Independent California Colleges and Universities representing 79 WASC accredited non profit College and universities where we educate almost as many students as the UC, including 27,000 low income students. Whether we are working on streamlining transfer or degree completion on a community college campus or we are working on courses that get students to nursing degrees or their teaching credentials faster, we are committed to college affordability. We look forward to working with the Legislature to keep that affordability through the CAL grant program and through AB 1166 Assemblymember Burke's College opportunity Act. Thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Thia Chamillio: Hi, my name is Thia Chamillio, and I attend UC Irvine. I just wanted to share my experience while being there. My freshman year of college was probably my hardest year, because I chose to live in on campus housing. That meant my family had to pay about $4,300 a quarter, which was more than my family's rent. And so that was a real burden on my family, and payment's couldn't be made on time every month, which meant that there would be a hold. I would have a financial hold. And that meant that I couldn't use my student ID to swipe in to Commons. I couldn't go to the cafeteria, I didn't have access to meals. So, I just want to reiterate that there are more costs to students that just tuition. There's housing security, there's transportation, there's food security.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alex Caliena: Hello, my name is Alex Caliena and I am a student from Shasta College. Now, when I first moved to Sacramento, I didn't really have the most stable living arrangements. I actually had to couch surf from one friends house to another, never really knowing where I would wake up the next morning. Now, on top of that. I had to worry about keeping up with my college course work and also serving as the Vice President of the state wide community college student Association. Now as everything by some of the things have been said here today, I now know that I was never alone when facing this difficulties. Now, tuition cost make it very difficult for low income students to have equitable access towards higher educationw, which is why I respectably want to ask this state Legislature to invest in low income students like myself because I know that I am not alone. By increasing the size of the Cal grant B access award. Assembly Member McCarty, as your constituent and as hopefully a future Sacramento State student, I know I would personally appreciate this. Thank you chair. Hope you guys have a good day.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 934, 'end': 941, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brandon Collins: Hi, thanks for having me. My name is Brandon Collins. I was asked to sort of provide this overview on forest health and I was given a long list of things to address in a short amount of time and I'm going to try to talk real fast to get through that list. So the first, just to start out with the things I'd liked to sort of walk away or have you all walk away with from this talk are one, that forests have changed considerably from historical conditions and we have a number of data sources that support that. Two, the driver of that change is pretty much the lack of fire. It's surprising that that's what's driving the current situation but it is. There's so many studies that corroborate that. And the third thing is that there's something we can do about this. We have a few tools, if you will, as to how to address this forest problem. But the reality of this is it needs to happen soon and it needs to happen at large scale. These are not things that we need to experiment really with any more given what we've seen in the forests themselves. So the talk is largely focused on Sierran forests, that is in Sierra Nevada, but it applies to really all forests types in the Western US that have this common history with fire, in that they experience fire every 5 to 15 years. And we have this, like I said, from a number of data sources that support that. So, like I said, it's Sierran specific but it has broader application. So this figure, I know, is really messy and complicated but there's a lot in it. And if you can bear with me for a moment, you can actually take a few things from it that should hopefully stick with you for a long time. On the horizontal axis that is on the bottom, that is years before present. This is a study of reconstruction of fire events, drought, and average temperature, going back about 1,500 years. This is reconstructed from tree rings, charcoal settlement and a few other sources. The things to note about this, first, there are the red line, that is what they call a standardized index of sort of fire activity. And you can see that over the course of hundreds of years, fire activity sort of goes up and comes back down and goes up and comes back down. If you look in that yellow box, that's really the last 100 years. That's the last 100 years where we've seen a major, major downturn in fire activity. And the odd thing about that is that that downturn in fire activity is corresponding with a sharp increase in temperature which is in the blue, and a sharp increase in drought frequency which is in that pinkish color. So if you'd look back before the yellow box, every time there's a peak in drought frequency and a peak in temperature, there's a peak, a corresponding peak in fire activity. But somehow, we're going the opposite way. We're going up in temperature, up in drought frequency over the last 100 years, but our fire activity is going way down. So, the cause there is basically us putting out fires, counter to what climate would have dictated. So, if you look at that, on the top panel, that black dotted line, that's a statistical prediction of where fire activity should be given its historical range with climate. But that difference between the black dotted line and the red line is us. That's us putting out fires on the land. So we're going in opposite directions, and the argument at least from these authors in this paper is that, that's not sustainable. At some point, those things are going to come back together. Drought, and temperature, and fire activity are going to get back in alignment. And in a way, we're kind of seeing that, right? We're seeing, despite our best efforts from a suppression standpoint, we're still seeing pretty big fires every single year. So at a different level that change, that loss of fire sort of on these landscapes has resulted in a major change in forest, like I said before. And that change is really is just in the density of the forest overall. This is a picture from 1915. It was taken on the Plumas National Forest before any harvesting. There was no harvesting here. Everyone looks at that picture and says, well they cut all the big trees down. Well, that wasn't the case at all. This is before harvesting happened. Here's that same cabin, same exact photo point taken in 2005, and that's what we're talking about. When you shut down fire that in these forests historically happened every 5 to 15 years, you get that, you get a major change in density. And what does that mean? Well, a lot of people like that, a lot of people look at it and say, good, I can't see my neighbors. I love having more trees around me, but the problem is that is a hazard from a fire standpoint. It has what we call ladder fuels, these are small trees that allow fire to move from the surface to the mid ground, all the way to the upper ground of trees. So we get these what was referred to before as sort of high severity fires. Uncharacteristic, at least historically in these forest. And, now, there's more trees pooling or competing for the same amount, in some cases even less water than there was historically. So competition is up. Therefore, each individual tree doesn't have the vigor it might have in those very open conditions on the left, hence very susceptible to bark-beetle mortality. If you don't like the pictures, here's some numbers. This is from an area about 40,000 acres that we had surveys that were performed in 1911. Again before any timber harvesting when really little impact of fire suppression in 1911. We remeasured those same inventory areas in 2013. And what we're seeing is a, we have a couple different ways we characterize how the forest is. On the left is basal area, that's really just a cross-sectional area of trees. It's just saying, how much cross-sectional area is spread out over a given acre. If you see, we had about 90 square feet of tree cross-sectional area per acre, historically. That's doubled. That's doubled in 2013. If you want to just count trees, just the number of trees per acre, that has increased about five fold. Five fold, this is a pretty robust survey over about 40,000 acres. So, anyway this is not, just a snapshot. The picture of course, is a snapshot, but this is something that happened for over a very large area. And then the other things that we've lost, some of the character of the forest in terms of the proportion of pine and we've certainly lost shrubs which are important from a habitat standpoint for certain bird species and small mammals. Now what results is with those forest conditions and that change over a large scale, we see fires like this. This is the King Fire on the El Dorado National Forest just west of Lake Tahoe. All that red, that big red patch in the middle, that's 100% mortality. That's what we call stand replacing or high severity fire. All trees are dead and that patch that is about 50,000 acres of continuous, pretty much continuous 100% mortality.  This is what it looks like on the ground, but imagine that over 50,000 acres. Here's what it looks like. This is obviously not the same place, this is another place after a stand replacing or high severity fire event. This is what it looks like 10 years later. Now, why does that matter to you? It should matter because, well, for a number of reasons, the amount of carbon that's on that side is about an order of magnitude or two lower than it was when you had a full forest in place. Secondly, the potential to burn again at high severity and completely eliminate even regenerating trees is high because you have an incredibly continuous, what we call, fuel bed of shrubs that then can burn again at high severity and effectively change the character of that land for a long time. So, beyond the fire impacts, which are in discrete footprints, we are all obviously are here because of the tree mortality issue. That same increasing density, like I said before, has increased the competition and lowered the vigor on individual trees. Now the problem with the mortality event, you might say, we have a five fold increase in trees, why does it matter if we're losing some of our trees, right? We want to actually have a reduction in density. Well, the problem is that the mortality is focused on our large trees. Our large trees are the ones we want to hold onto, and that landscape there is sort of the pillar of the forest from the standpoint of habitat and all kinds of other services,. And their already at a deficit mostly because of historical logging relative to historical conditions. So we want the large trees in there. We want to cut the small trees out of the forest. So here's a sort of rough depiction of what it is that we're doing right now. On the very left panel, that's the amount of treatment that we do in a given year. The average annual treatment and that includes wildfire. We're actually saying wildfire is a treatment here, we're giving it, even though we know that it's not. Then the middle panel is the historical amount of area burned historically per year. This is sort of averaged across the entire Sierra's. And this is an estimate of course, there's error in this estimate.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Daniele Lindler: Okay, I think I'm on now. So Madame Chairwoman Garcia and Members of the Committee, thank you for having us. I'm Daniele Lindler, I am CEO of Jefferson Resource Company. We're a certified woman-owned forestry and biological services company in California. We have offices from Placerville to Yreka, Fort Bragg and Anderson and I'm a registered professional forester and a pest control adviser and want to just chat with you about why are all the pine trees dying and I've heard some of it from colleagues here, but even heard that the unprecedented forest mortality in California is due to the insect attacks, primarily Western pine beetle, as well as other species, and as a result of the drought and warmer temperatures, milder winters, and that is true in part. While those are contributing factors to the epidemic we're witnessing, they're by no means the only factors, nor are they the root cause of the problem, as you've heard. The recent drought added the final blow to an already stressed system. The system, this is not the first drought that this state has had, nor is it the first drought that these trees have experienced, but what is the difference this go around is the density of the trees. Forest management professionals have known for decades, our forests are overly dense where on average historically, we had 20 to 50 trees an acre, today in some of our forests, we have over 500, even 1000 trees per acre in some areas. We call it dog hair thickets, where you can't even get through it. These densities are not historically natural nor are they stable. With higher density, there's higher competition amongst the trees for water and nutrients. It's a basic function of supply and demand. Without adequate waters, the trees become stressed and are unable to use their natural defense systems against insects because all of their energy is literally being focused on just staying alive. As US Forest Service, specific South West research station demonstrates, that given standard densities measured as the standard density index, forest resource managers can predict which insects are going to attack our forest at certain densities. So it's no surprise for those of us that study this thing, that the bark beetles are here and have grown to epidemic populations, given the high density of trees that exist today. I personally learned that we were on the tip of this iceberg back in 1992 when I started forestry school. We were talking about it then. So, how did we get here. So as others have said, historically our forests have always evolved with disturbance, rather it was in the form of insects, disease, or fire, we always had some kind of agent that was in our forests reducing the number of tress. However around the middle of the last century, we became very professional in suppressing these natural disturbances, primarily fire. And also around the 80s or early 90s, we substantially limited the amount of harvesting that we did on a national forest, which by our practical definitions, is a disturbance you know mechanism. So now fast forward to today where our forests grow many times more volume each and every year than we harvest, and you end up with a density fuel situation, which is the catalyst for the insects that we're experiencing now, and then you add on the drought and it's a perfect storm and our forests literally become a buffet for the insects. So had we been proactive and at least went in and thinned and reduced those densities, our forests would not have been under such stress and competition for resources, and they would have, by all practical measures, in most instances, been able to fight the insects like they had before. So now that we not only have the mortality issue, we also have the impending risk of catastrophic wildfire, which will right the ship and get the system back to historic levels, and with that, our forests are now on their way of being net emitters of carbon, so think about that. Instead of being an incredible sink of carbon, because that's what woody biomass is, it's stored carbon. We are now emitting more carbon than we're sequestering as predicted by the US Forest Service FIA Program and CalFire's FRAP program, among others. There's a white paper from UC Berkeley that's talking about this, and we continue to ignore the math. What we're seeing is just the tip of the iceberg, and it's not a matter of if fire's going to reenter our forests, it's when and at what level. So where do we go from here and what options do we have? As a private forester, we know we must reduce the standard density index to reduce the insect outbreaks. Well, insects have always been present, they're always there in the forests. You know it not like they just showed up with the densities. They are always there, it's just the trees are able to protect themselves. So we know that we need to reduce the densities. Many advocate for the user prescribed fire. I work on small landowners, anywhere from one acre to 10,000 acre landowners and I can tell you in managing thousands of acres of non-industrial timberline throughout the state, the risk of putting fire on their land is extreme, and they go against it every single time. It is not a tool that they are willing to take because the liability is too great. And one needs not to look any further than the ongoing litigation to understand the harsh economic reality of communities in and private land owners, and what that means if a fire escapes, the financial risk associated not only with the land owners, but also myself. The insurance cost for me to recommend fire is cost prohibitive. I can't afford the insurance. Its tens of thousand of dollars for a company of my size just to recommend fire, and only for that one insurance, by the way. So in my opinion, prescribed fire is a useful tool. I personally feel that it's best left to large land owners such as industrial land owners or federal governments, state governments that are able to absorb that risk and those costs. The other reason I would advocate not only from the risk standpoint, but because some of my properties are small landowners, fires tend to generally select towards even age systems, because they burn off all your understory. So for some of my small landowners that have an uneven aged goal, they can't achieve that on small lands when you're burning it every three to five years, or 10 years. So, and then furthermore, logistically, trying to coordinate fire crews within the given burn windows, and the windows that we have under our burn plans with the air resources control board, they make it logistically impossible at times to burn for prescribed fire, let alone even burning slash piles. In the forest practice rules I'm required to burn my slash piles by the following April of which they were created and I have a hard time, even just getting the piles burned, let alone doing prescribed fire because of the limited burn windows that I have. So, my option is biomass thinning and harvesting material. We select towards smaller diameter, thin from below, type operations. We typically remove all the chips. We don't leave chips on-site, especially on small land owners because you're going to be selecting for red turpentine beetle. That when you chip the, it releases strappings that will bring in insects, the beetle being the one that I'm concerned about and the other thing, is i need some kind of economic veil to make it pay because on small land owners I don't have the economies of scale to get cruising and right now we're losing our infrastructure. So, I'm at the bottom of the totem pole to get staffing in. So in short, as a professional, bolstered by decades of peer reviewed and published science, it's my opinion that we desperately need to recognize the full cost of human environmental detriment. When it comes to our overstocked forests, we need to thereby assign reasonable human value to bring in our force back to prewire suppression stocking levels. I do advocate for grant funding. I'm involved with the C fit program heavily, and I can tell you its funding maybe a tenth of what we can actually do on the landscape, even though it is funded at higher levels than we've had in the recent past, but like Lori, I think we need Other alternatives to help our small landowners. So anyways, I would just advocate that we need all the tools in the toolbox when it comes to dealing with this problem and not just rely on fire for small landowners and that we need to use appropriate Science based management and thank you for your time. Thanks.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 53, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 113, 'end': 128, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 4031, 'end': 4044, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8242, 'end': 8246, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ken Pimlott: good afternoon. make sure i'm on here. there we go. good afternoon, committee chairs and members of our committees. ken jonah pimlott, director of cal fire. and with that title it's not only the chief of cal fire but it's also of california's state foresters, so not only responsible for the protection from the wild land fire but the resources issues at cal fire by a statute as responsible 31 million acres of forest and water shed lands through out california and that is predominantly private forest and water shed lands in california, not the federal publicly owned forest lands or state park lands. it's the predominantly private forested or water shed lands around the state. we're talked a lot today and they've laid a foundation i think for the issue for you. so i don't want to really rehash the discussion because the previous panel and craig have done an outstanding job i think of laying before you the issue. but the issue is real. we talked about the tree mortality crisis. over 102 million trees have succumbed. so far to this epidemic level of western pine beetle and others. the governor proclaimed a state of emergency. we've created a task force led by the state, with over 80 entities, including the forest service, local governments, many other organizations utilities from around the state. but the focus of that group while it's got a number of working groups looking at these utilization challenges that you talked about, looking at where are we going to process this material, but the reality is 102 million trees, most of those will stay up in the forest and rot and fall to the forest floor. we are focusing right now primarily on the public safety threats associated with those dead trees. power line corridors, escape routes, protecting critical infrastructure, what we're calling tier one high hazard areas. just looking at those and where to put the material, how to remove that certainly has proved to be a daunting challenge. the reality is we must continue to focus on how to get ahead of that. as... talked about, it will take several years of precipitation like we're seeing this here, to really stop the forward progress of this bark beetle to the extend that its at. so we are going to continue to face the challenge we are facing for the next several years, drought or not. and that's not just, again, the epidemic level of insects. but we've got to continue to focus on managing our forest. to prevent the catastrophic kinds of fires that we're seeing that are completely destroying our forest stands. it takes all the tools in the toolbox. we're talking about prescribed fire today. but certainly, if we've heard both commercial, pre-commercial kinds of harvesting or fuels treatment. all of that is critical, all the tools in the toolbox to make that just to deal with this challenge. i think what i really want to focus on right now is a good, clear understanding of the differences in the landscape across the state. cal fire is responsible for supporting the private land ownerships, private watershed lands throughout california. 31 million acres, of that about 15 million is in forrest landscapes. about half of that 15 million are your large commercial, land ownerships. the remainder, 7, 8 million acres, are small, non-industrial, private force landowners, meaning there're landowners that... talked about. these range from 10 acres, 50 acres a 100 acres. these are family owned forest lands, they're family owned lands. they may have been inherited, that's been passed down by families, or they are witting it as an investment. but at the end of the day, most of these small force landowners don't have the resources at their disposal to manage the land. they don't necessarily have the expertise. they certainly don't have the fiscal resources or the actual physical resources to go out and do the work. cal fire, as the state forestry agency, provides technical assistance to all of these landowners to work with consulting foresters such as... and many others, to provide tools so that they can manage their land, but it's entirely voluntary. there are no laws that dictate that this landowners engaging prescribe fire, or that they harvest timber. so we have got to continue to work through and find incentives for these landowners to engage in prescribe fire and managing their forest land. and again, it's very expensive. you heard the cost of reforestation. it's not just a matter of planting a seedling out there after the fire, clearing the land of either burned vegetation or green vegetation, extremely expensive, and then maintaining that over time to protect that investment. all of that is cost prohibitive or can be very expensive for individual landowners. many, many other issues are prohibitive. you heard again many of the previous speakers talk about the disincentives to engage in using prescribed fire and many of the other tools on the landscape. there are a variety of programs available. we talked about the california forest improvement program. but again, those are public funds, funds can be limited. but just last year, that program was funded about $2 million to assist these small private force landowners to do work. but again, they have to have some skin in the game, and have to have the ability to put funds and capital upfront to be able to engage in that.  working again, forest landowners, prescribe fire is a very, can be very daunting. and as you heard from previous speakers, the social license to engage and put smoke in the air. so to engage in prescribed burning on private lands, it would take 20 or 30 landowners together contiguously to build a prescribed burn project that has of any consequence or size,unlike federal ownership where again, a management plan covers thousands of acres. so the challenge we have is bringing together willing landowners to engage and helping them understand the importance of putting prescribed fire on the ground. every land owner has a different management objective, and so our responsibility is to help educate and bring them together, and assist them meeting their management objectives. cal fire has had a number of programs over time to support, prescribe fire, and chaparral management. our vegetation management program initiated in statue, in the early 80s, 1981, was a program designed just for that purpose, and i believe rich mentioned it earlier. its a program where the state cost-shared with private property owners to assist them with burning their land. we would provide the resources, we would assume the responsibility to take that project on, and see it through to completion. but it's ebbed and flowed over the course of the last 30 years, and certainly, been challenged by obviously budget constraints. in the last five years, we've had unprecedented drought which has left fuel conditions extremely parched, been very dangerous to burn in many of these areas. and again, where the private lands are different is that, that's where the 39 million people are, or many of them are. so engaging in prescribed fire and those activities in these wild land urban and interface areas is more expensive, and certainly can be more challenging. so all of that combined has led to some challenges in getting our program really where it needs to be. we are a 100% supporter of the mou that greg talked about, with all of our partners to put more fire back on the landscape and we are challenging ourselves as an organization to do more with what we have. i've given the department, all of our 7,000 fire fighters direction this year that we will accomplish 20,000 acres of prescribed burning this year and that may not sound like a lot when we talk about needing to burn 3 or 4 million acres across the state. but when we have a program that barely burns 3 or 4,000 acres last year we've got to redirect and start focusing similar continue to build from year to year. so we will continue to push ourselves and challenge more burning on the landscape. we're also looking at engaging in partnerships with our federal partners in using authorities to burn across boundaries. we're engaging a greenhouse gas reduction funding and sra fire prevention funds to do much of this work across the landscape as well. and i believe we funded about $1.5 million in projects through the ght program in fiscal year 14-15. and hope to see some more in the current round.
[{'start': 116, 'end': 133, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 848, 'end': 853, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7332, 'end': 7336, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Karen Lange: chair and members. karen ken lange on behalf of the placer county board of supervisors. they're very active in the tree mortality task force. they did want to emphasize to the committee and anyone who cares or is interested, the 25% match for local disaster assistance that they need to come up with to draw down the state funding has proven to be a real challenge. and so, for the 10 counties that have the highest mortality rate, only one of them has actually been able to draw down the funding that the governor has actually put in the budget to deal with the tree mortality problem. that 25% for a rural county with a small budget and a ton of unincorporated area is a real challenge, and so they identified that as one of a bigger problems and also the insurance piece that you are starting to drill down on. the homeowners even do the cutting to make sure there's enough clearance to meet the standard. those folks are losing their insurance because of mortality issues is just so severe. so they're hoping, they wanted me to communicate to you that of course the prescribed fires would be wonderful, every tool in the toolbox like the chief said. but also the insurance issue in continuing to drive folks into a place where they're buying on the unregulated market, like lloyd's of london is a big one, and the premiums are incredibly expensive. so those are the things that are seen out there in county land and they wanted also to make sure i just emphasize to you. the enormity is hard to convey in words, and i know they want to invite as many if you out there to see it in person as possible. and finally, the trees that are down and dying are having huge impacts on their water infrastructure. so when we already have so much water that needs to get into the channels, the trees are destructing their water infrastructure, increasing the problems that we're having right now. so all things that we hope you consider as you consider any new policies. thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Satina Pascone: good afternoon. i'm satina karen pascone on behalf of the rural counties. rcrc represents 35 rural counties statewide. our member counties have been heavily impacted by the tree mortality. in fact, eight of the 10 hazard zone tree mortality counties are located within our membership. while we support the use of prescribed burning and forest management, we do recognize that it is only one tool in the toolbox. and we should be mindful of the varying conditions of the forest as we look to improve overall forest health and prevent high severity wild fire in the future. rcrc would also encourage members of this committee that haven't done so to get out to tree mortality areas and see it up close. tree mortality enforce health, in general, have dramatic climate change implications as well as profound impacts on water quality and supply for the entire state. thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joe Rawitzer: I'm sorry, my name is Joe Rawitzer. And I'm project coordinator for the Central Coast Prescribed Fire Council. And I'd like to address the issue of insurance liability relative to increase of prescribed fire. At the scale and increase that's needed, what we need to support is private initiative burning in addition to CAL FIRE's VMP program. The VMP program will be limited to 60,000 acres a year under the EIR that will be issued. So if you look at the scale, that 500,000 acres that needs to be done in the state, there needs to be private initiative burning, and we will need to support from the Legislature to address the liability issues relative to doing that. So there is capacity. There is the ability to do the burning but we are going to need help. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Mason: Good afternoon. Paul Mason with Pacific Forest Trust, and I'll be brief given the time. But I just want to put a finer point on one of the things that Speaker Atkins just brought up in terms of directing additional funding to some of these activities. We have a real window of opportunity right now, especially in the areas with a lot of tree mortality, where the trees are still standing, they dropped a lot of their needles. There is a window of a couple of years where we can get in there and do a lot of large scale burning, that counterintuitively maybe would really reduce the risk over time. And our ability to be able to get up to speed and get that accomplished, that scale is going to be directly related to how much funding there is to do that. So as we're going through the budget process this year, I think it's important to stretch, recognizing that we have some biological imperatives here and a limited window. So that's going to ramp up over five years. If we have money this next budget cycle, we can actually get after this challenge. Thanks.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 159, 'end': 165, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brandon Collins: hi, thanks for having me. my name is brandon jonah collins. i was asked to sort of provide this overview on forest health and i was given a long list of things to address in a short amount of time and i'm going to try to talk real fast to get through that list. so the first, just to start out with the things i'd liked to sort of walk away or have you all walk away with from this talk are one, that forests have changed considerably from historical conditions and we have a number of data sources that support that. two, the driver of that change is pretty much the lack of fire. it's surprising that that's what's driving the current situation but it is. there's so many studies that corroborate that. and the third thing is that there's something we can do about this. we have a few tools, if you will, as to how to address this forest problem. but the reality of this is it needs to happen soon and it needs to happen at large scale. these are not things that we need to experiment really with any more given what we've seen in the forests themselves. so the talk is largely focused on sierran forests, that is in sierra nevada, but it applies to really all forests types in the western us that have this common history with fire, in that they experience fire every 5 to 15 years. and we have this, like i said, from a number of data sources that support that. so, like i said, it's sierran specific but it has broader application. so this figure, i know, is really messy and complicated but there's a lot in it. and if you can bear with me for a moment, you can actually take a few things from it that should hopefully stick with you for a long time. on the horizontal axis that is on the bottom, that is years before present. this is a study of reconstruction of fire events, drought, and average temperature, going back about 1,500 years. this is reconstructed from tree rings, charcoal settlement and a few other sources. the things to note about this, first, there are the red line, that is what they call a standardized index of sort of fire activity. and you can see that over the course of hundreds of years, fire activity sort of goes up and comes back down and goes up and comes back down. if you look in that yellow box, that's really the last 100 years. that's the last 100 years where we've seen a major, major downturn in fire activity. and the odd thing about that is that that downturn in fire activity is corresponding with a sharp increase in temperature which is in the blue, and a sharp increase in drought frequency which is in that pinkish color. so if you'd look back before the yellow box, every time there's a peak in drought frequency and a peak in temperature, there's a peak, a corresponding peak in fire activity. but somehow, we're going the opposite way. we're going up in temperature, up in drought frequency over the last 100 years, but our fire activity is going way down. so, the cause there is basically us putting out fires, counter to what climate would have dictated. so, if you look at that, on the top panel, that black dotted line, that's a statistical prediction of where fire activity should be given its historical range with climate. but that difference between the black dotted line and the red line is us. that's us putting out fires on the land. so we're going in opposite directions, and the argument at least from these authors in this paper is that, that's not sustainable. at some point, those things are going to come back together. drought, and temperature, and fire activity are going to get back in alignment. and in a way, we're kind of seeing that, right? we're seeing, despite our best efforts from a suppression standpoint, we're still seeing pretty big fires every single year. so at a different level that change, that loss of fire sort of on these landscapes has resulted in a major change in forest, like i said before. and that change is really is just in the density of the forest overall. this is a picture from 1915. it was taken on the plumas national forest before any harvesting. there was no harvesting here. everyone looks at that picture and says, well they cut all the big trees down. well, that wasn't the case at all. this is before harvesting happened. here's that same cabin, same exact photo point taken in 2005, and that's what we're talking about. when you shut down fire that in these forests historically happened every 5 to 15 years, you get that, you get a major change in density. and what does that mean? well, a lot of people like that, a lot of people look at it and say, good, i can't see my neighbors. i love having more trees around me, but the problem is that is a hazard from a fire standpoint. it has what we call ladder fuels, these are small trees that allow fire to move from the surface to the mid ground, all the way to the upper ground of trees. so we get these what was referred to before as sort of high severity fires. uncharacteristic, at least historically in these forest. and, now, there's more trees pooling or competing for the same amount, in some cases even less water than there was historically. so competition is up. therefore, each individual tree doesn't have the vigor it might have in those very open conditions on the left, hence very susceptible to bark-beetle mortality. if you don't like the pictures, here's some numbers. this is from an area about 40,000 acres that we had surveys that were performed in 1911. again before any timber harvesting when really little impact of fire suppression in 1911. we remeasured those same inventory areas in 2013. and what we're seeing is a, we have a couple different ways we characterize how the forest is. on the left is basal area, that's really just a cross-sectional area of trees. it's just saying, how much cross-sectional area is spread out over a given acre. if you see, we had about 90 square feet of tree cross-sectional area per acre, historically. that's doubled. that's doubled in 2013. if you want to just count trees, just the number of trees per acre, that has increased about five fold. five fold, this is a pretty robust survey over about 40,000 acres. so, anyway this is not, just a snapshot. the picture of course, is a snapshot, but this is something that happened for over a very large area. and then the other things that we've lost, some of the character of the forest in terms of the proportion of pine and we've certainly lost shrubs which are important from a habitat standpoint for certain bird species and small mammals. now what results is with those forest conditions and that change over a large scale, we see fires like this. this is the king fire on the el dorado national forest just west of lake tahoe. all that red, that big red patch in the middle, that's 100% mortality. that's what we call stand replacing or high severity fire. all trees are dead and that patch that is about 50,000 acres of continuous, pretty much continuous 100% mortality.  this is what it looks like on the ground, but imagine that over 50,000 acres. here's what it looks like. this is obviously not the same place, this is another place after a stand replacing or high severity fire event. this is what it looks like 10 years later. now, why does that matter to you? it should matter because, well, for a number of reasons, the amount of carbon that's on that side is about an order of magnitude or two lower than it was when you had a full forest in place. secondly, the potential to burn again at high severity and completely eliminate even regenerating trees is high because you have an incredibly continuous, what we call, fuel bed of shrubs that then can burn again at high severity and effectively change the character of that land for a long time. so, beyond the fire impacts, which are in discrete footprints, we are all obviously are here because of the tree mortality issue. that same increasing density, like i said before, has increased the competition and lowered the vigor on individual trees. now the problem with the mortality event, you might say, we have a five fold increase in trees, why does it matter if we're losing some of our trees, right? we want to actually have a reduction in density. well, the problem is that the mortality is focused on our large trees. our large trees are the ones we want to hold onto, and that landscape there is sort of the pillar of the forest from the standpoint of habitat and all kinds of other services,. and their already at a deficit mostly because of historical logging relative to historical conditions. so we want the large trees in there. we want to cut the small trees out of the forest. so here's a sort of rough depiction of what it is that we're doing right now. on the very left panel, that's the amount of treatment that we do in a given year. the average annual treatment and that includes wildfire. we're actually saying wildfire is a treatment here, we're giving it, even though we know that it's not. then the middle panel is the historical amount of area burned historically per year. this is sort of averaged across the entire sierra's. and this is an estimate of course, there's error in this estimate.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Daniele Lindler: Okay, I think I'm on now. So Madame Chairwoman Garcia and Members of the Committee, thank you for having us. I'm Daniele Lindler, I am CEO of Jefferson Resource Company. We're a certified woman-owned forestry and biological services company in California. We have offices from Placerville to Yreka, Fort Bragg and Anderson and I'm a registered professional forester and a pest control adviser and want to just chat with you about why are all the pine trees dying and I've heard some of it from colleagues here, but even heard that the unprecedented forest mortality in California is due to the insect attacks, primarily Western pine beetle, as well as other species, and as a result of the drought and warmer temperatures, milder winters, and that is true in part. While those are contributing factors to the epidemic we're witnessing, they're by no means the only factors, nor are they the root cause of the problem, as you've heard. The recent drought added the final blow to an already stressed system. The system, this is not the first drought that this state has had, nor is it the first drought that these trees have experienced, but what is the difference this go around is the density of the trees. Forest management professionals have known for decades, our forests are overly dense where on average historically, we had 20 to 50 trees an acre, today in some of our forests, we have over 500, even 1000 trees per acre in some areas. We call it dog hair thickets, where you can't even get through it. These densities are not historically natural nor are they stable. With higher density, there's higher competition amongst the trees for water and nutrients. It's a basic function of supply and demand. Without adequate waters, the trees become stressed and are unable to use their natural defense systems against insects because all of their energy is literally being focused on just staying alive. As US Forest Service, specific South West research station demonstrates, that given standard densities measured as the standard density index, forest resource managers can predict which insects are going to attack our forest at certain densities. So it's no surprise for those of us that study this thing, that the bark beetles are here and have grown to epidemic populations, given the high density of trees that exist today. I personally learned that we were on the tip of this iceberg back in 1992 when I started forestry school. We were talking about it then. So, how did we get here. So as others have said, historically our forests have always evolved with disturbance, rather it was in the form of insects, disease, or fire, we always had some kind of agent that was in our forests reducing the number of tress. However around the middle of the last century, we became very professional in suppressing these natural disturbances, primarily fire. And also around the 80s or early 90s, we substantially limited the amount of harvesting that we did on a national forest, which by our practical definitions, is a disturbance you know mechanism. So now fast forward to today where our forests grow many times more volume each and every year than we harvest, and you end up with a density fuel situation, which is the catalyst for the insects that we're experiencing now, and then you add on the drought and it's a perfect storm and our forests literally become a buffet for the insects. So had we been proactive and at least went in and thinned and reduced those densities, our forests would not have been under such stress and competition for resources, and they would have, by all practical measures, in most instances, been able to fight the insects like they had before. So now that we not only have the mortality issue, we also have the impending risk of catastrophic wildfire, which will right the ship and get the system back to historic levels, and with that, our forests are now on their way of being net emitters of carbon, so think about that. Instead of being an incredible sink of carbon, because that's what woody biomass is, it's stored carbon. We are now emitting more carbon than we're sequestering as predicted by the US Forest Service FIA Program and CalFire's FRAP program, among others. There's a white paper from UC Berkeley that's talking about this, and we continue to ignore the math. What we're seeing is just the tip of the iceberg, and it's not a matter of if fire's going to reenter our forests, it's when and at what level. So where do we go from here and what options do we have? As a private forester, we know we must reduce the standard density index to reduce the insect outbreaks. Well, insects have always been present, they're always there in the forests. You know it not like they just showed up with the densities. They are always there, it's just the trees are able to protect themselves. So we know that we need to reduce the densities. Many advocate for the user prescribed fire. I work on small landowners, anywhere from one acre to 10,000 acre landowners and I can tell you in managing thousands of acres of non-industrial timberline throughout the state, the risk of putting fire on their land is extreme, and they go against it every single time. It is not a tool that they are willing to take because the liability is too great. And one needs not to look any further than the ongoing litigation to understand the harsh economic reality of communities in and private land owners, and what that means if a fire escapes, the financial risk associated not only with the land owners, but also myself. The insurance cost for me to recommend fire is cost prohibitive. I can't afford the insurance. Its tens of thousand of dollars for a company of my size just to recommend fire, and only for that one insurance, by the way. So in my opinion, prescribed fire is a useful tool. I personally feel that it's best left to large land owners such as industrial land owners or federal governments, state governments that are able to absorb that risk and those costs. The other reason I would advocate not only from the risk standpoint, but because some of my properties are small landowners, fires tend to generally select towards even age systems, because they burn off all your understory. So for some of my small landowners that have an uneven aged goal, they can't achieve that on small lands when you're burning it every three to five years, or 10 years. So, and then furthermore, logistically, trying to coordinate fire crews within the given burn windows, and the windows that we have under our burn plans with the air resources control board, they make it logistically impossible at times to burn for prescribed fire, let alone even burning slash piles. In the forest practice rules I'm required to burn my slash piles by the following April of which they were created and I have a hard time, even just getting the piles burned, let alone doing prescribed fire because of the limited burn windows that I have. So, my option is biomass thinning and harvesting material. We select towards smaller diameter, thin from below, type operations. We typically remove all the chips. We don't leave chips on-site, especially on small land owners because you're going to be selecting for red turpentine beetle. That when you chip the, it releases strappings that will bring in insects, the beetle being the one that I'm concerned about and the other thing, is i need some kind of economic veil to make it pay because on small land owners I don't have the economies of scale to get cruising and right now we're losing our infrastructure. So, I'm at the bottom of the totem pole to get staffing in. So in short, as a professional, bolstered by decades of peer reviewed and published science, it's my opinion that we desperately need to recognize the full cost of human environmental detriment. When it comes to our overstocked forests, we need to thereby assign reasonable human value to bring in our force back to prewire suppression stocking levels. I do advocate for grant funding. I'm involved with the C fit program heavily, and I can tell you its funding maybe a tenth of what we can actually do on the landscape, even though it is funded at higher levels than we've had in the recent past, but like Lori, I think we need Other alternatives to help our small landowners. So anyways, I would just advocate that we need all the tools in the toolbox when it comes to dealing with this problem and not just rely on fire for small landowners and that we need to use appropriate Science based management and thank you for your time. Thanks.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 53, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 113, 'end': 128, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 4031, 'end': 4044, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8242, 'end': 8246, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ken Pimlott: Good afternoon. Make sure I'm on here. There we go. Good afternoon, Committee Chairs and Members of our Committees. Ken Pimlott, Director of CAL FIRE. And with that title it's not only the chief of CAL FIRE but it's also of California's state foresters, so not only responsible for the protection from the wild land fire but the resources issues at CAL FIRE by a statute as responsible 31 million acres of forest and water shed lands through out California and that is predominantly private forest and water shed lands in California, not the federal publicly owned forest lands or state park lands. It's the predominantly private forested or water shed lands around the state. We're talked a lot today and they've laid a foundation I think for the issue for you. So I don't want to really rehash the discussion because the previous panel and Craig have done an outstanding job I think of laying before you the issue. But the issue is real. We talked about the tree mortality crisis. Over 102 million trees have succumbed. So far to this epidemic level of Western Pine Beetle and others. The Governor proclaimed a State of emergency. We've created a task force led by the state, with over 80 entities, including the forest service, local governments, many other organizations utilities from around the state. But the focus of that group while it's got a number of working groups looking at these utilization challenges that you talked about, looking at where are we going to process this material, but the reality is 102 million trees, most of those will stay up in the forest and rot and fall to the forest floor. We are focusing right now primarily on the public safety threats associated with those dead trees. Power line corridors, escape routes, protecting critical infrastructure, what we're calling tier one high hazard areas. Just looking at those and where to put the material, how to remove that certainly has proved to be a daunting challenge. The reality is we must continue to focus on how to get ahead of that. As... talked about, it will take several years of precipitation like we're seeing this here, to really stop the forward progress of this bark beetle to the extend that its at. So we are going to continue to face the challenge we are facing for the next several years, drought or not. And that's not just, again, the epidemic level of insects. But we've got to continue to focus on managing our forest. To prevent the catastrophic kinds of fires that we're seeing that are completely destroying our forest stands. It takes all the tools in the toolbox. We're talking about prescribed fire today. But certainly, if we've heard both commercial, pre-commercial kinds of harvesting or fuels treatment. All of that is critical, all the tools in the toolbox to make that just to deal with this challenge. I think what I really want to focus on right now is a good, clear understanding of the differences in the landscape across the state. CAL FIRE is responsible for supporting the private land ownerships, private watershed lands throughout California. 31 million acres, of that about 15 million is in forrest landscapes. About half of that 15 million are your large commercial, land ownerships. The remainder, 7, 8 million acres, are small, non-industrial, private force landowners, meaning there're landowners that... talked about. These range from 10 acres, 50 acres a 100 acres. These are family owned forest lands, they're family owned lands. They may have been inherited, that's been passed down by families, or they are witting it as an investment. But at the end of the day, most of these small force landowners don't have the resources at their disposal to manage the land. They don't necessarily have the expertise. They certainly don't have the fiscal resources or the actual physical resources to go out and do the work. CAL FIRE, as the State Forestry Agency, provides technical assistance to all of these landowners to work with consulting foresters such as... and many others, to provide tools so that they can manage their land, but it's entirely voluntary. There are no laws that dictate that this landowners engaging prescribe fire, or that they harvest timber. So we have got to continue to work through and find incentives for these landowners to engage in prescribe fire and managing their forest land. And again, it's very expensive. You heard the cost of reforestation. It's not just a matter of planting a seedling out there after the fire, clearing the land of either burned vegetation or green vegetation, extremely expensive, and then maintaining that over time to protect that investment. All of that is cost prohibitive or can be very expensive for individual landowners. Many, many other issues are prohibitive. You heard again many of the previous speakers talk about the disincentives to engage in using prescribed fire and many of the other tools on the landscape. There are a variety of programs available. We talked about the California Forest Improvement Program. But again, those are public funds, funds can be limited. But just last year, that program was funded about $2 million to assist these small private force landowners to do work. But again, they have to have some skin in the game, and have to have the ability to put funds and capital upfront to be able to engage in that.  Working again, forest landowners, prescribe fire is a very, can be very daunting. And as you heard from previous speakers, the social license to engage and put smoke in the air. So to engage in prescribed burning on private lands, it would take 20 or 30 landowners together contiguously to build a prescribed burn project that has of any consequence or size,unlike federal ownership where again, a management plan covers thousands of acres. So the challenge we have is bringing together willing landowners to engage and helping them understand the importance of putting prescribed fire on the ground. Every land owner has a different management objective, and so our responsibility is to help educate and bring them together, and assist them meeting their management objectives. CAL FIRE has had a number of programs over time to support, prescribe fire, and chaparral management. Our vegetation management program initiated in statue, in the early 80s, 1981, was a program designed just for that purpose, and I believe Rich mentioned it earlier. Its a program where the state cost-shared with private property owners to assist them with burning their land. We would provide the resources, we would assume the responsibility to take that project on, and see it through to completion. But it's ebbed and flowed over the course of the last 30 years, and certainly, been challenged by obviously budget constraints. In the last five years, we've had unprecedented drought which has left fuel conditions extremely parched, been very dangerous to burn in many of these areas. And again, where the private lands are different is that, that's where the 39 million people are, or many of them are. So engaging in prescribed fire and those activities in these wild land urban and interface areas is more expensive, and certainly can be more challenging. So all of that combined has led to some challenges in getting our program really where it needs to be. We are a 100% supporter of the MOU that Greg talked about, with all of our partners to put more fire back on the landscape And we are challenging ourselves as an organization to do more with what we have. I've given the department, all of our 7,000 fire fighters direction this year that we will accomplish 20,000 acres of prescribed burning this year and that may not sound like a lot when we talk about needing to burn 3 or 4 million acres across the state. But when we have a program that barely burns 3 or 4,000 acres last year we've got to redirect and start focusing similar continue to build from year to year. So we will continue to push ourselves and challenge more burning on the landscape. We're also looking at engaging in partnerships with our federal partners in using authorities to burn across boundaries. We're engaging a greenhouse gas reduction funding and SRA fire prevention funds to do much of this work across the landscape as well. And I believe we funded about $1.5 million in projects through the GHT program in fiscal year 14-15. And hope to see some more in the current round.
[{'start': 116, 'end': 127, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 842, 'end': 847, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7326, 'end': 7330, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Karen Lange: chair and members. karen brandon lange on behalf of the placer county board of supervisors. they're very active in the tree mortality task force. they did want to emphasize to the committee and anyone who cares or is interested, the 25% match for local disaster assistance that they need to come up with to draw down the state funding has proven to be a real challenge. and so, for the 10 counties that have the highest mortality rate, only one of them has actually been able to draw down the funding that the governor has actually put in the budget to deal with the tree mortality problem. that 25% for a rural county with a small budget and a ton of unincorporated area is a real challenge, and so they identified that as one of a bigger problems and also the insurance piece that you are starting to drill down on. the homeowners even do the cutting to make sure there's enough clearance to meet the standard. those folks are losing their insurance because of mortality issues is just so severe. so they're hoping, they wanted me to communicate to you that of course the prescribed fires would be wonderful, every tool in the toolbox like the chief said. but also the insurance issue in continuing to drive folks into a place where they're buying on the unregulated market, like lloyd's of london is a big one, and the premiums are incredibly expensive. so those are the things that are seen out there in county land and they wanted also to make sure i just emphasize to you. the enormity is hard to convey in words, and i know they want to invite as many if you out there to see it in person as possible. and finally, the trees that are down and dying are having huge impacts on their water infrastructure. so when we already have so much water that needs to get into the channels, the trees are destructing their water infrastructure, increasing the problems that we're having right now. so all things that we hope you consider as you consider any new policies. thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Satina Pascone: Good afternoon. I'm Satina Pascone on behalf of the rural counties. RCRC represents 35 rural counties statewide. Our member counties have been heavily impacted by the tree mortality. In fact, eight of the 10 hazard zone tree mortality counties are located within our membership. While we support the use of prescribed burning and forest management, we do recognize that it is only one tool in the toolbox. And we should be mindful of the varying conditions of the forest as we look to improve overall forest health and prevent high severity wild fire in the future. RCRC would also encourage members of this Committee that haven't done so to get out to tree mortality areas and see it up close. Tree mortality enforce health, in general, have dramatic climate change implications as well as profound impacts on water quality and supply for the entire state. Thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joe Rawitzer: I'm sorry, my name is Joe Rawitzer. And I'm project coordinator for the Central Coast Prescribed Fire Council. And I'd like to address the issue of insurance liability relative to increase of prescribed fire. At the scale and increase that's needed, what we need to support is private initiative burning in addition to CAL FIRE's VMP program. The VMP program will be limited to 60,000 acres a year under the EIR that will be issued. So if you look at the scale, that 500,000 acres that needs to be done in the state, there needs to be private initiative burning, and we will need to support from the Legislature to address the liability issues relative to doing that. So there is capacity. There is the ability to do the burning but we are going to need help. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Mason: Good afternoon. Paul Mason with Pacific Forest Trust, and I'll be brief given the time. But I just want to put a finer point on one of the things that Speaker Atkins just brought up in terms of directing additional funding to some of these activities. We have a real window of opportunity right now, especially in the areas with a lot of tree mortality, where the trees are still standing, they dropped a lot of their needles. There is a window of a couple of years where we can get in there and do a lot of large scale burning, that counterintuitively maybe would really reduce the risk over time. And our ability to be able to get up to speed and get that accomplished, that scale is going to be directly related to how much funding there is to do that. So as we're going through the budget process this year, I think it's important to stretch, recognizing that we have some biological imperatives here and a limited window. So that's going to ramp up over five years. If we have money this next budget cycle, we can actually get after this challenge. Thanks.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 159, 'end': 165, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Robert Puleo: good morning assembly member salas, senator hill and members of the joint committee, i'm puleo. i'm the executive officer for the board of chiropractic examiners. and with me here today is our board chair, newly elected board chair, heather dane. and she's a licensee member of the board and heather will be presenting our testimony today.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 34, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 44, 'end': 48, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 89, 'end': 94, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 233, 'end': 245, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 292, 'end': 299, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Robert Puleo: excuse me, robert jonah puleo again, we will be working with the department's budget office to do a thorough review of our budget and make there's no areas where we can't cut costs first. so, in answer to your question, we don't know what exactly the fee will be. one of the things we are looking at is we have miscellaneous fees and regulation and for things like satellite offices that are too low. they don't cover the cost of the work associated with issuing that satellite certificate. so we want to look at those fees and raise them so that we're actually charging the people who utilize these services rather than the whole license population. so we're going to do a thorough analysis of all of our fees. we're currently working with the department to do desk audits or a process mapping for licensing and enforcement. so we want to look at all of this areas where we charge fees and make sure that we're charging the appropriate fee. and my hope is that we won't have to raise the renewal fee. that we can generate enough revenue through these other fees that we can cover the cost. but that's something, that we won't be raising the fee this year. we will be doing a thorough evaluation of our budget.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katarina Eleby: Morning Chairman Jerry Hill, Chairman Ruiz Salas, Committee Members, we are pleased to be here today for our sunset hearing. My name is Katarina Eleby, board President and public member. Joining me today is Jason Kaiser the executive officer and Alicia Rabena-Amen our Vice President. The mission of the Physical Therapy Board is to protect consumers from incompetent, unprofessional and fraudulent practice through regulation of practitioners. Specifically, the Physical Therapy Board administers the licensing and enforcement programs for physical therapists, physical therapist assistants, and unlicensed physical therapy aides. Regulation of the practice of physical therapy began in 1958, when the Legislature passed the Physical Therapy Practice Act. Initially, the Practice Act established the Physical Therapy Examining Committee as a Committee under the Medical Board of California. Between 1971 and 1996 amendments to the Practice Act shifted regulatory responsibility over physical therapy away from the Medical Board to the Committee and eventually renamed and converted the Committee into its own board. The board is comprised of seven members, four practitioners and three public members. The Governor appoints five members in total, all four professional members and one of the public members. The Senate Rules Committee and the Assembly Speaker each appoint one public member each. Currently, there are no vacancies. As of fiscal year 15-16, the Physical Therapy Board regulates approximately 31,000 physical therapists and 6700 physical therapy assistants. The Board's budget is just over $4 million and it has approximately four months of reserves in its fund. I'll be giving the response to the issue item number one, regarding the statutory fee increase. Currently we are at statutory caps as of December 26, 2016. This is a concern for us for the following reasons. The board may need to develop examinations, our jurisprudence exam needs to be updated and, should a need arise, we may need to develop a national exam. If so, it would be emergent and would need to be addressed immediately. In addition, our reserves are still relatively low, with only four months in our fund. Although projections are positive, there may be unforeseen litigation that would be a strain on resources. Thirdly, the Board is planning to move to a larger office space in the near future, as we are currently at capacity in our current office. We want to be clear that we are not planning on increasing fees. We are simply asking the Legislature to consider increasing our Statutory Caps because we don't know what we don't know. Although there is no immediate need to raise fees, the board is trying to be proactive and prepare for a rainy day. This approach is proactive and will allow us to plan for the future in a fiscally responsible manner. And with that, I'll hand it over to our executive officer, Jason Kaiser, to address the next issue regarding BreEZe.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 38, 'end': 48, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 136, 'end': 150, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 207, 'end': 219, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 246, 'end': 264, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2908, 'end': 2920, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alicia Rabena-Amen: Good morning Chairman Salas, Chairman Hill, and Committee Members. And thank you all for your public service, and for the opportunity to testify before you today. My names is Alicia Rabena-Amen, and I've been a professional member of PTBC board since February 2014. This morning I'm going to discuss issue number 15 under edits to the Practice Act, which asks, should the Practice Act be amended to change the PTBC's ratio of public members to professional members? There's been much thought and discussion about board composition and the potential for anti-competitive decisions, especially since the US Supreme Court's decision in the case of the North Carolina Board of Dental Examiners versus the Federal Trade Commission, the FTC. While attempting to balance the boards with a public member majority may enhance consumer perspective of antitrust protection, the FTC guidance suggested that a board with even just one professional member could still be a controlling majority. As it is not uncommon for public members to defer to professional members on matters even outside of practice issues, such as administration of the board. Given the North Carolina case and decision, we board members of the PTBC understand why the Legislature might be considering such a change to the Practice Act. This board, however, does not feel that this change is necessary and please allow me to explain why. Just as a reminder, our board is made up of three public members and four professional members. During my three years of service on this board, I've not seen one example of a professional member using his or her position to drive a decision. It's my belief that if a professional member tried such a thing, the other professional and public members would be quick to reign that member in. I've witnessed only positive contributions from the professional members who sit on this board. And as a professional board member myself, I've seen first hand the benefits of a board that consists of four professional members who come from diverse work settings. And one of the areas where professional members bring added enhancement is during case deliberation, where we can each apply our various workplace experiences to a licensee's case, in order to contribute to a fair decision all the while, while still honoring our consumer protection mandate. I feel very grateful and blessed for the PTBC board members who came before me, and engrave the culture of consumer protection to be first and foremost the focus of our existence and decisions. Yes, the PTBC has other functions, such as testing and licensing and other things. But it is our mandate to protect consumers that is always at the forefront of our minds of our board members. Because we clearly understand our purpose, we PTBC board members feel that each one of us is a public member. I would even issue a challenge to anyone who is willing to take a look at one of our board meetings and see if you can tell which members are public and which are professional. I think you'd have a hard time trying to figure it out. And since this culture has been in place for years before most of us current board members were appointed, opinions and responsibilities are shared freely and openly among us. I think our Board President, Ms. Eleby, and Board members Mr. TJ Watkins, and Ms. Tonia McMillian, who are all public members, would agree that any notion of a turf war is nonexistent within the PTBC Board. And so it is for these reasons that this board has no concern with changing the board composition. We do, however, think that perhaps all boards should be looked at individually in order to determine each board's history and liability on a board by board basis. Once again, thank you for your service and thank you for your consideration.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 38, 'end': 42, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 175, 'end': 193, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 3281, 'end': 3286, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3310, 'end': 3320, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3330, 'end': 3345, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Medu Challa: good morning, chairman salas, and chairman hill, committee members and staff. i'm dr. medu robert challa, a professional member and the current president of the california state board of optometry. i was appointed to the board in june 2012 and have served on and chaired all of the boards forming committees as well as board vice president prior to being president. with me is vice president and public member, donna burke. ms. burke was appointed in october 2010, and has also served in various capacities throughout her 10 year on the board. in addition of vice president, and to being vice president, ms. burke currently chairs the public relations and outreach committee, and joining us is our executive officer, jessica seiferman, appointed in september 2015. we'd first like to begin by thanking your committee staff, for their exceptional work and assistance during the sunset review process. they've been extremely professional, supportive, and accommodating. we also appreciate the opportunity to appear before you, to address the issues identified by the committee. since its inception over a hundred years ago, the california state board of optometry has supported and helped consumers by advocating consumer interest before lawmakers regulating to protect consumers from unlicensed practitioners and guarding our licensees against unfair competition, while enforcing laws to protect the consumers and resolving disputes between business and customers or consumer and a licensee. our authority to protect the health and safety of california patients receiving optometric care through licensing, education, and regulation of the practice of optometry was expanded on january 1st, 2016, when governor brown signed assembly bill 684. transferring practice of optical dispensary from the medical board of california to the state board of optometry. over night, the board's regulatory population grew by 50%, expanding its regulatory oversight from 8,000 licensees to roughly 12,000 licensees and registrants. today, the board regulates the largest population of optometrists and dispensers in the united states. with over 17,400 licensees, registrants and permits. the board is also responsible for issuing optometry certifications for diagnostic pharmaceutical agents, therapeutic pharmaceutical agents, irrigation and dilation and for the treatment of glaucoma. with this significant change in population, come new and emerging responsibilities, our board stands ready and has the capabilities and resources to maintain the same level of accountability, efficiency, effectiveness, integrity, and customer service, it has delivered since the last sunset review. further, it is in the best interest in california consumers to continue protecting their ihealth and safety through the board and it's current constituted state and independent board. that relays on the department of consumer affairs for administrative support. with that, i turn it over to ms. burke for additional information.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 28, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 43, 'end': 47, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 86, 'end': 104, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 411, 'end': 422, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 428, 'end': 433, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 608, 'end': 613, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 717, 'end': 734, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1710, 'end': 1715, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2965, 'end': 2970, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
 : It's nothing we want to rush into. We want to definitely meet with the existing inspection programs within DCA. Find out what works for them, what doesn't work for them, the best ways to implement it through Breeze. We want to identify any efficiencies that we can do before rolling it out. But again, we hope to have that up and running by the end of 2017.
[]
Kara Cortez: kara medu cortez, representing the...
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeffrey Mason: Thank you, Chair Hill, Chair Salas, and members of the committees. I'm Jeffrey Mason, Chief Deputy Director for the Department of Consumer Affairs. This afternoon, we will be presenting as a panel. As the committees may be aware, the department is currently undergoing a leadership transition. Director Alok ...'s last day is tomorrow. And we welcome our newly appointed director, Dean Grafilo. The department's also appreciative of the assistance and the partnership of Secretary Alexis Podesta and the Business Consumer Services and Housing Agency has provided the department through this transition. I'd like to take a moment and introduce the panel, first of all, we have Peter Williams, Deputy Secretary at the Business Consumer Services and Housing Agency, and Adam Quinonez, Deputy Director of Legislation for the Department of Consumer Affairs. To begin, I would like to do a quick overview of the department. The Department of Consumer Affairs oversees 40 boards, bureaus, and commissions, whom, together, licenses and regulates over 3 million licensees in more than 200 professional and 100 business categories. The Department serves and supports these 40 separate entities in the areas of enforcement, budgeting, information technology, legal affairs, communications, legislation, and regulations. Several department highlights from 2016 include the following, DCA responded to approximately 530,000 consumer calls. Working in conjunction with the Bureau of Postsecondary Education, we hosted 76 student outreach events in response to school closures throughout California. This included students impacted by the closure of ITT Tech. The Department's information technology team implemented 1,243 brief system enhancements. And DCA conducted 2,078 investigations on behalf of the boards and bureaus. We've been asked to speak to issue number one, the investigator vacancies currently in the Department's health quality investigation unit. As the committees are aware in July of 2014, the investigative staff of the California Medical Board moved under the management of the Department Consumer Affairs division investigations. Since that date in 2014, 47 individuals have left the Department, but the vast majority transitioned to positions elsewhere in the state that have less complicated case types, lower case loads, and most impactful, higher pay scales. Currently, the unit that investigates Medical Board cases has 31 investigator vacancies, a number which represents 40% of the total investigative positions. The results of the vacancies have been an increased workload on remaining staff and an increase in overall investigation timelines. The Department's addressing these vacancies as follows, first of all, we're hiring, hiring, hiring. Beginning on August 2014, DCA has received and reviewed over 1,600 applications, interviewed over 475 candidates. And we've had 18 individuals successfully complete the required year-long background check process that it takes to become a sworn peace officer in the state. The Department also has an additional 15 candidates currently undergoing that background check process. From an operational standpoint, we reassigned cases based upon type cases, and we provided overtime to existing staff. We're also using what we consider to be an innovative approach to bring on new investigators in a non-sworn capacity. We're taking advantage of that year long background check process, bring in the individuals on board, on staff in a non-sworn capacity, they investigate less egregious, less complex cases. They get used to our processes, our procedures, how we do business, our culture. We get used to them as employees. They complete the year long process. They go to the academy; and they come back to the Department as a sworn investigator. We look at this a little bit like having a AAA baseball team for our Major League team. And while the Department has been very active in recruiting and replacing sworn officers, we also need to be able to retain them. And in light of that, the Department has submitted a retention pay proposal, which is currently at Cal HR. And we anticipate hearing the resolution of that very soon. The issue number two, status of IT upgrades for the release three entities. In October 2013, the Department implemented release one of the BreEZe system. And that release placed 10 boards on the new BreEZe platform. In January of 2016, another eight boards and bureaus were moved to BreEZe in release two. Since that launch of release two last year, the Department's been focused on two primary activities, the first being the upgrade and the stabilization of the BreEZe platform. Today the BreEZe system is stable and performs millions of processes everyday. It's used by 1,200 employees approximately and about 1.4 million registered users. One important capability that's been expressed by the board you've heard today is the ability to have an online presence where the prior business system didn't have. Individuals who are applying for life insurance can now apply online. And current licensees who are seeking renewal of their license can submit their license renewals online. In 2016, the BreEZe system processed $115 million through online submissions. Current licensees submitted approximately 466,000 online renewals last year, 91% of which were processed in the same day. Put that in context, those in the past would have had to be put in an envelope with a check by the licensee, sent to us. We would have to open the mail, cashier the check, and process the paperwork, now that's being accomplished in a day or two. The second initiative related to BreEZe is the transition of release three boards and bureaus to a new IT platform The department has learned a great deal from the first two releases. We've learned how best to maintain the system, we've learned how to better manage and implement the sustained levels of program-related enhancement requests. And we've learned how to mitigate the impacts of legislative and regulatory modifications. As a result, we've adjusted our approach for the remaining 18 Boards and Bureaus. Going forward, DCA will be using the Department of Technology's Project Approval Lifecycle Process to determine what IT solution is most effective and most efficient for each individual Board and Bureau. The overall objective of the Department of Technology's process is to match an entity's organizational readiness and business needs with the most appropriate IT solution. This process also includes a cost-benefit analysis, which occurs in phase two of the Department of Technology's process. And that analysis will play a key factor in determining what is the most appropriate IT solution for an individual board or bureau. DCA's expectation is that in some cases the process will determine that BreEZe is the best solution. In other cases, such as our new Bureau of Medical Cannabis Regulation, a different platform was deemed better able to meet that individual entity's specific business needs. DCA is organizing the remaining 18 Boards and Bureaus into groups based upon their individual operational readiness to move through the Department of Technology's process. Each program will begin by focusing on their business needs. They're currently mapping out processes, documenting, assessing their operational needs, looking at staffing impacts of not just the preparation to launch a new system, but the transition and the workload of a new system. We currently have five programs preparing to enter the Department of Technology's process, and we will have an additional two begin next quarter. We've been asked to speak to issue number three, which is barriers to licensure. The Department has been actively working with the the Business Consumer Services and Housing Agency to identify areas where unnecessary barriers to licensure can be reduced. One key area of this work has been on the examination of possible barriers to licensure for individuals re-entering society after incarceration. We've been working to understand how individual Boards and Bureaus determine if a past conviction is deemed substance-related. And we're also attempting to ascertain how they consider rehabilitation in their assessment. In October of 2016 the Little Hoover Commission issued a report titled Jobs for Californians: Strategies to Ease Occupational Licensing Barriers. The report offered a number of recommendations to minimize barriers to entry into licensed professions and included anecdotal discussions of individuals attempting to re-enter society after incarceration simply not applying for licensure because they assumed they would be denied. The department and DCA, DCA and the agency agree that it can be confusing and it can be intimidating for individuals to understand if a prior conviction would be considered substance-related, as well as how one demonstrates rehabilitation. And we're seeking to clarify criteria through regulation or through FAQs, update the websites, to assist applicants, to potentially encourage more folks to apply. Demographic data. The Little Hoover Commission report also recommended that the department collect demographic data on a mandatory basis. Currently the department has a few examples of boards that do collect demographic information, but this activity is completed post-licensure and the response is voluntary on the part of the licensee. The department is not opposed to the collection of data but we believe it should never be condition for licensure and we believe it's best conducted by a third party. We appreciate your time and we look forward to your conversation. Thank you.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 21, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 29, 'end': 34, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 71, 'end': 84, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 303, 'end': 307, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 381, 'end': 393, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 488, 'end': 495, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 676, 'end': 690, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 767, 'end': 780, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 9113, 'end': 9119, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jason Piccione: Hello,Jason Piccione, CIO for DCA, thank you. Yes, the quick answer is yes. The usability of the public portal for searching licensees is actually being reformatted currently. With a projected scheduled implementation date of September of this year. That the effort there is exactly what you said. Navigation, usability, and ease of use for the general public to go out and look for their Doctor, their dentist. And to find usable, efficient searches as they would other standard type of searches, a la Google, Amazon, etc.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Veverka: hi, my name is michelle, and i'm an investigator with the division of investigation, the health quality investigation unit. and senator hill, i wanted to answer your question as to what's the real reason for investigators leaving. the original intent of sb 231 was not implemented. another public commenter had mentioned this, that investigators were never co-located with the deputy attorney generals. the system was set up to fail. we had to investigate these matters and prosecute these matters being in two separate agencies. it has made it very difficult and very cumbersome. exit interviews shortly after january, 2006 sided vertical enforcement and salary as predominant reasons to transfer elsewhere. in february 2016, the division conducted an internal vertical enforcement survey, however the results have not been shared with staff. my coworker is going to discuss another question that the committee had.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 136, 'end': 140, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Aaron Barnett: committee members my name is aaron, i am also an investigator with the health quality investigation unit at the division of investigation. i've been an investigator with the medical board previously until the legislative transfer occurred, moving us in 2014. one of the other questions that was posed was, where are investigators going when they leave our department? and it's my understanding that the majority of investigators are leaving to other high-paying agencies such as the department of justice that employ special agents and then also special agents that are employed by the california department of corrections. we also lose investigators to other agencies that are more of our peers that use the same investigator classification that we're within. the problem of retaining experienced and highly trained investigators has existed prior to vertical enforcement. vertical enforcement was probably the most significant. attempt to try and fix the problem, but the medical board has been trying for a long time and they've been trying to get the investigators higher paid. so that is the significant issue that the board, the medical board faces, which has now been passed along to the division of investigation where we now reside.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dev Gnanadev: thank you, sir. good afternoon, the chairs, hill and salas, and the board members, my name is dr. dev kara gnanadev, and in my real life, i major at trauma and vascular surgeon from san bernardino, and i'm the president of the medical board of california. would also like to introduce my board vice chair and public member, denise pines, and the board executive director, kimberly kirchmeyer. ms. pines and i will take turns in giving the brief report and responses to specific issues raised by the committee, and mrs. kirchmeyer will assist us in answering questions. i'd like to thank you for providing this opportunity for the medical board, to work with with the legislature, to review the body of law that governs the practice of medicine, as well as the operations of the medical board. the board is a consumer protection agency which licenses and regulates physicians and surgeons. and those, satellite healthcare professionals in california who fall under our statutory mandate. there are currently approximately 142,000 physician and surgeon licenses in california, about 110,000 of them practice in california. the board's primary mission is consumer protection. by statute, the board is authorized for 15 board members, 8 physician members and 7 public members. the governor appoints 13 members and 2 are appointed by the legislature, senate rules committee and the speaker of the assembly. the board currently has one wakened public member pushing. the board's budget for this fiscal year is approximately $63 million. of the $63 million budget, approximately 67% is spent on enforcement. that includes complaint handling, investigation, and prosecution. 14% on licensing and the remainder is expended and administrated to functions and provision monitoring. if the board spends its full budget in this fiscal year, it will have approximately four months to end reserve. the board takes its mission very seriously, as is evidenced by the significant number of changes that have taken place, since the last sunset review report in 2013. in the last four years, the board has made the elimination of opioid and opioid abuse one of its main, focal areas of improvement. board, has a significant role in this issue and took a very proactive approach to addressing this matter. the board, established a prescribing task force and held multiple meetings to identify best practices, heard from speakers regarding this issue, and update the boards guidelines for prescribing controlled substances for pain which are adopted by the board in november of 2014. we did this before the cdc did. these guidelines are intended to educate physicians, on effective pain management in california by avoiding under treatment, overtreatment, or other inappropriate treatment of patients' pain, as well as recognition of addiction and appropriate treatment for addiction. the board also dealt up two public service announcements specific to the opioid overdose prevention. one psa was specific to physicians and provided education on approximate, unappropriately prescribing controlled substances to the patients. the second psa, was intended for the public and featured olympic swimmer and gold medalist, natalie coughlin. this video was designed to alert consumers to the dangers of abusing prescription drugs. the board also established, for a limited time, a group of investigators called operation rx strikeforce, focused solely on investigating the most serious over prescribing cases. the strikeforce performed numerous search warrants, filed a number of actions and arrested multiple physicians and others. in addition, board members and staff have provided numerous presentations, including ms. kirchmeyer and i on the issue of opia opides and the inappropriate prescribing to the physicians and consumer groups. in an effort to be proactive, the board  established a data use agreement with the california department of public heath, cdph, to receive death certificates when the death was related to opioids, or it was then able to use cures to identify physicians who may be inappropriately prescribing control substances. the board,also requested information from the pharmaceutical companies who had identified physicians who may have inappropriate prescribing issues. all these attempts have assisted the board in identifying the physicians who may be inappropriately prescribing in an effort to eliminate opiate overdose death. in july 2014, board established a new compliant investigation office, cio, made up of special investigators who are non sworn, who began working the less complex investigations for the board. this unit comprised of six special investigators and the supervising special investigator one, was the result of portions received pursuant to the consumer protection enforcement initiative and is tasked with investigating quality of care investigations following the medical malpractice settlement or judgment. cases against physicians charged with their convicted of criminal offense and physicians petitioning for reinstatement of license following publication or surrender of his or her license. the establishment of cio has assisted in reducing the case load of the department of consumer affairs investigators in addition to resulting in quicker resolution of these cases. the board also established outpatient surgery setting task force, for which i was a member of in 2013, to review the board's existing oss program. and last to explore ways to improve consumer protection. based upon the input from this task force the board sought legislation that will require adverse event reports occurring at this facilities to be sent to the board, not to cdph. the board now receives these reports and is able to not only value the facility but also look into the care provided by the physicians. the board also recommended legislation that would require all physicians within the oss to have peer review, would require a shorter time frame for initial accreditation, and would require the oss to check for peer review information for all the physicians working within the facility. in addition, the board made significant improvements to oss database and website to make it more consumer friendly. the public can now go to the board website and search for an oss. the information contained in the database includes the owners of the facility, the types of services being performed, the status of the facility with their accreditation agency, and provides copies of the document pertaining to an inspection of the oss and any corrective action plans and follow up inspections. and ms pines will follow the rest.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 42, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 44, 'end': 48, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 98, 'end': 115, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 324, 'end': 336, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 372, 'end': 391, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 397, 'end': 402, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 519, 'end': 529, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3197, 'end': 3213, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3695, 'end': 3705, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6609, 'end': 6614, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rosanna Davis: Good afternoon. I am Rosanna Davis, a California-Licensed midwife and the President of California Association of Licensed Midwives, also known as CALM. We are the state professional society for licensed midwives, who are also regulated by the medical board of California. Licensed midwives are specifically educated and trained to provide maternity care in and out of hospital settings, in our clients' homes and in freestanding alternative birth centers. I also serve as President of the California Association of Midwives, our non-profit, public benefit corporation whose mission is to educate California families, policy makers such as yourselves, as well as increase access to patient-centered, evidence-based midwifery care. I wish to thank the Committee Members here today for providing this opportunity for me to testify. I'd also like to especially thank the staff of both committees for their review of our comments on the Sunset Review Report of the Medical Board and their assistance with getting us up to speed for this hearing. My testimony today provides CALM's response to the issues regarding license midwifery raised by the staff's background paper. Particularly, the matters highlighted in issues number four and number 30, which raises two questions. Are certain clarifications in a law necessary to reflect these providers roles? And number two, how does the Medical Board of California work with licensed midwives and the licensed midwives stakeholder groups? CALM agrees with the staff that both of these issues must be addressed during the present sunset review. Three issues warrant clarifications in the law. Peer review.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1481, 'end': 1485, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tanya Smith-Johnson: Hello, good afternoon. My name is Tanya Smith-Johnson, I'm the President of California Families for Access to Midwives, or better known as CFAM. I'm an Navy Veteran, active duty military spouse, home schooler, and student. But most importantly, I'm a mother of five and pregnant with baby six, and a mother who has birthed all of her births with midwives. I've birthed in all settings. I've birthed in the hospital, free standing birth center, and my last two births have been at home. Like many families in the State of California, I chose the midwifery model of care. My last two births were here in the State of California. Yet many families in California are unable to do the same. They are being denied access to affordable midwifery care. The passage of AB 1308 allowed midwives to be autonomous care providers. SB 407 made it possible for midwives to become CPSP providers and accept Medi-Cal. This was seen as a victory for so many families here in the state. No longer would midwifery care be cost prohibitive and unavailable for those receiving Medi-Cal. But it's been three years since the passage of AB 1308 and a year passed the deadline for the Medical Board of California to complete the ruling. Delays in implementation of the CPSB bill due to ACOG's insistence on restrictive regulations on the way licensed mid-wives practice is impacting the healthcare of thousands of families in California. One in eight births in the United States take place here in California, when half of those births in California are to women on Medi-Cal. It is an egregious disservice to think that the option to see licensed midwives as care providers is being impeded by this impasse. The true stakeholders are women and families, not ACOG, and we want the freedom to choose our care providers. We should be listening to women and families who are saying they want midwifery care. We want the freedom to choose midwives as our care providers and the choice should be available to low income women, women on Medi-Cal, and families who otherwise could not afford it. Licensed midwives have done all that they've been asked to do to become autonomous and fully qualify as CPS providers. They are ready and wanting to offer their services to us and thousands of us are ready to receive their care. CFAM supports holding the NBC accountable for impeding midwives from qualifying as CPS providers. We support licensed midwives being regulated by their own board and no longer regulated by a board that doesn't have midwifery representation present or fully understand the difference between the midwifery model of care and the medical model of care. CFAM respectively requests that the committees and the staff consider to develop legislation for transferring the regulation of licensed midwives from the Medical Board to an autonomous licensed midwife's board within the State Department of Consumer Affairs. We also support the amendment to relevant sections of the CPSP bill to allow families the freedom to choose midwives and midwifery model of care. The families of California have been patiently waiting long enough.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alicia Sanchez: Good afternoon. Alicia Sanchez, representing the California Medical Association. We don't always agree with the Medical Board but we do think that they have been responsive to many of the issues that have been raised over the course of the last few years since the Sunset Review process. and we agree with the staff recommendation that the board's authority should be extended. The analysis raises a lot of issues, many of which are very complicated, and the language of the legislative proposal is really going to matter in our ability to do an analysis. So we look forward to continuing to provide feedback as we go through this process. We want to thank the Committee for including issue 19, the issue of utilization review in the staff analysis, and we look forward to hearing updates on that. However, there are a few issues in the staff analysis on which our position at this point is clear. We continue to oppose the elimination of the corporate bar on the practice of medicine, issue 12. As we've expressed in multiple venues, the corporate bar is a fundamental protection against corporate financial interest driving patient care decisions. We disagree with the assertion that changing the corporate bar will increase access. The 2016 CRB report that was referenced in the staff analysis was inconclusive as to whether the corporate bar would increase access to care. And AB 2024, which was passed last year, which would create a temporary exemption to the corporate bar for critical access hospitals requires a report back to the Legislature on the program's effectiveness. We believe a conversation about the elimination at this point without that additional information is premature. We continue to oppose the idea of mandatory notification of probation, issue 28. We continue to be concerned about the due process issues that we raised on SB 1033. And we disagree, Senator Hill, about the assertion that our proposal AB 505, which we introduced after hearing the concerns about probation being an inappropriate disciplinary action for many of the cases being discussed, does not include due process. Additionally, we believe that the Sunset Review is not the appropriate venue for this clearly controversial issue. We take issue with the assertion in the staff analysis that a stipulated settlement is an admission to violating the charges and that accusations are equivalent to proven charges. This is not an accurate portrayal of the process. It only serves to further confuse the public, and it decreases our confidence that this venue is appropriate to address this concern. The staff analysis raises the issue of cost recovery, issue 14. The current licence fee includes a $15 that's spread across all licensees to pay for the cost of what the medical board previously recovered through cost recovery. Should the Committee seek to reinstate, or committees, seek to reinstate the cost recovery, we would request that the license fee be reduced accordingly. Without that, the physician would be paying twice. We do question, however, the rationale for seeking this reinstated cost recovery, as other boards have shown to have varying degrees of success in actually recovering the costs that have been ordered. The Board of Optometry is reporting that only 21% of the amount ordered is being actively collected. The Acupuncture Board is reporting a return of 3% on unrecovered costs in its 2015 Sunset Review Report. We do support the idea of readdressing vertical enforcement issue 64, though I would note we have in the past opposed what was suggested by Mr. Howard which is moving the investigators to the AG's office. So I'm sure there will be ongoing conversations about that, but I wanted to put out that we do support reviewing and readdressing vertical enforcement. And as to the other issues in the report, our assessment on the language as I noted will be language dependent, but there will be important factors that we'll be considering. What is the impact on due process? Physicians as all other licensees have a constitutional right to due process, and the language must maintain those due process protections. What is the impact on patient privacy? Both federal and state law establish patient privacy protections because of the very sensitive nature of medical information. And when you start to consider making changes to those, they need to be very carefully weighed, the balance between the desire to change it and what the impact would be. And is the issue one that's better addressed consistently across all types of healthcare licensees? For example, the report suggests adding a physician specific requirements to the office notifications that are currently required for all licensees. What about physicians recommends that different requirement from physicians from those other licensee types? We appreciate the opportunity to provide this analysis, and continue to have a dialog with you as the process continues.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1886, 'end': 1890, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3576, 'end': 3582, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mario Guzman: Good afternoon sir. Good afternoon. My name is Mario Guzman, and I live in San Jose. And I came here today to ask for your help, for the Senate, to bring back accountability and demand accountability and transparency to the California Medical Board. Look at me. I am a victim of medical negligence, malpractice. Back in 2013, I was a triathlete, and a marathoner. However, a series of utterly avoidable medical mistakes left me in this chair, a shadow of my former self. I demanded justice. And for a while, it seemed that I was going to get it. After I filed a complaint against the Doctor that harmed me, an investigation by the California Medical Board found her to be below the standard of care and was referred to the Attorney General office for disciplinary action. Imagine my surprise when the complaint was closed without explanation, and most importantly, without any sort of disciplinary action. I spent months, seeing my limbs fall off my body, and the doctor that harmed me has a spotless record. A little research showed me that this surprise was misplaced. After all, the California Medical Board dismisses 95% of the complaints it receives. Not only that, but it also seals those files from external review. So there is no way for the victim, this case me or any other, open independent audit to find out why this suffering was left unaddressed. For many, medical malpractice is an abstraction. To some it is just an excuse to shake money out of the physicians. But the reality is that the preventable medical errors are the third leading cause of death in the United States. I am the consequence of a medical establishment that allows mediocre, drug addicted, pill vending doctors continue practicing unscathed for years under the complicit eye of the California Medical Board. I came here to demand change. I came here to bring some light to the injustice because I am still alive, which is not the case for many of the victims. I ask for your help, Assemblymen and Senators, to bring back transparency and accountability to a consumer protection agency that long ago lost its purpose. Because for the California Medical Board, impunity and disability are acceptable.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lyudmila Parada: hello, my name is lyudmila dev parada and i am from san jose, california. one thing that it has always brought my attention and i think it has been like the big elephant on the content in this room, and it should be of the most importance for all of us, congressmen, citizens of california, it's the fact of who pays for medical negligence. who ends up paying for the bill when somebody ends up dead or disabled as a result of a preventable medical error? i got to tell you, it's not the doctor. between tort reform, and arbitration clauses, and medical provider contracts, less than 3% of victims ever go to trial.  and less than three-quarters of a percent ever get any sort of financial compensation for their troubles. i gotta tell you, it's not the hospital also the ones that ends up with the bill. when a patient falls in the hospital, or gets a hospital acquired infection, that hospital continues billing, primary insurance continues billing medicare, continues billing all of us for that medical treatment. do you know who pays? all of us pay. preventable medical errors are believed to be the third leading cause of death in the united states. research shows that between $73 and $98 billion a year are the costs of medical errors. if the estimate of our recent paper on the journal of healthcare finance is correct the actual cost between indirect and direct costs is 10 times higher, at a rate of almost $1 trillion a year. given this reality, it would be plain common sense that the consumer protection agencies such as the california medical board would discipline and limit the ability to practice of that 6% of doctors that account for almost 60% of malpractice insurance payments. unfortunately, that is not the case. this board, throughout the years, have actively pushed for policies that put californians' lives at risk. it refuses to mandate doctors on probation to disclose their disciplinary status to patients. it recently approved the reestablishment of the diversion program that allows substance abusing physicians to continue practicing during the disciplinary process. this was a program that was struck down several years ago because it was proved to have harmed several patients. that's absolutely true and the new program is not a diversion program. it's completely different then that one that you're referring to. but still this is a board that closes 95% of complaints and seals them from any sort of review. we don't even know if they are reviewed at all. how is this good public policy? it puzzles me, but maybe it shouldn't. when we look at the financial incentives that the board has, it's not surprising at all. my husband is this man right here. he is now on medicare and social security, 20 years before he should have. his medical care will cost millions of dollars throughout his life. we all pay for it, not kaiser permanente. but be assured that the california medical board will allow doctors that cause these sorts of errors for years, and we all will be paying for it. thank you.>>thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carmen Dalver: Hello. My name's Carmen Dalver. I'm the Executive Director of Consumer Watchdog and we were here four years ago when this Committee issued a scathing report on enforcement and doctor discipline at the California medical board, threatened to shut it down if it didn't clean up its act and start protecting patients. Four years later, the medical board continues to fail in its primary mission, which is patient protection, not physician protection. I have to say I was really offended by the absurd comments by Dr. Gnanadev that in one hand, patients should be perfectly fine with the information that they're able to get online at the medical boards website. So they have all the information they need about a Doctor's probationary status. Yet Dr. Gnanadev doesn't want to actually tell them because that might impact the patient/doctor relationship. But it's just shocking. It's speaking out of both sides of their mouths and it really shows how little physicians at the medical board want patients to be informed. They talked about putting up tables at the mall to inform patients how they might look at their Doctor. This isn't a bake sale. This isn't the girl scouts. We're talking about patients lives. We're talking about the people like the patients who came here to speak who didn't know about dangerous doctors and are facing the results. So, number one, we strongly support the Committee's recommendation that doctors be required to inform their patients if they are on probation. Not only because they should know but because it is so difficult for a doctor actually to get on probation in the first place for doing harm to a doctor that you know these accusations and these disciplinary actions are severe. What we far more often hear from patients is that they submit a complaint, they get a letter saying we got your complaint. And a little while later, they say was dismissed without cause. So frequently, we hear from patients who were never interviewed by an investigator, never interviewed by a medical expert. We hear from patients whose medical records have been falsified. Doctor's add or change things after the fact but those are the records the board is relying on to decide whether or not there was a departure from the standard of care and so we also urge this Committee to require the board to speak to complainants before they close the case. If we were talking about a rape case, the doctors wouldn't take evidence and speak to only the person who was accused of the rape. They would talk to the victim as well. But the Medical Board doesn't do that, and that's outrageous. So urge the Committee. Again, we were here four years ago with exactly the same problems. Little has changed and if we continue to repeat history, we're going to get the same results. So we urge the board to mandate these changes in the enforcement process or shut down the board. We should start over if they're going to continue down this road.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 514, 'end': 522, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 748, 'end': 756, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Valencia: Good afternoon Mr. Chairman and Members John Valencia. I'm here on two matters. First on issue 25 on behalf of the Latino Physicians of California, we're heartened by the board's response to the Golden State Medical Association's urging to pursue the report, but we're concerned that the responses and reactions lack one critical thing that we think should come back before the joint committees, and that's a diagnostic as to the causality. My board of directors includes a former member of the Medical Board of California. We'll be engaged in a detailed communication to the Board, with copies to this Committee. And again, while we find the initial responses heartening. We find that the disproportionality of enforcement for a population that at least in our case Latino physicians represents fewer than 3% active physicians in California warrants a deeper into causality quite simply. Shifting gears and shifting topics very briefly, the Committee is possession on item 11, the notion that an alternative pathway for crediting boards to petition the Medical Board of California have equivalency standards reviewed for recognition of specialties in California, not for practice since we don't stratify the practice of medicine, but rather for advertising one specialization. So on behalf of the American Board of Cosmetic Surgery and the California Academy of Cosmetic Surgery, our clients in the matter, we ask that you refer to our detailed communication. Of course, as an active applicant, in this oversized paperweight is essentially one third of the documentation that we have pending before the board. We join with the at least one of the server boards and have been affirmatively reviewed previously by the medical board over the last 27 years during which time the two private, non-profit, which is not to be confused with not for profit, organizations have recognized only one specialty, that specialty being, thankfully, medical genetics and genomics. Thank you Mr. Chairman, thank you members.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eric Holm: Thank you very much. Good afternoon, it's pleasure to be with all of you, and Assemblyman, it's nice to see you again, and thank you to the Committee Members and to the Committee staff. I'm Eric Holm. I'm the President of the Board of Guide Dogs for the Blind. I'm joined today with Ms. Carmen Delgado, who's my Vice President and my Executive Officer Brian Skewis and, of course, my beloved guide dog, Ford. So I appreciate the opportunity to be heard today and I know we have a lot that you probably want to cover. So I wish to, at this time, turn it over to my Vice President for brief overview of the board. Thank you.
[{'start': 190, 'end': 199, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 287, 'end': 301, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 352, 'end': 364, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 403, 'end': 407, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sanjay Wadley: Thank you, my name is Sanjay Wadley, I'm a legislative advocate with the California Association of Realtors. I'd like to thank the chairs and Members of the Committee for the opportunity to address you today. I'm here specifically to address issue 12, the concerns related to what are described as fake service dogs, and this is an issue confronted by our members primarily in their capacity as property managers. AB 1569 introduced by Assembly member Caballero and sponsored by our Association is meant to address some of the issues surrounding verification of companion and service animals. And those issues and hopefully curb some of the abuses, in conformity, however, with federal and state law. However, we welcome the board taking on a role in helping address the issues and concerns related to fake service dogs, and welcome any suggestions the board may make to increasing consumer protections regarding this issue, and welcome become it being a participant in assisting without process, thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 452, 'end': 461, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Margie Donovan: Good afternoon, my name is Margie Donovan, am I being heard on the mic?
[{'start': 27, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ken Metz: got it, thank you. my name is metz. i am the current president of the golden state guide dog handlers, formerly known as guide dog users of california. and i am here also to oppose the board going for another four years. i don't feel that the board, as margie mentioned, has listened to us in many ways. got it, thank you. my name is metz. i am the current president of the golden state guide dog handlers, formerly known as guide dog users of california. and i am here also to oppose the board going for another four years. i don't feel that the board, as margie mentioned, has listened to us in many ways. in 2013, we tried to work with the board and ended up having go through legislation because the board didn't want to work with us, and we have had a lot of issues in that respect. the board, as a matter of fact, when people graduate from a guide dog school here in california, the board does receive and they require the receipt of the identification of each individual person receiving a guide dog, each handler. they also try and make certain that they have the records in, on file at least in their office, i realize only for their use. but we do not understand why private information needs to be sent to this board when someone graduates getting a guide dog. we realize that the seeing eye school was the original in 1929. and so it's something like 88 years now, and they also have done a lot of work with the international guide dog federation. and let me say that the three schools here in california, three guide dog schools, also are accredited by the international guide dog federation. and let me finish, at least, by saying that using the best practices at the state board of guide dogs for the blind has produced has used a lot of the material using the state board of the guide dog, i'm sorry, international guide dog federation. therefore, we are opposing the board, and we also feel very strongly about the fact that the board has not, in the last several years, been willing to work with the consumers to try and improve what they could have had as a really good program. they have done their own thing. they have worked with individuals that are not guide dog handlers to get a lot of the materials that they put together. they haven't put out surveys recently to ask any questions of what we need. it appears that they really just don't care about what is going on with the schools here in california, and especially for the use of the graduates. we're the important folks. i'm sorry, let me say one more thing and i'll finish. that is that the board did start in 1949, 48 legislation. in 1949, they started there were reasons because people were being billed out of a lot of money. you hear about fake service dogs? they had fake guide dog schools, and so that was the reason these things don't exist now because of the establishment of the board at that time. now, they've overseen their responsibility. they are not doing the things they need to do for consumers. thank you.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 253, 'end': 259, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 334, 'end': 338, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 557, 'end': 563, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Carla Scardins: Dog jam, kind of like a log jam. My name is Carla Scardins. I am a Legislative Committee Member for the California Association of Guide Dog Users. And to be very brief in the questions that have already been brought up here about questions of efficacy and validity at this point in time of the Board. I would respectfully request that we sunset this Board. Thank you so much for your time. Thank you. Thank you so much.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Kelly: hello, my name is mike lyudmila kelly. i've been a guide dog user for just shy of 25 years. i've never had any experience with the board until i got a dog from out of state. the board has forbade the instructors from the school i came from, from coming out here. we have to notify them. in one case, an instructor with 35 years experience was tailed by a california instructor. they had to hire them to follow the seeing eye instructor around. and they've interfered with my ability to get training for this dog, so i oppose the board. thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roger Oberholtzer: okay, thank you. okay. there you are. hi, everybody. my name is roger. i am the secretary of the national federation of the blind, the california association of guide dog users of the national federation of the blind of california. and i got the dog from seeing eye as well, and i see that at one time this board had a purpose in the 40s. but as we all know and you probably hear it from my accent, i'm from switzerland originally, and we have now throughout the world schools that are overseen by the international guide dog federation that has very high standards and that all schools that try to abide by. and the board has only jurisdiction here in california. we don't encounter the same problems any longer that happened in the 1940s. as you heard before, there were fake guide dog trainers, fake schools. this is no longer an emerging problem. therefore, i feel also that there is no longer a use for this board. there is already an international body. all schools tried to follow these standards. and therefore, this court has absolutely outlived its purpose and just consumes the time of the assembly and the senate, and has not worked together with the users of guide dogs. and the consumer agency such as conductory chart associations for the acb and the agencies for the acb international federation of the blind. i have here some documentation in case you guys didn't get these. i faxed some copies for assembly chair-
[{'start': 64, 'end': 69, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Retha: All right. It's... Good afternoon, my name is Richard Retha. I am a member of the California Council of the Blind, and the Guide Dog user group that Ken and Margie referred to moments ago. I'll keep this short and sweet. The four people who preceded me are, I echo their sediments. I think this is a redundant use of our time. I think the International Guide Dog Federation has existed and does well. I think the Guide Dog board, as others have said, hasn't worked with our population and it puts more barriers in our way than it helps us and like others before me. I'm also in favor of not having this board exist any longer, thank you. Thank you.
[{'start': 46, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 149, 'end': 152, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 157, 'end': 163, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Margie Donovan: thank you. i'd like to make two more comments. just for the record again, i'm donovan and in reference to other service dog organizations in california. a couple years ago there was a board meeting held by the guide dog board. and it was abundantly clear from the other schools in california that are not guide dog, that they did not want oversight, that they do not need oversight and they spoke very, very strongly about not becoming under the board. secondly, i need to tell something that is very awful to have to say, but there's a board member on the state guide dog board who has been malicious and divisive with our organization, which was guide dogs users of california. took our name while serving on the board. spent two years not submitting the rest of the paperwork. finally submitted it this december, and we had to change our name. and i don't foresee that that's a qualified person to be serving on this board and representing our governor. thank you.
[{'start': 78, 'end': 85, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debbie Wasserman: Good afternoon, I'm Debbie Wasserman and I, too, feel like this board has long served its purpose back in the 40s I believe that this was necessary. But I really strongly believe that we, as blind persons have a much stronger group and can speak completely for ourselves. And as others have said I believe that this poll board needs to be abolished. Thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Skewis: once again, this is skewis, the executive officer of the board. fundamentally the board opposed some of the issues brought up through senate bill 1331 which is the bill that was discussed by the majority of public comment. while the board fundamentally disagreed with the provisions in that bill it was signed into law and we're in the process of implementing that. we are still too early to analyze the effectiveness of it. but we're more than happy to work with consumer groups moving forward. based on the issues that were brought up in public comment we believe that those issues were addressed in senate bill 1331. so we look forward to figuring out if that there are effective solutions or not. another issue that was brought up was the issue regarding the background papers. issue number six regarding public information or demographic information with which in our original document we requested that that section of law be removed. we no longer need that information. in my time, with the board has not been used for anything other than data entry so, we see no issue with not collecting any information about graduates and certainly don't need any demographic information about licensees. and finally, i'll close with one last comment regarding the international guide dog federation. the international guide dog federation is an accrediting body that has no enforcement ability whatsoever short of stripping a schools accreditation. so, regarding the consumer protection element, the board still is the only thing in california that has an ability to enforce the laws of the guide dog act on instructors and licensees.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert Puleo: Good morning Assembly Member Salas, Senator Hill and members of the Joint Committee, I'm Robert Puleo. I'm the executive officer for the Board of Chiropractic Examiners. And with me here today is our board chair, newly elected board chair, Heather Dane. And she's a licensee member of the board and Heather will be presenting our testimony today.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 34, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 44, 'end': 48, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 89, 'end': 101, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 240, 'end': 252, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 299, 'end': 306, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Robert Puleo: Excuse me, Robert Puleo again, we will be working with the department's budget office to do a thorough review of our budget and make there's no areas where we can't cut costs first. So, in answer to your question, we don't know what exactly the fee will be. One of the things we are looking at is we have miscellaneous fees and regulation and for things like satellite offices that are too low. They don't cover the cost of the work associated with issuing that satellite certificate. So we want to look at those fees and raise them so that we're actually charging the people who utilize these services rather than the whole license population. So we're going to do a thorough analysis of all of our fees. We're currently working with the department to do desk audits or a process mapping for licensing and enforcement. So we want to look at all of this areas where we charge fees and make sure that we're charging the appropriate fee. And my hope is that we won't have to raise the renewal fee. That we can generate enough revenue through these other fees that we can cover the cost. But that's something, that we won't be raising the fee this year. We will be doing a thorough evaluation of our budget.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katarina Eleby: Morning Chairman Jerry Hill, Chairman Ruiz Salas, Committee Members, we are pleased to be here today for our sunset hearing. My name is Katarina Eleby, board President and public member. Joining me today is Jason Kaiser the executive officer and Alicia Rabena-Amen our Vice President. The mission of the Physical Therapy Board is to protect consumers from incompetent, unprofessional and fraudulent practice through regulation of practitioners. Specifically, the Physical Therapy Board administers the licensing and enforcement programs for physical therapists, physical therapist assistants, and unlicensed physical therapy aides. Regulation of the practice of physical therapy began in 1958, when the Legislature passed the Physical Therapy Practice Act. Initially, the Practice Act established the Physical Therapy Examining Committee as a Committee under the Medical Board of California. Between 1971 and 1996 amendments to the Practice Act shifted regulatory responsibility over physical therapy away from the Medical Board to the Committee and eventually renamed and converted the Committee into its own board. The board is comprised of seven members, four practitioners and three public members. The Governor appoints five members in total, all four professional members and one of the public members. The Senate Rules Committee and the Assembly Speaker each appoint one public member each. Currently, there are no vacancies. As of fiscal year 15-16, the Physical Therapy Board regulates approximately 31,000 physical therapists and 6700 physical therapy assistants. The Board's budget is just over $4 million and it has approximately four months of reserves in its fund. I'll be giving the response to the issue item number one, regarding the statutory fee increase. Currently we are at statutory caps as of December 26, 2016. This is a concern for us for the following reasons. The board may need to develop examinations, our jurisprudence exam needs to be updated and, should a need arise, we may need to develop a national exam. If so, it would be emergent and would need to be addressed immediately. In addition, our reserves are still relatively low, with only four months in our fund. Although projections are positive, there may be unforeseen litigation that would be a strain on resources. Thirdly, the Board is planning to move to a larger office space in the near future, as we are currently at capacity in our current office. We want to be clear that we are not planning on increasing fees. We are simply asking the Legislature to consider increasing our Statutory Caps because we don't know what we don't know. Although there is no immediate need to raise fees, the board is trying to be proactive and prepare for a rainy day. This approach is proactive and will allow us to plan for the future in a fiscally responsible manner. And with that, I'll hand it over to our executive officer, Jason Kaiser, to address the next issue regarding BreEZe.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 38, 'end': 48, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 136, 'end': 150, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 207, 'end': 219, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 246, 'end': 264, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2908, 'end': 2920, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alicia Rabena-Amen: Good morning Chairman Salas, Chairman Hill, and Committee Members. And thank you all for your public service, and for the opportunity to testify before you today. My names is Alicia Rabena-Amen, and I've been a professional member of PTBC board since February 2014. This morning I'm going to discuss issue number 15 under edits to the Practice Act, which asks, should the Practice Act be amended to change the PTBC's ratio of public members to professional members? There's been much thought and discussion about board composition and the potential for anti-competitive decisions, especially since the US Supreme Court's decision in the case of the North Carolina Board of Dental Examiners versus the Federal Trade Commission, the FTC. While attempting to balance the boards with a public member majority may enhance consumer perspective of antitrust protection, the FTC guidance suggested that a board with even just one professional member could still be a controlling majority. As it is not uncommon for public members to defer to professional members on matters even outside of practice issues, such as administration of the board. Given the North Carolina case and decision, we board members of the PTBC understand why the Legislature might be considering such a change to the Practice Act. This board, however, does not feel that this change is necessary and please allow me to explain why. Just as a reminder, our board is made up of three public members and four professional members. During my three years of service on this board, I've not seen one example of a professional member using his or her position to drive a decision. It's my belief that if a professional member tried such a thing, the other professional and public members would be quick to reign that member in. I've witnessed only positive contributions from the professional members who sit on this board. And as a professional board member myself, I've seen first hand the benefits of a board that consists of four professional members who come from diverse work settings. And one of the areas where professional members bring added enhancement is during case deliberation, where we can each apply our various workplace experiences to a licensee's case, in order to contribute to a fair decision all the while, while still honoring our consumer protection mandate. I feel very grateful and blessed for the PTBC board members who came before me, and engrave the culture of consumer protection to be first and foremost the focus of our existence and decisions. Yes, the PTBC has other functions, such as testing and licensing and other things. But it is our mandate to protect consumers that is always at the forefront of our minds of our board members. Because we clearly understand our purpose, we PTBC board members feel that each one of us is a public member. I would even issue a challenge to anyone who is willing to take a look at one of our board meetings and see if you can tell which members are public and which are professional. I think you'd have a hard time trying to figure it out. And since this culture has been in place for years before most of us current board members were appointed, opinions and responsibilities are shared freely and openly among us. I think our Board President, Ms. Eleby, and Board members Mr. TJ Watkins, and Ms. Tonia McMillian, who are all public members, would agree that any notion of a turf war is nonexistent within the PTBC Board. And so it is for these reasons that this board has no concern with changing the board composition. We do, however, think that perhaps all boards should be looked at individually in order to determine each board's history and liability on a board by board basis. Once again, thank you for your service and thank you for your consideration.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 38, 'end': 42, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 175, 'end': 193, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 3281, 'end': 3286, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3310, 'end': 3320, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3330, 'end': 3345, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Medu Challa: Good morning, Chairman Salas, and Chairman Hill, Committee Members and staff. I'm Dr. Medu Challa, a professional member and the current President of the California State Board of Optometry. I was appointed to the board in June 2012 and have served on and chaired all of the boards forming committees as well as board Vice President prior to being President. With me is Vice President and public member, Donna Burke. Ms. Burke was appointed in October 2010, and has also served in various capacities throughout her 10 year on the board. In addition of Vice President, and to being Vice President, Ms. Burke currently chairs the public relations and outreach Committee, and joining us is our executive officer, Jessica Seiferman, appointed in September 2015. We'd first like to begin by thanking your Committee staff, for their exceptional work and assistance during the Sunset review process. They've been extremely professional, supportive, and accommodating. We also appreciate the opportunity to appear before you, to address the issues identified by the Committee. Since its inception over a hundred years ago, the California State Board of Optometry has supported and helped consumers by advocating consumer interest before lawmakers regulating to protect consumers from unlicensed practitioners and guarding our licensees against unfair competition, while enforcing laws to protect the consumers and resolving disputes between business and customers or consumer and a licensee. Our authority to protect the health and safety of California patients receiving optometric care through licensing, education, and regulation of the practice of optometry was expanded on January 1st, 2016, when Governor Brown signed Assembly Bill 684. Transferring practice of optical dispensary from the Medical Board of California to the State Board of Optometry. Over night, the board's regulatory population grew by 50%, expanding its regulatory oversight from 8,000 licensees to roughly 12,000 licensees and registrants. Today, the board regulates the largest population of optometrists and dispensers in the United States. With over 17,400 licensees, registrants and permits. The board is also responsible for issuing optometry certifications for diagnostic pharmaceutical agents, therapeutic pharmaceutical agents, irrigation and dilation and for the treatment of glaucoma. With this significant change in population, come new and emerging responsibilities, our board stands ready and has the capabilities and resources to maintain the same level of accountability, efficiency, effectiveness, integrity, and customer service, it has delivered since the last Sunset review. Further, it is in the best interest in California consumers to continue protecting their iHealth and safety through the board and it's current constituted state and independent board. That relays on the Department of consumer affairs for administrative support. With that, I turn it over to Ms. Burke for additional information.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 28, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 43, 'end': 47, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 86, 'end': 97, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 404, 'end': 415, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 421, 'end': 426, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 601, 'end': 606, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 710, 'end': 727, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1703, 'end': 1708, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2958, 'end': 2963, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
 : it's jonah nothing jonah we jonah want jonah to jonah rush jonah into. jonah we jonah want jonah to jonah definitely jonah meet jonah with jonah the jonah existing jonah inspection jonah programs jonah within jonah dca. jonah find jonah out jonah what jonah works jonah for jonah them, jonah what jonah doesn't jonah work jonah for jonah them, jonah the jonah best jonah ways jonah to jonah implement jonah it jonah through jonah breeze. jonah we jonah want jonah to jonah identify jonah any jonah efficiencies jonah that jonah we jonah can jonah do jonah before jonah rolling jonah it jonah out. jonah but jonah again, jonah we jonah hope jonah to jonah have jonah that jonah up jonah and jonah running jonah by jonah the jonah end jonah of jonah 2017.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 10, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 19, 'end': 24, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 28, 'end': 33, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 39, 'end': 44, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 48, 'end': 53, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 59, 'end': 64, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 71, 'end': 76, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 80, 'end': 85, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 91, 'end': 96, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 100, 'end': 105, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 117, 'end': 122, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 128, 'end': 133, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 139, 'end': 144, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 149, 'end': 154, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 164, 'end': 169, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 181, 'end': 186, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 196, 'end': 201, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 209, 'end': 214, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 220, 'end': 225, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 231, 'end': 236, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 241, 'end': 246, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 252, 'end': 257, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 264, 'end': 269, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 274, 'end': 279, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 286, 'end': 291, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 297, 'end': 302, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 311, 'end': 316, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 322, 'end': 327, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 332, 'end': 337, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 344, 'end': 349, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 354, 'end': 359, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 365, 'end': 370, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 376, 'end': 381, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 385, 'end': 390, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 401, 'end': 406, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 410, 'end': 415, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 424, 'end': 429, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 438, 'end': 443, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 447, 'end': 452, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 458, 'end': 463, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 467, 'end': 472, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 482, 'end': 487, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 492, 'end': 497, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 511, 'end': 516, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 522, 'end': 527, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 531, 'end': 536, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 541, 'end': 546, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 550, 'end': 555, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 563, 'end': 568, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 577, 'end': 582, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 586, 'end': 591, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 597, 'end': 602, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 607, 'end': 612, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 620, 'end': 625, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 629, 'end': 634, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 640, 'end': 645, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 649, 'end': 654, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 660, 'end': 665, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 671, 'end': 676, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 680, 'end': 685, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 690, 'end': 695, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 704, 'end': 709, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 713, 'end': 718, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 723, 'end': 728, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 733, 'end': 738, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 742, 'end': 747, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kara Cortez: kara  cortez, representing the...
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jeffrey Mason: Thank you, Chair Hill, Chair Salas, and members of the committees. I'm Jeffrey Mason, Chief Deputy Director for the Department of Consumer Affairs. This afternoon, we will be presenting as a panel. As the committees may be aware, the department is currently undergoing a leadership transition. Director Alok ...'s last day is tomorrow. And we welcome our newly appointed director, Dean Grafilo. The department's also appreciative of the assistance and the partnership of Secretary Alexis Podesta and the Business Consumer Services and Housing Agency has provided the department through this transition. I'd like to take a moment and introduce the panel, first of all, we have Peter Williams, Deputy Secretary at the Business Consumer Services and Housing Agency, and Adam Quinonez, Deputy Director of Legislation for the Department of Consumer Affairs. To begin, I would like to do a quick overview of the department. The Department of Consumer Affairs oversees 40 boards, bureaus, and commissions, whom, together, licenses and regulates over 3 million licensees in more than 200 professional and 100 business categories. The Department serves and supports these 40 separate entities in the areas of enforcement, budgeting, information technology, legal affairs, communications, legislation, and regulations. Several department highlights from 2016 include the following, DCA responded to approximately 530,000 consumer calls. Working in conjunction with the Bureau of Postsecondary Education, we hosted 76 student outreach events in response to school closures throughout California. This included students impacted by the closure of ITT Tech. The Department's information technology team implemented 1,243 brief system enhancements. And DCA conducted 2,078 investigations on behalf of the boards and bureaus. We've been asked to speak to issue number one, the investigator vacancies currently in the Department's health quality investigation unit. As the committees are aware in July of 2014, the investigative staff of the California Medical Board moved under the management of the Department Consumer Affairs division investigations. Since that date in 2014, 47 individuals have left the Department, but the vast majority transitioned to positions elsewhere in the state that have less complicated case types, lower case loads, and most impactful, higher pay scales. Currently, the unit that investigates Medical Board cases has 31 investigator vacancies, a number which represents 40% of the total investigative positions. The results of the vacancies have been an increased workload on remaining staff and an increase in overall investigation timelines. The Department's addressing these vacancies as follows, first of all, we're hiring, hiring, hiring. Beginning on August 2014, DCA has received and reviewed over 1,600 applications, interviewed over 475 candidates. And we've had 18 individuals successfully complete the required year-long background check process that it takes to become a sworn peace officer in the state. The Department also has an additional 15 candidates currently undergoing that background check process. From an operational standpoint, we reassigned cases based upon type cases, and we provided overtime to existing staff. We're also using what we consider to be an innovative approach to bring on new investigators in a non-sworn capacity. We're taking advantage of that year long background check process, bring in the individuals on board, on staff in a non-sworn capacity, they investigate less egregious, less complex cases. They get used to our processes, our procedures, how we do business, our culture. We get used to them as employees. They complete the year long process. They go to the academy; and they come back to the Department as a sworn investigator. We look at this a little bit like having a AAA baseball team for our Major League team. And while the Department has been very active in recruiting and replacing sworn officers, we also need to be able to retain them. And in light of that, the Department has submitted a retention pay proposal, which is currently at Cal HR. And we anticipate hearing the resolution of that very soon. The issue number two, status of IT upgrades for the release three entities. In October 2013, the Department implemented release one of the BreEZe system. And that release placed 10 boards on the new BreEZe platform. In January of 2016, another eight boards and bureaus were moved to BreEZe in release two. Since that launch of release two last year, the Department's been focused on two primary activities, the first being the upgrade and the stabilization of the BreEZe platform. Today the BreEZe system is stable and performs millions of processes everyday. It's used by 1,200 employees approximately and about 1.4 million registered users. One important capability that's been expressed by the board you've heard today is the ability to have an online presence where the prior business system didn't have. Individuals who are applying for life insurance can now apply online. And current licensees who are seeking renewal of their license can submit their license renewals online. In 2016, the BreEZe system processed $115 million through online submissions. Current licensees submitted approximately 466,000 online renewals last year, 91% of which were processed in the same day. Put that in context, those in the past would have had to be put in an envelope with a check by the licensee, sent to us. We would have to open the mail, cashier the check, and process the paperwork, now that's being accomplished in a day or two. The second initiative related to BreEZe is the transition of release three boards and bureaus to a new IT platform The department has learned a great deal from the first two releases. We've learned how best to maintain the system, we've learned how to better manage and implement the sustained levels of program-related enhancement requests. And we've learned how to mitigate the impacts of legislative and regulatory modifications. As a result, we've adjusted our approach for the remaining 18 Boards and Bureaus. Going forward, DCA will be using the Department of Technology's Project Approval Lifecycle Process to determine what IT solution is most effective and most efficient for each individual Board and Bureau. The overall objective of the Department of Technology's process is to match an entity's organizational readiness and business needs with the most appropriate IT solution. This process also includes a cost-benefit analysis, which occurs in phase two of the Department of Technology's process. And that analysis will play a key factor in determining what is the most appropriate IT solution for an individual board or bureau. DCA's expectation is that in some cases the process will determine that BreEZe is the best solution. In other cases, such as our new Bureau of Medical Cannabis Regulation, a different platform was deemed better able to meet that individual entity's specific business needs. DCA is organizing the remaining 18 Boards and Bureaus into groups based upon their individual operational readiness to move through the Department of Technology's process. Each program will begin by focusing on their business needs. They're currently mapping out processes, documenting, assessing their operational needs, looking at staffing impacts of not just the preparation to launch a new system, but the transition and the workload of a new system. We currently have five programs preparing to enter the Department of Technology's process, and we will have an additional two begin next quarter. We've been asked to speak to issue number three, which is barriers to licensure. The Department has been actively working with the the Business Consumer Services and Housing Agency to identify areas where unnecessary barriers to licensure can be reduced. One key area of this work has been on the examination of possible barriers to licensure for individuals re-entering society after incarceration. We've been working to understand how individual Boards and Bureaus determine if a past conviction is deemed substance-related. And we're also attempting to ascertain how they consider rehabilitation in their assessment. In October of 2016 the Little Hoover Commission issued a report titled Jobs for Californians: Strategies to Ease Occupational Licensing Barriers. The report offered a number of recommendations to minimize barriers to entry into licensed professions and included anecdotal discussions of individuals attempting to re-enter society after incarceration simply not applying for licensure because they assumed they would be denied. The department and DCA, DCA and the agency agree that it can be confusing and it can be intimidating for individuals to understand if a prior conviction would be considered substance-related, as well as how one demonstrates rehabilitation. And we're seeking to clarify criteria through regulation or through FAQs, update the websites, to assist applicants, to potentially encourage more folks to apply. Demographic data. The Little Hoover Commission report also recommended that the department collect demographic data on a mandatory basis. Currently the department has a few examples of boards that do collect demographic information, but this activity is completed post-licensure and the response is voluntary on the part of the licensee. The department is not opposed to the collection of data but we believe it should never be condition for licensure and we believe it's best conducted by a third party. We appreciate your time and we look forward to your conversation. Thank you.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 21, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 29, 'end': 34, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 71, 'end': 84, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 303, 'end': 307, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 381, 'end': 393, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 488, 'end': 495, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 676, 'end': 690, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 767, 'end': 780, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 9113, 'end': 9119, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jason Piccione: Hello,Jason Piccione, CIO for DCA, thank you. Yes, the quick answer is yes. The usability of the public portal for searching licensees is actually being reformatted currently. With a projected scheduled implementation date of September of this year. That the effort there is exactly what you said. Navigation, usability, and ease of use for the general public to go out and look for their Doctor, their dentist. And to find usable, efficient searches as they would other standard type of searches, a la Google, Amazon, etc.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Veverka: hi, my name is michelle kara veverka, and i'm an investigator with the division of investigation, the health quality investigation unit. and senator hill, i wanted to answer your question as to what's the real reason for investigators leaving. the original intent of sb 231 was not implemented. another public commenter had mentioned this, that investigators were never co-located with the deputy attorney generals. the system was set up to fail. we had to investigate these matters and prosecute these matters being in two separate agencies. it has made it very difficult and very cumbersome. exit interviews shortly after january, 2006 sided vertical enforcement and salary as predominant reasons to transfer elsewhere. in february 2016, the division conducted an internal vertical enforcement survey, however the results have not been shared with staff. my coworker is going to discuss another question that the committee had.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 149, 'end': 153, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Aaron Barnett: committee members my name is aaron, i am also an investigator with the health quality investigation unit at the division of investigation. i've been an investigator with the medical board previously until the legislative transfer occurred, moving us in 2014. one of the other questions that was posed was, where are investigators going when they leave our department? and it's my understanding that the majority of investigators are leaving to other high-paying agencies such as the department of justice that employ special agents and then also special agents that are employed by the california department of corrections. we also lose investigators to other agencies that are more of our peers that use the same investigator classification that we're within. the problem of retaining experienced and highly trained investigators has existed prior to vertical enforcement. vertical enforcement was probably the most significant. attempt to try and fix the problem, but the medical board has been trying for a long time and they've been trying to get the investigators higher paid. so that is the significant issue that the board, the medical board faces, which has now been passed along to the division of investigation where we now reside.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dev Gnanadev: thank you, sir. good afternoon, the chairs, hill and salas, and the board members, my name is dr. gnanadev, and in my real life, i major at trauma and vascular surgeon from san bernardino, and i'm the president of the medical board of california. would also like to introduce my board vice chair and public member, denise pines, and the board executive director, kimberly kirchmeyer. ms. pines and i will take turns in giving the brief report and responses to specific issues raised by the committee, and mrs. kirchmeyer will assist us in answering questions. i'd like to thank you for providing this opportunity for the medical board, to work with with the legislature, to review the body of law that governs the practice of medicine, as well as the operations of the medical board. the board is a consumer protection agency which licenses and regulates physicians and surgeons. and those, satellite healthcare professionals in california who fall under our statutory mandate. there are currently approximately 142,000 physician and surgeon licenses in california, about 110,000 of them practice in california. the board's primary mission is consumer protection. by statute, the board is authorized for 15 board members, 8 physician members and 7 public members. the governor appoints 13 members and 2 are appointed by the legislature, senate rules committee and the speaker of the assembly. the board currently has one wakened public member pushing. the board's budget for this fiscal year is approximately $63 million. of the $63 million budget, approximately 67% is spent on enforcement. that includes complaint handling, investigation, and prosecution. 14% on licensing and the remainder is expended and administrated to functions and provision monitoring. if the board spends its full budget in this fiscal year, it will have approximately four months to end reserve. the board takes its mission very seriously, as is evidenced by the significant number of changes that have taken place, since the last sunset review report in 2013. in the last four years, the board has made the elimination of opioid and opioid abuse one of its main, focal areas of improvement. board, has a significant role in this issue and took a very proactive approach to addressing this matter. the board, established a prescribing task force and held multiple meetings to identify best practices, heard from speakers regarding this issue, and update the boards guidelines for prescribing controlled substances for pain which are adopted by the board in november of 2014. we did this before the cdc did. these guidelines are intended to educate physicians, on effective pain management in california by avoiding under treatment, overtreatment, or other inappropriate treatment of patients' pain, as well as recognition of addiction and appropriate treatment for addiction. the board also dealt up two public service announcements specific to the opioid overdose prevention. one psa was specific to physicians and provided education on approximate, unappropriately prescribing controlled substances to the patients. the second psa, was intended for the public and featured olympic swimmer and gold medalist, natalie coughlin. this video was designed to alert consumers to the dangers of abusing prescription drugs. the board also established, for a limited time, a group of investigators called operation rx strikeforce, focused solely on investigating the most serious over prescribing cases. the strikeforce performed numerous search warrants, filed a number of actions and arrested multiple physicians and others. in addition, board members and staff have provided numerous presentations, including ms. kirchmeyer and i on the issue of opia opides and the inappropriate prescribing to the physicians and consumer groups. in an effort to be proactive, the board  established a data use agreement with the california department of public heath, cdph, to receive death certificates when the death was related to opioids, or it was then able to use cures to identify physicians who may be inappropriately prescribing control substances. the board,also requested information from the pharmaceutical companies who had identified physicians who may have inappropriate prescribing issues. all these attempts have assisted the board in identifying the physicians who may be inappropriately prescribing in an effort to eliminate opiate overdose death. in july 2014, board established a new compliant investigation office, cio, made up of special investigators who are non sworn, who began working the less complex investigations for the board. this unit comprised of six special investigators and the supervising special investigator one, was the result of portions received pursuant to the consumer protection enforcement initiative and is tasked with investigating quality of care investigations following the medical malpractice settlement or judgment. cases against physicians charged with their convicted of criminal offense and physicians petitioning for reinstatement of license following publication or surrender of his or her license. the establishment of cio has assisted in reducing the case load of the department of consumer affairs investigators in addition to resulting in quicker resolution of these cases. the board also established outpatient surgery setting task force, for which i was a member of in 2013, to review the board's existing oss program. and last to explore ways to improve consumer protection. based upon the input from this task force the board sought legislation that will require adverse event reports occurring at this facilities to be sent to the board, not to cdph. the board now receives these reports and is able to not only value the facility but also look into the care provided by the physicians. the board also recommended legislation that would require all physicians within the oss to have peer review, would require a shorter time frame for initial accreditation, and would require the oss to check for peer review information for all the physicians working within the facility. in addition, the board made significant improvements to oss database and website to make it more consumer friendly. the public can now go to the board website and search for an oss. the information contained in the database includes the owners of the facility, the types of services being performed, the status of the facility with their accreditation agency, and provides copies of the document pertaining to an inspection of the oss and any corrective action plans and follow up inspections. and ms pines will follow the rest.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 42, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 44, 'end': 48, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 98, 'end': 106, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 315, 'end': 327, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 363, 'end': 382, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 388, 'end': 393, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 510, 'end': 520, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3188, 'end': 3204, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3686, 'end': 3696, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6600, 'end': 6605, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rosanna Davis: good afternoon. i am davis, a california-licensed midwife and the president of california association of licensed midwives, also known as calm. we are the state professional society for licensed midwives, who are also regulated by the medical board of california. licensed midwives are specifically educated and trained to provide maternity care in and out of hospital settings, in our clients' homes and in freestanding alternative birth centers. i also serve as president of the california association of midwives, our non-profit, public benefit corporation whose mission is to educate california families, policy makers such as yourselves, as well as increase access to patient-centered, evidence-based midwifery care. i wish to thank the committee members here today for providing this opportunity for me to testify. i'd also like to especially thank the staff of both committees for their review of our comments on the sunset review report of the medical board and their assistance with getting us up to speed for this hearing. my testimony today provides calm's response to the issues regarding license midwifery raised by the staff's background paper. particularly, the matters highlighted in issues number four and number 30, which raises two questions. are certain clarifications in a law necessary to reflect these providers roles? and number two, how does the medical board of california work with licensed midwives and the licensed midwives stakeholder groups? calm agrees with the staff that both of these issues must be addressed during the present sunset review. three issues warrant clarifications in the law. peer review.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1473, 'end': 1477, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tanya Smith-Johnson: Hello, good afternoon. My name is Tanya Smith-Johnson, I'm the President of California Families for Access to Midwives, or better known as CFAM. I'm an Navy Veteran, active duty military spouse, home schooler, and student. But most importantly, I'm a mother of five and pregnant with baby six, and a mother who has birthed all of her births with midwives. I've birthed in all settings. I've birthed in the hospital, free standing birth center, and my last two births have been at home. Like many families in the State of California, I chose the midwifery model of care. My last two births were here in the State of California. Yet many families in California are unable to do the same. They are being denied access to affordable midwifery care. The passage of AB 1308 allowed midwives to be autonomous care providers. SB 407 made it possible for midwives to become CPSP providers and accept Medi-Cal. This was seen as a victory for so many families here in the state. No longer would midwifery care be cost prohibitive and unavailable for those receiving Medi-Cal. But it's been three years since the passage of AB 1308 and a year passed the deadline for the Medical Board of California to complete the ruling. Delays in implementation of the CPSB bill due to ACOG's insistence on restrictive regulations on the way licensed mid-wives practice is impacting the healthcare of thousands of families in California. One in eight births in the United States take place here in California, when half of those births in California are to women on Medi-Cal. It is an egregious disservice to think that the option to see licensed midwives as care providers is being impeded by this impasse. The true stakeholders are women and families, not ACOG, and we want the freedom to choose our care providers. We should be listening to women and families who are saying they want midwifery care. We want the freedom to choose midwives as our care providers and the choice should be available to low income women, women on Medi-Cal, and families who otherwise could not afford it. Licensed midwives have done all that they've been asked to do to become autonomous and fully qualify as CPS providers. They are ready and wanting to offer their services to us and thousands of us are ready to receive their care. CFAM supports holding the NBC accountable for impeding midwives from qualifying as CPS providers. We support licensed midwives being regulated by their own board and no longer regulated by a board that doesn't have midwifery representation present or fully understand the difference between the midwifery model of care and the medical model of care. CFAM respectively requests that the committees and the staff consider to develop legislation for transferring the regulation of licensed midwives from the Medical Board to an autonomous licensed midwife's board within the State Department of Consumer Affairs. We also support the amendment to relevant sections of the CPSP bill to allow families the freedom to choose midwives and midwifery model of care. The families of California have been patiently waiting long enough.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alicia Sanchez: good afternoon. alicia michelle sanchez, representing the california medical association. we don't always agree with the medical board but we do think that they have been responsive to many of the issues that have been raised over the course of the last few years since the sunset review process. and we agree with the staff recommendation that the board's authority should be extended. the analysis raises a lot of issues, many of which are very complicated, and the language of the legislative proposal is really going to matter in our ability to do an analysis. so we look forward to continuing to provide feedback as we go through this process. we want to thank the committee for including issue 19, the issue of utilization review in the staff analysis, and we look forward to hearing updates on that. however, there are a few issues in the staff analysis on which our position at this point is clear. we continue to oppose the elimination of the corporate bar on the practice of medicine, issue 12. as we've expressed in multiple venues, the corporate bar is a fundamental protection against corporate financial interest driving patient care decisions. we disagree with the assertion that changing the corporate bar will increase access. the 2016 crb report that was referenced in the staff analysis was inconclusive as to whether the corporate bar would increase access to care. and ab 2024, which was passed last year, which would create a temporary exemption to the corporate bar for critical access hospitals requires a report back to the legislature on the program's effectiveness. we believe a conversation about the elimination at this point without that additional information is premature. we continue to oppose the idea of mandatory notification of probation, issue 28. we continue to be concerned about the due process issues that we raised on sb 1033. and we disagree, senator hill, about the assertion that our proposal ab 505, which we introduced after hearing the concerns about probation being an inappropriate disciplinary action for many of the cases being discussed, does not include due process. additionally, we believe that the sunset review is not the appropriate venue for this clearly controversial issue. we take issue with the assertion in the staff analysis that a stipulated settlement is an admission to violating the charges and that accusations are equivalent to proven charges. this is not an accurate portrayal of the process. it only serves to further confuse the public, and it decreases our confidence that this venue is appropriate to address this concern. the staff analysis raises the issue of cost recovery, issue 14. the current licence fee includes a $15 that's spread across all licensees to pay for the cost of what the medical board previously recovered through cost recovery. should the committee seek to reinstate, or committees, seek to reinstate the cost recovery, we would request that the license fee be reduced accordingly. without that, the physician would be paying twice. we do question, however, the rationale for seeking this reinstated cost recovery, as other boards have shown to have varying degrees of success in actually recovering the costs that have been ordered. the board of optometry is reporting that only 21% of the amount ordered is being actively collected. the acupuncture board is reporting a return of 3% on unrecovered costs in its 2015 sunset review report. we do support the idea of readdressing vertical enforcement issue 64, though i would note we have in the past opposed what was suggested by mr. howard which is moving the investigators to the ag's office. so i'm sure there will be ongoing conversations about that, but i wanted to put out that we do support reviewing and readdressing vertical enforcement. and as to the other issues in the report, our assessment on the language as i noted will be language dependent, but there will be important factors that we'll be considering. what is the impact on due process? physicians as all other licensees have a constitutional right to due process, and the language must maintain those due process protections. what is the impact on patient privacy? both federal and state law establish patient privacy protections because of the very sensitive nature of medical information. and when you start to consider making changes to those, they need to be very carefully weighed, the balance between the desire to change it and what the impact would be. and is the issue one that's better addressed consistently across all types of healthcare licensees? for example, the report suggests adding a physician specific requirements to the office notifications that are currently required for all licensees. what about physicians recommends that different requirement from physicians from those other licensee types? we appreciate the opportunity to provide this analysis, and continue to have a dialog with you as the process continues.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1895, 'end': 1899, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3585, 'end': 3591, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mario Guzman: good afternoon sir. good afternoon. my name is mario alicia guzman, and i live in san jose. and i came here today to ask for your help, for the senate, to bring back accountability and demand accountability and transparency to the california medical board. look at me. i am a victim of medical negligence, malpractice. back in 2013, i was a triathlete, and a marathoner. however, a series of utterly avoidable medical mistakes left me in this chair, a shadow of my former self. i demanded justice. and for a while, it seemed that i was going to get it. after i filed a complaint against the doctor that harmed me, an investigation by the california medical board found her to be below the standard of care and was referred to the attorney general office for disciplinary action. imagine my surprise when the complaint was closed without explanation, and most importantly, without any sort of disciplinary action. i spent months, seeing my limbs fall off my body, and the doctor that harmed me has a spotless record. a little research showed me that this surprise was misplaced. after all, the california medical board dismisses 95% of the complaints it receives. not only that, but it also seals those files from external review. so there is no way for the victim, this case me or any other, open independent audit to find out why this suffering was left unaddressed. for many, medical malpractice is an abstraction. to some it is just an excuse to shake money out of the physicians. but the reality is that the preventable medical errors are the third leading cause of death in the united states. i am the consequence of a medical establishment that allows mediocre, drug addicted, pill vending doctors continue practicing unscathed for years under the complicit eye of the california medical board. i came here to demand change. i came here to bring some light to the injustice because i am still alive, which is not the case for many of the victims. i ask for your help, assemblymen and senators, to bring back transparency and accountability to a consumer protection agency that long ago lost its purpose. because for the california medical board, impunity and disability are acceptable.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 66, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lyudmila Parada: Hello, my name is Lyudmila Parada and I am from San Jose, California. One thing that it has always brought my attention and I think it has been like the big elephant on the content in this room, and it should be of the most importance for all of us, Congressmen, citizens of California, it's the fact of who pays for medical negligence. Who ends up paying for the bill when somebody ends up dead or disabled as a result of a preventable medical error? I got to tell you, it's not the Doctor. Between tort reform, and arbitration clauses, and medical provider contracts, less than 3% of victims ever go to trial.  And less than three-quarters of a percent ever get any sort of financial compensation for their troubles. I gotta tell you, it's not the hospital also the ones that ends up with the bill. When a patient falls in the hospital, or gets a hospital acquired infection, that hospital continues billing, primary insurance continues billing Medicare, continues billing all of us for that medical treatment. Do you know who pays? All of us pay. Preventable medical errors are believed to be the third leading cause of death in the United States. Research shows that between $73 and $98 billion a year are the costs of medical errors. If the estimate of our recent paper on the Journal of Healthcare Finance is correct the actual cost between indirect and direct costs is 10 times higher, at a rate of almost $1 trillion a year. Given this reality, it would be plain common sense that the consumer protection agencies such as the California Medical Board would discipline and limit the ability to practice of that 6% of doctors that account for almost 60% of malpractice insurance payments. Unfortunately, that is not the case. This Board, throughout the years, have actively pushed for policies that put Californians' lives at risk. It refuses to mandate doctors on probation to disclose their disciplinary status to patients. It recently approved the reestablishment of the diversion program that allows substance abusing physicians to continue practicing during the disciplinary process. This was a program that was struck down several years ago because it was proved to have harmed several patients. That's absolutely true and the new program is not a diversion program. It's completely different then that one that you're referring to. But still this is a board that closes 95% of complaints and seals them from any sort of review. We don't even know if they are reviewed at all. How is this good public policy? It puzzles me, but maybe it shouldn't. When we look at the financial incentives that the board has, it's not surprising at all. My husband is this man right here. He is now on Medicare and Social Security, 20 years before he should have. His medical care will cost millions of dollars throughout his life. We all pay for it, not Kaiser Permanente. But be assured that the California Medical Board will allow doctors that cause these sorts of errors for years, and we all will be paying for it. Thank you.>>Thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carmen Dalver: hello. my name's carmen mario dalver. i'm the executive director of consumer watchdog and we were here four years ago when this committee issued a scathing report on enforcement and doctor discipline at the california medical board, threatened to shut it down if it didn't clean up its act and start protecting patients. four years later, the medical board continues to fail in its primary mission, which is patient protection, not physician protection. i have to say i was really offended by the absurd comments by dr. gnanadev that in one hand, patients should be perfectly fine with the information that they're able to get online at the medical boards website. so they have all the information they need about a doctor's probationary status. yet dr. gnanadev doesn't want to actually tell them because that might impact the patient/doctor relationship. but it's just shocking. it's speaking out of both sides of their mouths and it really shows how little physicians at the medical board want patients to be informed. they talked about putting up tables at the mall to inform patients how they might look at their doctor. this isn't a bake sale. this isn't the girl scouts. we're talking about patients lives. we're talking about the people like the patients who came here to speak who didn't know about dangerous doctors and are facing the results. so, number one, we strongly support the committee's recommendation that doctors be required to inform their patients if they are on probation. not only because they should know but because it is so difficult for a doctor actually to get on probation in the first place for doing harm to a doctor that you know these accusations and these disciplinary actions are severe. what we far more often hear from patients is that they submit a complaint, they get a letter saying we got your complaint. and a little while later, they say was dismissed without cause. so frequently, we hear from patients who were never interviewed by an investigator, never interviewed by a medical expert. we hear from patients whose medical records have been falsified. doctor's add or change things after the fact but those are the records the board is relying on to decide whether or not there was a departure from the standard of care and so we also urge this committee to require the board to speak to complainants before they close the case. if we were talking about a rape case, the doctors wouldn't take evidence and speak to only the person who was accused of the rape. they would talk to the victim as well. but the medical board doesn't do that, and that's outrageous. so urge the committee. again, we were here four years ago with exactly the same problems. little has changed and if we continue to repeat history, we're going to get the same results. so we urge the board to mandate these changes in the enforcement process or shut down the board. we should start over if they're going to continue down this road.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 520, 'end': 528, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 754, 'end': 762, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Valencia: Good afternoon Mr. Chairman and Members John Valencia. I'm here on two matters. First on issue 25 on behalf of the Latino Physicians of California, we're heartened by the board's response to the Golden State Medical Association's urging to pursue the report, but we're concerned that the responses and reactions lack one critical thing that we think should come back before the joint committees, and that's a diagnostic as to the causality. My board of directors includes a former member of the Medical Board of California. We'll be engaged in a detailed communication to the Board, with copies to this Committee. And again, while we find the initial responses heartening. We find that the disproportionality of enforcement for a population that at least in our case Latino physicians represents fewer than 3% active physicians in California warrants a deeper into causality quite simply. Shifting gears and shifting topics very briefly, the Committee is possession on item 11, the notion that an alternative pathway for crediting boards to petition the Medical Board of California have equivalency standards reviewed for recognition of specialties in California, not for practice since we don't stratify the practice of medicine, but rather for advertising one specialization. So on behalf of the American Board of Cosmetic Surgery and the California Academy of Cosmetic Surgery, our clients in the matter, we ask that you refer to our detailed communication. Of course, as an active applicant, in this oversized paperweight is essentially one third of the documentation that we have pending before the board. We join with the at least one of the server boards and have been affirmatively reviewed previously by the medical board over the last 27 years during which time the two private, non-profit, which is not to be confused with not for profit, organizations have recognized only one specialty, that specialty being, thankfully, medical genetics and genomics. Thank you Mr. Chairman, thank you members.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eric Holm: Thank you very much. Good afternoon, it's pleasure to be with all of you, and Assemblyman, it's nice to see you again, and thank you to the Committee Members and to the Committee staff. I'm Eric Holm. I'm the President of the Board of Guide Dogs for the Blind. I'm joined today with Ms. Carmen Delgado, who's my Vice President and my Executive Officer Brian Skewis and, of course, my beloved guide dog, Ford. So I appreciate the opportunity to be heard today and I know we have a lot that you probably want to cover. So I wish to, at this time, turn it over to my Vice President for brief overview of the board. Thank you.
[{'start': 190, 'end': 199, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 287, 'end': 301, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 352, 'end': 364, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 403, 'end': 407, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sanjay Wadley: Thank you, my name is Sanjay Wadley, I'm a legislative advocate with the California Association of Realtors. I'd like to thank the chairs and Members of the Committee for the opportunity to address you today. I'm here specifically to address issue 12, the concerns related to what are described as fake service dogs, and this is an issue confronted by our members primarily in their capacity as property managers. AB 1569 introduced by Assembly member Caballero and sponsored by our Association is meant to address some of the issues surrounding verification of companion and service animals. And those issues and hopefully curb some of the abuses, in conformity, however, with federal and state law. However, we welcome the board taking on a role in helping address the issues and concerns related to fake service dogs, and welcome any suggestions the board may make to increasing consumer protections regarding this issue, and welcome become it being a participant in assisting without process, thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 452, 'end': 461, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Margie Donovan: good afternoon, my name is margie carmen donovan, am i being heard on the mic?
[{'start': 27, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ken Metz: Got it, thank you. My name is Ken Metz. I am the current President of the Golden State Guide Dog Handlers, formerly known as Guide Dog Users of California. And I am here also to oppose the Board going for another four years. I don't feel that the Board, as Margie mentioned, has listened to us in many ways. Got it, thank you. My name is Ken Metz. I am the current President of the Golden State Guide Dog Handlers, formerly known as Guide Dog Users of California. And I am here also to oppose the Board going for another four years. I don't feel that the Board, as Margie mentioned, has listened to us in many ways. In 2013, we tried to work with the Board and ended up having go through legislation because the Board didn't want to work with us, and we have had a lot of issues in that respect. The Board, as a matter of fact, when people graduate from a Guide Dog School here in California, the board does receive and they require the receipt of the identification of each individual person receiving a Guide Dog, each handler. They also try and make certain that they have the records in, on file at least in their office, I realize only for their use. But we do not understand why private information needs to be sent to this Board when someone graduates getting a Guide Dog. We realize that the seeing eye school was the original in 1929. And so it's something like 88 years now, and they also have done a lot of work with the International Guide Dog Federation. And let me say that the three schools here in California, three Guide Dog Schools, also are accredited by the International Guide Dog Federation. And let me finish, at least, by saying that using the best practices at the State Board of Guide Dogs for the Blind has produced has used a lot of the material using the state Board of the Guide Dog, I'm sorry, International Guide Dog Federation. Therefore, we are opposing the Board, and we also feel very strongly about the fact that the Board has not, in the last several years, been willing to work with the consumers to try and improve what they could have had as a really good program. They have done their own thing. They have worked with individuals that are not Guide Dog handlers to get a lot of the materials that they put together. They haven't put out surveys recently to ask any questions of what we need. It appears that they really just don't care about what is going on with the schools here in California, and especially for the use of the graduates. We're the important folks. I'm sorry, let me say one more thing and I'll finish. That is that the Board did start in 1949, 48 legislation. In 1949, they started there were reasons because people were being billed out of a lot of money. You hear about fake service dogs? They had fake Guide Dog Schools, and so that was the reason these things don't exist now because of the establishment of the Board at that time. Now, they've overseen their responsibility. They are not doing the things they need to do for consumers. Thank you.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 257, 'end': 263, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 338, 'end': 346, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 565, 'end': 571, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Carla Scardins: dog jam, kind of like a log jam. my name is carla margie scardins. i am a legislative committee member for the california association of guide dog users. and to be very brief in the questions that have already been brought up here about questions of efficacy and validity at this point in time of the board. i would respectfully request that we sunset this board. thank you so much for your time. thank you. thank you so much.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 65, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Kelly: Hello, my name is Mike Kelly. I've been a Guide Dog user for just shy of 25 years. I've never had any experience with the Board until I got a dog from out of state. The Board has forbade the instructors from the school I came from, from coming out here. We have to notify them. In one case, an instructor with 35 years experience was tailed by a California instructor. They had to hire them to follow the seeing eye instructor around. And they've interfered with my ability to get training for this dog, so I oppose the board. Thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roger Oberholtzer: okay, thank you. okay. there you are. hi, everybody. my name is roger carla oberholtzer. i am the secretary of the national federation of the blind, the california association of guide dog users of the national federation of the blind of california. and i got the dog from seeing eye as well, and i see that at one time this board had a purpose in the 40s. but as we all know and you probably hear it from my accent, i'm from switzerland originally, and we have now throughout the world schools that are overseen by the international guide dog federation that has very high standards and that all schools that try to abide by. and the board has only jurisdiction here in california. we don't encounter the same problems any longer that happened in the 1940s. as you heard before, there were fake guide dog trainers, fake schools. this is no longer an emerging problem. therefore, i feel also that there is no longer a use for this board. there is already an international body. all schools tried to follow these standards. and therefore, this court has absolutely outlived its purpose and just consumes the time of the assembly and the senate, and has not worked together with the users of guide dogs. and the consumer agency such as conductory chart associations for the acb and the agencies for the acb international federation of the blind. i have here some documentation in case you guys didn't get these. i faxed some copies for assembly chair-
[{'start': 64, 'end': 87, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Retha: all right. it's... good afternoon, my name is richard roger retha. i am a member of the california council of the blind, and the guide dog user group that ken and margie referred to moments ago. i'll keep this short and sweet. the four people who preceded me are, i echo their sediments. i think this is a redundant use of our time. i think the international guide dog federation has existed and does well. i think the guide dog board, as others have said, hasn't worked with our population and it puts more barriers in our way than it helps us and like others before me. i'm also in favor of not having this board exist any longer, thank you. thank you.
[{'start': 46, 'end': 65, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 155, 'end': 158, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 163, 'end': 169, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Margie Donovan: Thank you. I'd like to make two more comments. Just for the record again, I'm Margie Donovan and in reference to other service dog organizations in California. A couple years ago there was a board meeting held by the Guide Dog board. And it was abundantly clear from the other schools in California that are not Guide Dog, that they did not want oversight, that they do not need oversight and they spoke very, very strongly about not becoming under the board. Secondly, I need to tell something that is very awful to have to say, but there's a board member on the State Guide Dog board who has been malicious and divisive with our organization, which was Guide Dogs Users of California. Took our name while serving on the board. Spent two years not submitting the rest of the paperwork. Finally submitted it this December, and we had to change our name. And I don't foresee that that's a qualified person to be serving on this board and representing our Governor. Thank you.
[{'start': 78, 'end': 92, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debbie Wasserman: good afternoon, i'm wasserman and i, too, feel like this board has long served its purpose back in the 40s i believe that this was necessary. but i really strongly believe that we, as blind persons have a much stronger group and can speak completely for ourselves. and as others have said i believe that this poll board needs to be abolished. thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Skewis: Once again, this is Brian Skewis, the Executive Officer of the board. Fundamentally the board opposed some of the issues brought up through Senate Bill 1331 which is the bill that was discussed by the majority of public comment. While the board fundamentally disagreed with the provisions in that bill it was signed into law and we're in the process of implementing that. We are still too early to analyze the effectiveness of it. But we're more than happy to work with consumer groups moving forward. Based on the issues that were brought up in public comment we believe that those issues were addressed in Senate Bill 1331. So we look forward to figuring out if that there are effective solutions or not. Another issue that was brought up was the issue regarding the background papers. Issue number six regarding public information or demographic information with which in our original document we requested that that section of law be removed. We no longer need that information. In my time, with the board has not been used for anything other than data entry so, we see no issue with not collecting any information about graduates and certainly don't need any demographic information about licensees. And finally, I'll close with one last comment regarding the International Guide Dog Federation. The International Guide Dog Federation is an accrediting body that has no enforcement ability whatsoever short of stripping a schools accreditation. So, regarding the consumer protection element, the board still is the only thing in California that has an ability to enforce the laws of the Guide Dog Act on instructors and licensees.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeff Stone: Thank you, Madame President. Members, I was raised in Anaheim. We moved there in 1957 when I was about a year old and there was a lot post World War II families there and people that were in law enforcement and four doors down was the Herron family and Jack Herron was a lieutenant with the LAPD for many, many years and his wife, Barbara, and they had two sons, Mark and Craig Herron. I mention them because they were kind enough to still remain god parents of mine. In fact, when I was in around the fourth grade, I gave my first political speech to run for class office. And Barbara Herron and actually helped me write my first speech who was called Jeff Stone, vote for your very prudent student and I'm very happy today, because Craig Herron who followed in his father's footsteps and is now a lieutenant also with the LAPD, and is married to a wonderful lady who is also a member of the LAPD and keeping with the public safety traditions, and my dear friend Craig has come down to see the State Senate, and so please give my good friend, practically a brother, Craig Herron a warm Senate welcome please. Craig Heron.
[{'start': 235, 'end': 241, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 253, 'end': 264, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 331, 'end': 338, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 363, 'end': 367, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 372, 'end': 384, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 578, 'end': 592, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 653, 'end': 663, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 734, 'end': 746, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 964, 'end': 969, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1067, 'end': 1079, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1110, 'end': 1121, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark Stivers: Yes, good afternoon members.Again, Mark Stivers, the Director of the Tax Credit Allocation Committee. And we really do one thing, we fund the development of affordable rental housing. So LHD and college FA, they're both single-family and homeownership. We are focused on apartments for those serving, person's earning 60% of the area median income and below. And we do that with low income housing tax credits. They really come in two forms. There are federal, and state credits. They're predominantly federal but we have a significant but fairly small amount of state credits. And all those credits really are bunched into two programs. We have a competitive program. And those include the 9% federal tax credits or the state credits which are limited in number. So, because they're limited, we hold the competition to figure out sort of which projects are worth of those credits. And we have a non-competitive program which consists of the 4% federal housing tax credits. And that's where really the growth potential is. Because the 9% credits are limited and they're oversubscribed, there's really not much more we can do there. We're producing the maximum number of units possible each year. With these 4% federal credits, we actually have a lot of uncapped capacity. And that's been our goal for the last two years, is how do we bring in more of those federal tax credits? And the real issue there has been that, the tax credits provide a certain amount of funding but not enough. They don't fill enough of that gap that exists between the costs of the project and what a private mortgage can support. And as a result, the projects are infeasible. If we can make more of these projects financially feasible, we can draw down more of those federal credits. And so, we make projects feasible. First of all, you reduce costs. And we've done various things to try and reduce the requirements of our program, reign in some of those costs. Obviously, a lot of costs are beyond our control. And we've done some things to also increase the amount of tax credits so we can put in to individual projects. And the result last year was that we had a record year. Our previous record was in 2001. We financed about 16,000 units with 4% tax credits. Last year, we were over 20,000. So, we had the best year in our history, but we still would like to do more. There are some, still there are 4% credits sitting on the table and if we can provide some additional gap financing, we can make that work. Whether that's in the form of a permanent source, whether it's in the form of a bond, whether it's in the form of additional tax credits. It doesn't really matter what flavor that public subsidy comes in, but the public subsidy is what would fill that gap and allow us to draw down more federal credits. And then the last thing is that, well we did have a record last year, we are a little bit concerned going forward because of the prospect of federal tax reform, there is less demand for our tax credit and the pricing has dropped about 15 percent since November. And as a result, that means that these gaps that I just talked about are going to be bigger on the natural. Which means that, for us to hit our goal of fully utilizing 4% credits, we're going to need, that need for gap financing from some other public sources greater than it was before. So, I will stop there and help answer any questions. Again, but we are sort of the basic building block of all affordable rental housing. Just about every affordable apartment complex that's developed these days has one form of these tax credits or the other. And it's our other partners that then provide the gap financing that really make these projects possible.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Uhler: thank you mr. chair and members. brian jonah uhler from the lao. i've been asked to provide comments on two housing related issues today. the first is the state's per unit cost, funding affordable housing development. and the second is to offer some comments on the regional housing needs allocation process. on the first issue, the issue of this sort of the states role in funding affordable housing, i want to start sort of with the caveat. that i'm going to offer some numbers about some of the states role historically in funding affordable units. but both the data and the financing that goes into these projects, it is complicated, and it varies significantly from project to project. because of that, it can be difficult to get sort of a full picture of what's going on by just looking at a few reference points. and because of that all, i'll kind of be talking in ranges and round numbers to try to avoid giving a false sense of precision. most affordable rental housing is funded through a combination of federal state and local funding. and the amount of public funding that goes into a project can vary significantly base on a lot of factors. two of the most important factors are the population that the project is targeting. if you're targeting low income households you have some relatively stable income. they require relatively more modest rental subsidy and they don't have need for additional sort of on-site social services or supportive services, the cost for them might be lower. if on the other end of the spectrum you have households that you need a significant rental subsidy and also have need on-site supportive services, then the cost can be higher. another major factor is the geographical location of the housing. a development in the coastal, urban areas is going to be more expensive. and a development in inland areas typically will be less expensive. reflecting this range. we see that the total public funding going into a project of the last few years, has ranged as a low of $80,000 per unit, for example, say, for senior housing in inland areas. all the way up to as much as 750,000 per unit for a deeply targeted housing in a higher cost area. and this range for total public funding, federal state and local, going to affordable units, they centered it about $300,000 per unit. historically, the federal share of this funding, the thorough funding is the most significant portion of funding for these projects and the state share has been about 20% on average but it can vary significantly. and one of the key factors that determines how much state funding goes into affordable housing production can depend on generally, how much affordable housing production is going on in the state. if in a given year, we're not producing a relatively low amount of production, then the federal and local pots of funds will be readily available. and the state might not have to provide such a large share. if we were to significantly increase construction of affordable housing, then the federal and local funds may become more stretched and the state may have to play a larger role in funding housing. so to give a sense of the scale, in general, in recent years about 2 to 3,000 new units have been funded with 9% credits. and in those projects because of the significant of federal subsidy, the state share has been about 15% where its been needed at all. and this can range from as low as $10,000 a unit and lower cost projects to as high as 140,000 with a center of about 50,000 a unit on average. the next several thousand units can be funded with federal 4% credits, which still provide a significant but smaller subsidy than the 9% credit. and in this case over the last few years, the state share has been about 30% of the total public funding going into projects. again, ranging from low of 20,000 units up to as much as 160 and centered at about $100,000 a unit. and what's been unprecedented in the state's history for the level of production to exceed sort of the capacity of the available funding through the 9% and the 4% credit of the state. words to pursue a very aggressive policy of say trying to build 25 or 30,000 new affordable units. it's likely that those sources would become exhausted and then the last few thousand units would have a larger marginal cost for the state. then those projects then become, primarily state local funded and the state share, observing what has traditionally been a federal share, could rise, to as much as 80% or perhaps $250,000 unit again. historically, that hasn't occurred, but its something, sort of hypothetically to think about if the state would pursue sort of an aggressive affordable housing construction policy. i think one of the main issues that has been under discussion right now, is if the state were to establish a new, permanent source of funding, for affordable housing, what will be the use of pre-unit cost of housing bill with that funding source? and i think mark mentioned that they had a record year last year with 4% projects. but prior to that, the state was building around 4,000 new units with 4% credits each year leading up to this past record year. and that was far below the capacity, they could probably available on a typical year to draw down that 4% credit. maybe as much in simple years as 10 to 12,000 additional units we think [unknown] will be funded by 4% credits. and to fully utilize that resource, the state costs would probably be somewhere between 800 million on the low end if the projects were concentrated in lower development cost areas. and sort of populations that needed a relatively lower rental subsidy up to as much as 1.5 billion if more of the projects were developed in higher cost areas or targeted population that needed more rental subsidy. to get a little bit of context on this production numbers, the state currently has around a million and a half low income households who as stand to believe would be eligible for affordable housing. and do not receive it because of the limited supply of that housing in the state. and this number is growing by about 58,000 households per year based on the arena projections developed by the department of finance and hcd. i think i'll use that as the segue into my comments on the regional housing needs allocation process. the rental process just generally is a method of allocating each city and county throughout the state, sort of it's fair share of housing. it allocates to each city and county, a housing need production for the next eight years in most cases. for four income categories across the income spectrum and our office has recently commented that we have some concerns, potentially, with the methodology of developing the rental projections. primarily, that we're concerned that the numbers may not reflect the full extent of demand for housing in some communities. and simply, many communities in california have significant housing shortages. and what this means is that, the amount of housing that is available to live in, in those communities and the number of people who want to live there, who would like to move they're out of balance. they are former people who would like to move there. and something has to give in this situation. and what gives is that home prices and rents essentially rise. and they rise to balance off the situation by discouraging people who would like to move here from doing so, and they go and they live in other parts of the country or the world. those folks contribute to the rising home prices and rents in california. but they don't show up in our demographic terms or migration numbers because they're living somewhere else. and to the extent that the real projections in are largely based on sort of past demographic trends. this on met on demand is not for the accounted for in those projections. and if the goal of the [unknown] process is to sort of mitigate or attenuate that balancing act of home pricing and rents rising to bring demand and supply into balance. then that unbent demand may need to be taken into account in developing these numbers with that all.turn over questions.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 4964, 'end': 4968, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Steven Choi: [INAUDIBLE] It's better, Steven Choi, freshman assemblyman, so it's fascinating to hear all the status report and quite interesting to learn about this Budget Committee sub number four is dealing with the affordable home issues whereas a couple days ago, a housing Committee which I'm sitting in dealt with the same issue. So, obviously, this is a pressing state issue. Maybe I can ask some basic naive questions. I'm sure that maybe are different from region to region, state wide average. What percentage of the California population will need so called affordable housing? Will it be 10%, 5% or 20%? Can you give me some quick answer on that?
[{'start': 25, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Catherine Amon: Catherine Amon, Assistant Deputy Director, the division of Financial Assistance. This is a complex issue, HCD, we have awarded all the CDBG funds that we currently have available to us. We are working with our local grant TSR, local governments, and these generally, are the rural communities that have the least capacity. To encourage them and work with them to increase their expenditure rate. This coming spring we will be putting out our first NOFA since enactment of your bill and we're looking strategically at where make sense to waive the 50% roll off. We want to be judicious to make sure that we're doing it in a way that does in fact enable locals to increase their expenditure rate. And so our NOFA, it will be going out in March or April and we are providing recommendations. As we're developing and writing the NOFA, and we'll have something out on that around the end of March.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Megan Tokanawa: hi, megan, department of finance. we're reading the national house and trust fund program, the administration would like to suggest that this positions be filled permanently. the department currently has 67 vacant positions, and of these a number of them will be expiring at the end of the fiscal year and have recently been authorized for the, no place like home program. and once you take into account these changes in staffing you will have a vacancy rate of 7.2% which is in the normal range of regular turnover. so, we suggest that you move forward with the recommended governor's proposal.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debra Brown: again, debra. i would also add, i think, what we're interested in looking at is the investment that the legislature. were made and the governor made, and trying to address this in just in the current year so they were some funding provided to help classified employees to become teachers. and so we are really hopeful on that and looking at, and this are programs through the the commission on teacher credential and also looking at the idea before year credential program. so maybe further investments on those, i know that there's a fair amount of legislation introduced this year that we're looking at and analysing to see, which ones might be the most beneficial to do that.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lisa Mierczynski: my name is lisa jonah mierczynski. i am with the department of finance. thank you for having me here today. i'm having mic issues. the handout that you're receiving will help me walk you through presentation. my presentation today is basically going over changes in the proposition 98. minimum guarantee and also to share with you some access single sheet handout, okay.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brianna Bruns: good morning, brianna lisa bruns, department of finance. the governor's budget includes 3.7 billion for california's early learning and childcare programs. this represents a 2% increase over the total 2016 budget act allocation. these augmentations are attributable to full year implementation of items included in the 2016 budget act, including increases in provided reimbursement rates and full day stay preschool slots. as well as increase in calworks cost of care. this budget proposal's pausing additional augmentations associated with the 2016 budget multi year agreement in order to better align expenditures with resources. this will extend the originally scheduled three year augmentation plan to four years. in addition, the governors budget includes several proposals that intended to increase alignment and efficiencies within the early learning and childcare programs. these proposals include authorizing the use of electronic applications in all childcare programs. eliminating licensing requirements for state preschool programs using facilities that meet transitional kindergarten facility standards. and allowing state preschool programs flexibility, and meeting minimum adult-to-student ratio, and teacher education requirements. thank you for your time, i'll be happy to answer any questions you may have.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Virginia Early: Hello Mr. Chair, members, Virginia Early with the Legislative Analysts Office, so continuing on in the same handout, page eight, covers the child care and preschool budget proposed. I'll go sort of quickly through this since Department of Finance covered it. I would note that this chart includes transitional kindergarten, so for that reason the total budget we're estimating is $3.8 billion instead of the 3.7 that Ms. Bruns mentioned. So this is about the 2% increase from the prior year as you can see from this chart about $1.7 billion of it, is in Proposition 98 funding for the states to preschool programs. And the other $2 billion is split evenly between the state general funding and the various general funding sources state goes for a childcare and preschool. Page nine of the handout discusses the $76 million and in a little bit more detail with this chart we have here. As Ms. Bruns mentioned and many of you likely remember there was the multi year budget deal that the Legislature and the Governor agreed to last year. The Governor is including funds to annualized certain of those increases, begun in 16-17. You can see that here in the chart, at the top, you can see there was 91 million allocated for a variety of rate and slot annualizations. However the Governor does not include additional funding to annualize certain other rate increases, add additional slots or add additional rate increases on top of the ones started in 16-17. The Governor is also proposing various policy changes to the programs. Ms. Bruns mentioned some of them. They're also highlighted in your agenda. At a broad level, there's a proposal to allow part day state preschool programs more flexibility and serving children with special needs from families with incomes over the threshold. And there are also several proposals that aim to better align state preschool and transitional kindergarten, which are the states two preschool programs that have very different requirements. Turning to page 10 of the handout, it'll give you some high level recommendations. First of all, since we took a look at how the 3,000 state preschool slots, were full day, they were intended for local educational agencies, such as school districts. We took a look at how those went out, and what those applications looked look like. And we noticed that, of those almost 3,000 slots, only 519 were applied for as intended. And so given that these particular types of agencies, such as school districts, don't seem to have interest, we would recommend to the Legislator that, if the Legislator is interested in allocating funding for additional state preschool slots this year and in the future. They allow all types of providers to apply for slots, so that the slots are able to be issued as the Legislature intends. We also took a look at the number of children eligible for state preschool and we would note that there are many children eligible for state preschool that are not served by either state preschool or another subsidized program. And due to that, we are recommending that the state make efforts to ensure all eligible children are served first before expanding eligibility to these children from higher income families with special needs. And finally, we think that preschool program alignment is a worthy goal. The particular proposal that the Department of Finance is issuing make a complicated system even more complicated while not allowing true alignment. So for that reason we will recommend that the Legislature reject these particular alignment proposals  and pursue alignment more holistically. Thank you and happy to answer any questions you may have.
[{'start': 421, 'end': 426, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 892, 'end': 897, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1530, 'end': 1535, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Debra Brown: Good morning, Debra Brown on behalf of state Superintendent Tom Torlakson. Again, thank you. I really will just build upon what the Superintendent said and I think most of it is already also been covered by the Department of Finance and LAO. Really just to state that the Superintendent appreciates the governor's continued investment in LCFF. And while it's maintaining funding this year we do hope that as revenues increase more money can go towards LCFF particularly during this really crucial time which as we talked about earlier the release of the dashboard is going to provide not only school and districts with valuable information that they can use around how their investments are working to help student achievement and school claim it, But also provide more information for communities. And so continue the investment and that is really important. Also note, on early education, again, our support for maintaining the funding for the slot increases and the rate increases, moving forward. And then, also note additional comments around the increasing eligibility. So really, trying to create increased support for families and children from the various earliest ages. And then what we're looking at the governor's proposals around the alignment and look to further conversations with those. We think some of the areas around trying to make programs more accessible are really important, so we want to have further conversations on that. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 60, 'end': 73, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lisa Mierczynski: Lisa Mierczynski with the Department of Finance, so we're really not in a position to answer that question at this time, again it's something that we'll address in our May revision. Again the Local Control Funding Formula obviously a high priority of the administration but and beyond that, these are things that would be addressed in our May revision.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brianna Bruns: sure. brianna brianna bruns, department of finance. the intent of these proposals is not to reduce quality and health and safety standards, but rather our focus, as indicated in the eight pages is to increase flexibility and alignment within these programs. so,  both of these proposals are aimed at just doing that.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debra Brown: Debra Brown, with the Department of Education. We're still in the process of analyzing those. In particular looking at the difference on the facilities doing a comparison of what the changes in the facilities are. So I'd be more prepared to talk about that when we have the The full hearing on this. So, we're looking at it and what the differences are.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ian Johnson: So Ian Johnson, Department of Finance. But, so in terms of the impact of the deferral I think, with you this is a cash flow issue and you are right it's towards the end of the fiscal year when there is a lot going on. So maybe I will just speak a little bit to sort of the volume of the impact just in terms of size of the deferral being 860 million compared to the resources in the LCFF, so. Typically school districts in terms of the apportionment schedule in a normal year they would receive about 9% of the general fund entitlement from the LCFF that they would be entitled to this June of 2017. And so this deferral in comparison to their entitlement represents about a third of the payment that they would otherwise receive in June of 2017. That's the figures that we're looking at and that we seen. And so in an example of a school district entitled to $10 million of general fund from the state from the LCFF absolute diferral they would expect to receive about $900,000 in June. Under our proposal, they would receive a little more than $600,000 in June and then the remaining $300,000 two weeks later. We don't want to minimize the impact that this will have on school districts. This will obviously be an issue that they're going to have that they would need to plan for. And that they would need to be able to accommodate again on a cash basis. We understand that it's not ideal, but within the context of the other options that we were facing when building this budget, we think that this is the least painful. Clearly if you don't reduce the guarantee at all, relative to the revenues that are lagging expectations in the current year. You essentially have to find some other program outside of the guarantee to cut $860 million from in the current year. If you try to look at sort of other ways other than doing a deferral within the Proposition 98 guarantee, to address this fiscal issue, you could either just cut the LCFF in the current year or some other program within the Prop 98 guarantee like special education or something like that. And so given those other options that we were facing when we were building the budget, we thought that this two week deferral made the most sense. Again within the context of the other options and within the context of the fact that schools in 16-17 are receiving about $2.9 billion of new funding from the LCFF.
[{'start': 3, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Natasha Collins: Good morning Mr. Chair and members. I'm Natasha Collins with the Legislature Analyst's Office. The sergeant has distributed a handout, which we'll be speaking from today. We've been asked to provide a brief overview of federal funding that California receives for K12 and early childhood education. I'm going to start with the K12 portion. And then allow my colleague to describe early childhood education funding.  After our presentation, the Committee will hear from the California Department of Education that will provide recent and possible federal actions that might affect education in California. So on page one of your handout, we provide an overview of the federal role in education which historically was limited but increased significantly with the 1965 passage of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act which provided federal funds to school districts with high proportions of low income students. Over time the federal role has increased and has led to requiring schools to administer some standardized tests and develop school improvements plans if schools do not need certain performance expectations. The 2001 re-authorization of the ESEA was known as the No Child Left Behind Act which you may have heard of and this expanded testing to more grades and required certain corrective actions as schools did not meet certain performance expectations. The most recent authorization of the ESEA is known as the Every Student Succeeds Act or ESSA. It so requires testing but removes many of the repercussions associated with the No Child Left Behind Act.  Today, three major acts governing the federal role on education and they are all administered by the California Department of Education. There are the Healthy and Hunger Free Kids Act which supports child nutrition programs, the Every Student Succeeds Act which supports various secondary and elementary education programs, and the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act. On page two of your hand out, we provide, we put federal funding and for K-12 education in context. Overall federal funding makes up about 10% of total K-12 funding in California or about $7.5 billion as proposed in 2017-18. Remaining K-12 funding comes from state and local sources. At a school district level, some school districts rely more heavily on federal funding than others. We found that about a third of school districts rely on federal funding for 10% or more of their budget with districts with relatively large numbers of low income and English learner students relying more on this piece of their budget. We begin to provide an overview of the three largest federal programs on page three of your handout. We begin with federal child nutrition programs which provide $2.6 billion in federal funding and are authorized through the Healthy and Hunger Free Kids Act I mentioned earlier. The largest programs are the National School Lunch Program and the School Breakfast Program, which comprise about 80% of this funding. These programs reimburse schools for providing free or reduced meals to low income students. In addition,California supplements these reimbursements annually about $160 million. Another large federal program are those for students with disabilities, and the federal government provides about $1.3 billion annually towards this purpose as authorized through the Individuals of Disabilities Education Act. Most of this funding goes to provide direct services for students with disabilities between ages three through 22. In addition, California provides about $4 billion annually towards special education in addition to this federal funding. Page four wraps up our overview of major federal programs with informations about programs for students from low income families which provides about $2.6 billion in federal funding. The vast majority of this funding goes towards Title 1 programs for low income students which were generally formula based as you can see at the figure at the bottom of your page. In addition, California provides about $9 billion annually for supplemental services to English learners and low income students all through the local funding formula. You can also see in your figure that the Every Student Succeeds Act provides support for various other elementary and secondary programs, including professional development programs, after-school programs, and programs for English learners. Page five provides an overview of other federal funding including funding for the Perkins Career Technical and Education Act and for the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act. In addition, there are various grants that are provided directly to educational service providers or directly to schools. For example, funding through the e-rate program that provides telecommunication providers with funding to support internet at schools and funding that goes directly to schools to offset losses of certain revenues due to schools location on federal lands. Lastly, the CDE receives federal funding for state operations. The CDE is to receive about $160 million in 2017-18 for these purposes. In a review our office did a few years ago, we estimate that federal funding supports about 70% of CDE's operations budget. That concludes my presentation on K-12, a very high level K-12 federal funding. I'll pass the baton now to my colleague to provide a brief overview of early childhood education federal funding. Thank you.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Virginia Early: Thank you, Mr. Chair, members, Virginia Early with the Legislative Analyst's office. So continuing on page six of the same handout, we discuss several federal funding for childcare and preschool. This funding really falls into two buckets, funding that flows through state agencies and then on to individual child care and principle providers, and funding that goes directly to child care and principle providers. I'll start by talking about the funding that flows through the state agencies. So the state has two main sources for federal funding, the child care and development fund provides about 600 million annually for childcare and preschool programs. As a condition of receiving this federal funding the state has to comply with various rules for these child care programs and the state is also required to spend a certain amount each year on activities to improve the quality of child care and as for 17-18 this is $85 million. The State also receives about 4 billion each year in Temporary Assistance for Needy Families or TANF as it more commonly known. These funds are for a variety of programs benefiting low income Californians and the State uses the majority of this funds to pay for a portion of costs in the CalWORKS Program, which is the state's welfare to work program. Since the CalWORKS Program includes childcare for its participating families, about $450 million of this amount supports childcare for those families. The state tends to blend federal and save funds together to support child care and on top of this roughly $1 billion in federal funding, the state adds about $2.7 billion in general fund. Page seven of this hand out gives you some more detail about how that breakdown happens between federal fund in the various federal funding sources in general fund. The federal funding sources are used slighty differently while TANF is used primarily to offset, exclusively to offset costs in the CalWORKS programs. The funds from the CCDF will offset both costs in CalWORKS and non-CalWORKs childcare. Finally, page eight of our handout discusses the funding I mentioned that flows from the federal government directly to pre-school and child care providers through the Head Start and early Head Start programs. California typically receives about $1 billion for these programs, for this child care and pre-school programs.  This serves about 110,000 children, about 20,000 birth through two year olds through early Head Start, and about 90,000 three through five year olds through Head Start. California also receives a very small grant to help coordinate early Head Start programs in several northern counties. Thank you, I'm happy to answer any questions you may have.
[]
Marguerite Ries: Good morning. Marguerite Ries on behalf of the State Superintendent Public Instruction. Congress recently confirmed Betsy DeVos as Secretary of Education with only two Republicans crossing party lines to vote against her. With Senators Collins and Murkowski defecting the Senate was tied 50-50 forcing Vice President Mike Pence to cast the deciding vote for her confirmation. The first time in recorded in history. Congress has introduced resolutions under the Congressional Review Act or the CRA, to appeal some Obama era education regulations. The CRA allows Congress to reach back 60 legislative days, and repeal regulations if a resolution is approved by the House and Senate and approved by the President. These resolutions pertain to accountability in state plan regulations under Title 1 of the Every Student Succeeds Act, and the teacher preparation regulations under Title 2 of the Higher Education Act. If the resolutions pass, the agency will be prohibited from enforcing the regulations, and from ever issuing substantially similar regulations on the same legislative language. Bills have been introduced to revoke the every Student Succeeds Act and abolish the U.S. Department of Education. However, these are both message bills introduced to rile up the base and are very unlikely to pass. Last week a proposal was floated for a private school tuition tax credit for working class families totaling up to $20 billion. But at this time, it's not clear where the money would be coming from, and would still require action from Congress. It is extremely unlikely the money would come from an existing federal education source. From a fiscal perspective, the federal government is still running on a temporary budget measure known as a Continuing Resolution through April 28 of this year. Law makers are expected to extend this measure without much fanfare, or significant changes through the end of the year but may not do so until this spring. The real potential for change comes in federal fiscal year 2018. Law makers are discussing making more significant changes in order to cut federal spending including, potentially in across the board cut of up to 10% to discretionary spending, a category that includes education funding. Such across the board cuts, tend to be more or less equally painful to all sectors, and thus are more attractive to appropriators than targeted cuts. Still we expect to see a limited number of programs like Title 1 of ESSA and part B of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act more or less protected, because law makers considered that spending an obligation. Action on other policy legislation will take a backseat until Congress completes its work on nominations and appropriations. Though Perkins Acts reauthorization, the Higher Education Act, and a revamp of child nutrition programs are all in congresses to do list, no substantive policy proposals have been put forth to date. New Secretary of Education Betsy Devos has made clear she knew priorities for her Department of Education. While President Obama's education secretaries focused on access and equity in education, we expect Devos to focus on state autonomy and parental choice. This could mean the review or appeal of regulations or guidance that limit such autonomy, closing or shrinking the U.S. Department of Education like the Office of Civil Rights, or reevaluating policies on charter school flexibilities. The President has issued two executive orders, that will impact the education regulations. One pauses the effective date regulations which were final but not yet going into effect, and other executive order instructs agencies to cut two old regulations for each new rule published. Regardless of how it happens, it is clear that regulations and guidance under the Every Student Succeeds Act, and other federal laws could be drastically changed or repealed wholesale in the coming months. In their absence, California and it's local educational agencies will rely on the language of the statute, and other non-effective guidance and regulations. However, uncertainty will be the constant in coming months. This concludes the CD Federal education update but I'm happy to answer any questions, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 24, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 116, 'end': 127, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 236, 'end': 243, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 248, 'end': 257, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 317, 'end': 327, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2962, 'end': 2973, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3058, 'end': 3063, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Beverly Yu: good morning, mr. chair and members. my name is beverly with udw... local 3930. thank you for holding this hearing today. as per the child care community that signed on to the joint early care and education budget letter, we would like to emphasize the need to continue the multi-year investment to increase reimbursement rates and slots. we support 12th month eligibility and updating the state median income and increasing funding for r&rs for data collection. while we appreciate the proposed policy changes to the trailer bill language, we believe it should be removed and adjust in policy committee. thank you.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Patti Prunhuber: good morning i'm patti brianna prunhuber from the child care law center. i want to echo some of the comments that you've heard regarding the governor's delay in funding. it's very important that this multi-year agreement be honored and that the funding be put back in place and that we don't have to spend all of our time working to get back to where we were last year. in terms of moving forward, it's very important to all of the childcare community, parents included, that we adopt ab 60. and i just want to point out that it is not correct that ab 60 uses outdated smi or state media and income levels. it includes a guarantee to use the most current smi which is the very important component. and it's particularly important right now in light on state wide minimum wage. i know the assembly report acknowledge that that we have for to recognize the impact that the statement among wage has on both child care providers and on families and it would be a squandered opportunity to forget to see through this second part. and finally i'd ask that you continue the reinbursement rate increases that are scheduled. thank you.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Monica Zemi: Good morning, my name is Monica Zemi.  I'm here on behalf of the California Alternative Payment Program Association and what we are is a network of public and non-profit private agencies that support counties with a unique blend of direct services. Among these direct services is subsidized childcare. I don't want to take too much of your time, so I have a handout that I'd like to distribute if that's okay. But, in regards, to what was discussed today, I'd like to align a lot of, our thoughts and prospective with what the panelist, and some previous commentators have said. The first is of course over the proposed pausing of the budget one of the consequences that we are seeing, over a camp is a lot of the agencies have all ready signed and negotiated contracts based on the promised rates, and so we're now struggling on how to honor that. Another thing that wasn't discussed here today, but is an area of concern, is the hold harmless provision, which is set to sunset in July of 2018. And what this is is provider rates that were enacted at the beginning of this year. That currently hold harmless provision and this is for providers whose rates did not increase at the beginning of this year so that they wouldn't be forced to decrease their rates. Unfortunately, when that provision expires, a portion of providers amongst all counties are expected to see a decrease and a drop in rates to 2005 and 2007 rates. And the last thing I'd really like to leave the Committee with is the potential impact of the minimum wage. And although this is something that we support, and applaud we are seeing that it could potentially have some unintended consequences to the childcare field. And so, we ask that you take a holistic approach, keeping that in mind. Thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ron Rapp: Thank you. Good morning Mr. Chair, Members of the Committee, Ron Rapp from the California Federation of Teachers speaking on behalf of the labor organizations as members of the education coalition. The Education Coalition has a number of concerns with Governors proposals. Number one, we're very concern that the Governor has proposed $93 million to fund projected growth and charter's school ADA while at the same time cutting other programs that are desperately needed. We believe that without additional accountability measures that we should not increase funding for charter school expansion. Number two, and we agree with you, Mr. Chair, and Members of the Committee and witnesses that we should not pause preschool funding. If money becomes available in the May revise, we believe that we should restore funding for the 290,059 state preschool slots and the standard reimbursement rate. Third, we are concerned about the pause on the development of standards on curriculum, let me give you an example, the VAPA standards, the visual and performing art standards were last revised in 2001, that is 15 years ago, 16 years ago. We need to move forward with high quality standards and curriculum so that we give our students an education that prepares them for the 20 first century and their careers. And finally, there were numbers of policy changes proposed in the budget.one example of that is special education and the funding mechanisms and other issues related to special add. We believe that those should be thoughtfully deliberated in policy committees rather than proposing them in a budget and making quick decisions around them. Thank you.
[{'start': 61, 'end': 69, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Monique Ramos: good morning ramos on behalf of the early care and education coalition. the coalition is very concerned about the proposed pause on reimbursement rates. we believe that this fails to recognize the urgent need to stabilize and strengthen our early childhood care education and education's system. in addition, we appreciate the chairman's comments about needing to move beyond just that for ece funding this year. we also think that we must address parent and child eligibility as well as addressing the 12-month eligibility issues. thank you.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Martha Alvarez: good morning, martha on behalf of acsa, the association of california school administrators. i'll align my comments to the edco members, terry and ron. in addition to those comments, i would like to urge the legislator to consider for the profit 51 dollars we are very pleased that california voters have approved 51 in early november.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 137, 'end': 142, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 147, 'end': 150, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kyle Highland: i'm kyle patti highland on behalf of oakland unified school district. we would just like to express our, echo the support expressed for the early childhood care education in the governor's budget. thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Enrique Ruacho: Enrique Ruacho, on behalf of the Los Angeles Unified School District and we also join the other school districts calling on flexibility as it relates to the early education child care proposals by the Governor, specifically as it relates to Title 22. We agree, if we had less cumbersome requirements, we would be taking advantage of those state preschool dollars. And separately from that group of education school districts, I also want to say that we definitely urge, as has been stated previously, removing the pause on the early education funding that the Governor has and revisiting that when the main revise comes around. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pamela Gibbs: Good morning, Mr. Chair and members. Is it still morning? Pamela Gibbs representing Debra Duardo, the Superintendent of Los Angeles County Schools, and we are very much in support of what the Governor is doing as far as funding education and continuing to fund LCFF but we did notice that the LCAP workload adjustment funding is not present in the budget.  We urged that this be continued on an ongoing basis. LACO serves 80 school districts. We feel as though this is a priority for us. We want to continue to do this work. And for those reasons we urge your support there. We also are looking at the Early Childhood Education Proposal, we haven't yet formulated all of our analysis on that so we look forward to working with you there. And we're also looking at the impact of the retirement increased contributions, so we'll be working with you in the coming weeks and months. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 58, 'end': 70, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 84, 'end': 96, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Martha Zaragoza-Diaz: Martha Zaragoza-Diaz, and I'm representing the California Association for Bilingual Education and Californians Together. Last month, the Learning Policy Institute released its updated report on the teacher shortage, including their report on the bilingual teachers shortage. Their report states that this shortage will continue to grow, especially in light of the passage of Proposition 58, that was approved by the voters, by 73%. The report stated that English learners are impacted by bilingual shortages, as well as bilingual shortages in special education. The report also identified the fact that fewer teacher preparation programs offer bilingual teacher training programs. Only 30 out of 80 offer bilingual teacher authorization programs. Additionally, California authorizes fewer than half of the number of new bilingual teachers than it did in the 1990s. It is respectfully request that the Committee consider additional funding so that there are incentives for schools of education to offer and to maintain bilingual education training programs. As well as providing additional funding for professional development for teachers for bilingual authorizations but also those teachers with bilingual authorizations already who have only taught in mainstream English classrooms but who may be interested in teaching in a bilingual program, but they need to have their skills and their training updated through professional development. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cai Jackson: good morning, mr. chairman, committee members. my name is jackson, i represent san diego unified school district. as you have heard, many districts are facing pressures on a general fund and consequently san diego unified school district's first budget priority, is to ensure that every dollar provided by the state is discretionary, which will give our district the flexibility to relief pressures and address local priorities. we support the administration, $744 million propose appropriation to fund the lcff. and continue it's positive progress for closing the achieving again for all students. to the extent that there is anticipated extra funds in may as result of the may revise. we would encourage the administration and legislature to maintain its priority commitment to funding the lcff and augmenting the discretionary one time appropriation to laa so that they can apply funds to a local spending priorities. with respect to early childhood education while we continue to review the education proposal, so we are encouraged by the primary analysis and the administration of early childhood education proposal and promoting much needed alignment. with respect to federal funding, we would appreciate the committee's attention toward helping mitigate any loss to impact aid with the specific focus on military impact aid, thank you.
[{'start': 58, 'end': 65, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Lillis: good morning, sarah kyle lillis with edvoice. we appreciate the assembly members concerns about the... cash deferrals and we share them. we think this proposal is really unnecessary and don't really want to go, we're hesitant to go down this road again. and to some of the questions that the members raised, we were very supportive of the governor's approach to get rid of the long term impacts of this accounting gimmick. we think that, we know, that there are disproportionate impacts on low wealth districts. in the department of finance's previous budgets they said, some school districts were able to borrow to manage these defers, while others had to implement defers as cuts. districts that were able to borrow incurred substantial interest costs, which lead to dollars taken out of the classroom. this is a real impact on districts and then there is the question of the impact on the out years which we think is the real one, and it is the an untested legal question. it's a question, it's a legal question that edvoice has consider testing but we think that's unnecessary legal road to go down. so we really think that by if we introducing this practice, it's just the wrong way to go, and it's very unnecessary. we also appreciate the conversation about additional investments in recruiting and retaining teachers, and would like to explore those further with the committee. and we also want to raise up the need to explore potentially additional supports, offer data systems at the department and statewide, again to make sure that this conversation about lcff that we have the systems in place to have a robust and transparent accountability system. thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1567, 'end': 1571, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jason Sisney: Thank you very much, Jason Sisney from the Legislative Analyst Office, we're going to start with the very big picture which is looking at the states economy. And given water office talks about the most, we'll connect it to the state budget particularly the states tax revenues. First as mentioned already, California's economy is really big. And it's one of the most important facts that people learning about the California economy need to get their hands around. That were big, were diverse. We have over $2 trillion of angle output of goods and services which is what gross domestic products measures. This particular chart, all of these charts are from, almost all of these charts are from our biannual publication Colfax. This is one of our most requested data sets every year and it basically looks at how big the California economy is compared to other economies around the world. And one of the things that's often misunderstood about this chart is that California's movement from year to year, be it sixth or seventh or eighth, doesn't really move that much because California's economy changes that much. It moves because currencies and their values change a lot. This chart is denominated in US dollars, so when the US dollar becomes stronger relative to other currencies of countries on this list, California tends to move up as it did. Last year passing France and as the US dollar becomes weaker relative to those currencies California will move downward. With the European currency so weak, it is entirely possible in the next few years that California will rise to fifth on this list. But if the dollar were to weaken in the future, California could easily fall to seventh or eighth again. And that would be more about currencies than really about the economic performance of California. California's economy is connected globally, and these charts look at exports and the state's key export partners. And also California imports are a very big part of the economy and in particular in Southern California, in Los Angeles region and Inland Empire. We have some of the most important concentrations of the logistics sector here in the country which basically takes goods and moves them all round the state, and all around the country. So, Californians are employed as a result of exports, and as a result of imports, and in large numbers. This chart looks at the differences around the state in terms of output. Per capita output, per capita Gross Domestic Product. And one of the most important things to know here is that while the Los Angeles region, you can see the population indicated by the people icons, each person indicating about 1 million people. The great Los Angeles region is by the far the biggest region in the economy. But in terms of per capita output the Bay Area is far more productive. And that's because of the tax sector. The tax sector is very high value industry and produces a lot of wealth in that region, and we'll talk more about this particular difference as we go through the presentation. All of the state regions as you all well know have different economic niches and some of them have a lot more value produced in terms of dollars than others. In the San Joaquin Valley which is one of the most important agricultural regions in the country. Per capita output is actually much lower. Even though it has a very strong, vibrant industry. That industry doesn't produce the type of wealth that the tech industry does for example. And so, these differences around the state are of course very obvious to those of you who were elected officials. But they're key to understanding how the different regions of our state fit together. Let's look at the job mix throughout the state. And for simplicity, we break this down into three bars for each of these major sectors, the greater LA region, including the [INAUDIBLE] Empire, the Bay Area and the rest of the state. Professional services in technology, as I mentioned, it's centered in the Bay Area. So, you see that the percent of jobs in the Bay Area that are in those sectors is much greater than in the Los Angeles region and the rest of the state. At the bottom you see the agricultural industries, they're the rest of the state probably pretty obviously, has a lot more of the concentration of employment in agriculture and related industries than does the LA and the Bay Area, and agriculture is heavily concentrated in the Central Valley. And then at the top you see government, government is a major share of economy, federal state, and local combined in most parts of the country. But in particular, government has a greater concentration of employment in our states' rural areas, particularly in the northern part of the state. Construction makes up about 5% of employment in most regions of the state as well. The topic for this hearing talks about income mobility, and I think the later speakers will talk a lot more about those issues. Our office put out a report a few weeks ago about income mobility in California across generations, which is a very complicated topic. And I picked one's figure out of that report, this looks at outcomes among California children born into the bottom 5th of incomes. Basically, you can see that the bulk of those children in adulthood remain in the bottom 5th or the second 5th of income. A little over 25% of them advance to the top two 5ths of income. That's actually a little bit better than the rest of the country, we're just 21% of the children born into the bottom 5th of incomes, advance over their lifetimes to the top two 5ths of income. Income mobility is, of course, a topic very much in the public consciousness these days, the solutions to making our children born into lower income groups more able to get up into higher income groups are very complicated. But the evidence suggest that the types of things that policy-makers want to consider are probably not surprising to you. How do you build a good education system? How do you ensure that they grow up in communities where there is less crime? And, therefore, they have more opportunity to build their skills and to gain employment. California has a lot of wealth, a tapping comes here are higher than elsewhere, many of the country's wealthiest people live here in California, had businesses here in California. And as a result our richest people are on average quite a bit richer than those in the rest of the country, we also have a lot of poverty. This particular chart looks at the regional variations in a type of measure called the California Poverty Measure. And one of the things that's happen in recent years is that economic statisticians have been looking at poverty in new ways. And this is a poverty measure along with some others that considers not only the incomes that people have but tries to look at that relative to the costs that they face in their communities. California, by some measures, has the highest poverty rate in the country among all 50 states. By these measures, when you consider the cost of housing that's involved, California's housing costs are far above the rest of the country. And when you look at these types of poverty measures that consider those sorts of cost of living, California does not show up well. And you can see that even within California by these measures you have big variations in how much housing and other costs affect the buying power of lower income people. This chart looks at jobless rates, and California has parts of the country that have among the lowest jobless rates particularly in the Bay Area now. Around 3% unemployment in many parts of the Bay Area. And then we have large slots of the state, in the northern part of the state, in the Central Valley, in Imperial County, that have much higher unemployment rates. And I think that as policymakers, dealing with that variation is one of the biggest challenges that our state faces. I think, as was pointed out earlier, we have a very big diverse state, policies that work well in the Los Angeles area are not necessarily going to work well in the northern part of the state, these are very different economies facing very different challenges, and the varying jobless rates are just one way that you can see those challenges and diversity illustrated quite dramatically. Transitioning a bit now to thinking about how the economy affects our State Budget. These are the trends over time for our state government's three largest revenue sources, the Personal Income Tax, the sales tax, and the corporation tax. If I've been sitting here 60, 70 years ago, the sales tax would have been by far the most important revenue source for California and many other states as well. And in some states, the sales tax is still the predominant revenue source, but not in California. For state government, the Personal Income Tax has overtaken it significantly over time. There are few reasons why, one of the most important reasons is what we have had real that is inflation-adjusted growth in the incomes, that is the states become richer, that's one big fact. And also, the state has increased marginal rates particularly for the highest income earners. Those highest income earners have seen their incomes grow far more than other income groups. And so, because California has a highly progressive Personal Income Tax structure, that means that we've seen the effects of that increase in wealth, the increase in income among our top tax payers show up in the Personal Income Tax over time. With regard to the sales tax, we've seen a number of changes over time, including parts of that sale tax rate being shifted from the state to local governments. And then we'll talk about services, and how that plays into it in just a little bit. With regard to the income tax, the top 1% of our state's taxpayers pay between 40 and 50% of the income tax each year. The income tax makes up two-thirds of our state's General Fund budget, and that top line shows the share of those payments on the personal income tax that come from the top 1%. Now this chart really helps people understand what our progressive tax rate structure is. The bottom line, the dotted line, shows the percentage of income on tax returns that the top 1% report. So you see that's typically between 20 and 30%. But because we levy higher marginal tax rates on these tax payers, they pay between 40% and 50% of the total amount of taxes every year. So they have about a quarter of the income but they pay about 50% of the taxes, and that's how our tax system is designed. Because we have this progressive right structure, and because as I talked about the Bay Area is where a lot of the state's wealth is concentrated. The Bay Area pays a disproportionately large share of our state's revenues, particularly the income tax. This chart has a lot of data on it. But I wanted to highlight the top line, the Bay Area, the San Francisco, Oakland, and San Jose MSAs. Has about 17% of the state's population, pays 37% of the state's income taxes. And that means that when the Bay Area and the tech sector is doing really well, the state budget's doing really well. And when it slips, the state budget slips. The other parts of the state play a role in the state budget too. But disproportionately, the health of the Bay Area economy drives the health of the state budget. I mentioned sales taxes before. One of the big things that's happened in sales taxes, and that has contributed to its relative decline in the share of state revenues. Is that the sales tax excludes services. And what this chart shows is that services have been taking up more and more of people's purchasing dollar over time. This chart actually shows a little bit of the opposite. What this shows, is that the percent of income that consumers in California spend on taxable goods. These are tangible goods that we levy sales taxes on. Share of their income spent on those sales tax items, has gone down. And conversely, the share of their income that they spend on non-taxable goods, primarily services, has increased over time. Now why is this? It's not because people have had that great a change in the types of products they buy. One of the key things that's happened is that taxable goods, physical goods. The sort of things you buy at a grocery store or that people buy at Walmart. Those goods have basically not grown in price much over time. They've had very low rates of inflation. If you think of pretty common household goods. If you think of t-shirts, if you think of socks, these are things that we tax. They have not increased that much in value as opposed to legal services, let's say, or healthcare services. Those products have increase dramatically in value. People are spending far more of their income now on those services than they are on those physical goods compared to decades ago. The income tax makes up two-thirds of our state's revenues. And as I mentioned, it's paid predominantly by the top 1% of tax payers. They get a disproportionate share of their income from business income and capital gains, gains on stocks and other assets. And because of that, their income, the top 1% income, it's very volatile. And as a result our personal income tax is volatile. This shows the percent change in the personal income tax from year to year, and as you can see it goes way down in recessions. And we can have big increases when times are booming. The state's leaders and voters have recognized this in recent years. With the passage of Proposition 2 in 2014, we've begun to set aside substantially more reserves than we had in a long time. When capital gains are strong as they have been Proposition 2 requires us to set aside even more than usual into reserves. In the Governor's Budget he estimates that reserves for the general fund would grow to $9.4 billion in the next fiscal year. The state has a $124 billion budget. So as a percentage of that 124 billion, the 9.4 billion reserves that are estimated, it's much better than it has been. But it is not going to be enough to tide the budget over during the next recession. The state's volatility of revenues as you saw in the last slide is just far too great for that $9.4 billion potential Reserve to really shield the Legislature from having to make any cuts. The point being that the state's policy makers and the voters that have made this decision. It was a good decision to set aside more reserves. And as long as the economic expansion continues it's something that we advise the Legislature to keep their eye on. We need more reserves than this to really help us deal with the outcomes of the certain next recession. That we don't know when that next recession will be. And with that I'll wrap up. At the Legislative Analyst's office we work for both parties in both houses of the Legislature. And our staff is happy to help you and your staffs think through issues, come up with different ideas and alternatives. Please free to contact us.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Scott Hauge: I'm Scott Hauge, I own an insurance business and I'm the founder. Small business in California. Thank you for the opportunity to speak today, I agree with everything Miss Pickman said. But I'd like to back up just a little bit. One of the things that I think is missing, and I think it's actually with social mobility, is financial literacy. If you look at the California, and actually this is national. The school system does not do good a very job of teaching basic financial principles. Balancing a checkbook, budgeting, managing money, those kinds of things. In 2015, Assemblyman Hernandez introduced a bill to try to address that and it really hasn't gotten down into the schools. Price Water House did a study in 2015 and found that less than 10% of the educators who are teaching financial literacy in the schools. And I think that's really critical. I think it's critical to upward social mobility. I think it's critical for entrepreneurs to know this, as well as everybody. I think there needs to be additional and focus on that, and I think that's a basic step. What Miss Pickman talked about was mentorship, access to capital, all of those things are really important. But again I think we need to start with a base of financial literacy.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 171, 'end': 178, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 584, 'end': 593, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1082, 'end': 1089, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Malaki Seku-Amen: Good morning Madam Chair, Members of the Committee, I'm Malaki Seku-Amen, CEO of the California Urban Partnership. We are a statewide organization but very much focused on building economic security in low income communities, communities of color at the local level. And the way we do that is by providing, or rather, developing technology, joint venture and policy solutions. And of course, to help that technology, joint venture and policy work come to life. We provide technical assistance and capacity building assistance at the local level to community based entities. And this has been a very interesting conversation that we've had this morning. There's this narrative around the question of how to move more Californians from generational poverty to upper income levels. We're very quick to talk about education and the need for less crime in neighborhoods. But really what we need to do, is more intently connect those neighborhoods to market based opportunities. We need to connect those neighborhoods to regional industry clusters and economies. We have in California approximately $10 billion in various economic and workforce development resources, but they are fragmented and largely out of reach for grassroots leaders who know how to solve the problems. But there's a need for technical assistance to help these nonprofits collaborate, to scale up and having stronger programs, stronger businesses. And also being able to participate in designing public policies so that it's more responsive to the various interrelated needs of low income communities of color. We love in California and I'm one of those folks who likes to tout our strengths and our competitive advantages. However, it's more than the general unemployment rate that has to come into our consideration of how we solve problems. I mean, we really need to look at seven major regions in the state where the unemployment rates in various sense tracks are anywhere from 13 to 38%. And then for black and Hispanic teenagers, the unemployment rate is north of 55%. And, so those are some of the things that we'd like this Committee and the Legislature to take into account as we move towards solutions.
[{'start': 56, 'end': 72, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anthony Rucker: Yes, I'm Anthony Rucker, senior loan officer at California capital financial development corporation. We administer a state government program called the Small Business Loan Guarantee Program. Which sits under the governor's office of economic development which is under it is iBank, the Infrastructure Bank and our program is under it. Just won't take so much of your time and not used to doing this kind of dragged me in from the frontline but just want to introduce myself and the program. And that the Loan Guarantee Program is a program that has been around 40 years. We provide guarantees to banks and other lending institutions. And we are out there helping small businesses get loans that they otherwise would not be able to get. In addition, one of the things I wanted to bring up and I might be a little premature on this but In the works is a direct lending program that we're looking at providing the program in the sense of providing small business loans directly from us, that these funds come from the state. And they will be targeting low income areas, low income census tracks. There is a poverty qualification to it. And I'm not sure what that is, and I apologize. But I wanted to bring that up because as a result of some of the hearings we've had in the past, we went back to the table and have come up with this. It's going to be called Jump Start. And again, it's through the iBank and we're looking to launch that very soon, and I encourage and your staff to look at it. And I encourage you to give me a call, and I can direct you to the Director of the program or answer any questions I have on that okay.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : After an order or removal is entered by the immigration court,
[]
 : Thank you, Madame Chair.
[]
Erin Hamilton: I will. My name is Erin Hamilton. I'm associate Professor of sociology at UC Davis. For the past 15 years, I've studied international migration as a sociologist and demographer. My research has focused on the determinants and demography of Mexico-US migration and on the health and well being of immigrant families and children. And I've written more than 25 scholarly articles and book chapters on this topic. In my view, children of undocumented immigrants are the single most vulnerable population of children in this country. They are vulnerable for many of the reasons that you can imagine, including disadvantages their parents face in the labor force. And the restricted access to social services. But perhaps most importantly, deportation shatters immigrant families and the threat of deportation casts a shadow of terror over immigrant families. Preventing some of these deportations and expanding due process rights of immigrants and detention and deportation proceedings would provide some protection to these most vulnerable families in California. I think it's important to remember that this population at risk of deportation in California is quite large. The best demographic estimates of the undocumented population in California place it at 2.3 and 3 million people in 2014. This means that undocumented immigrants are 22% of all California immigrants, and 6% of the state population. Undocumented immigrants are by and large, long term residents. In California, 87% have been in the United States for more than five years. And a full quarter have been in the United States for at least 20 years. As a result, many undocumented immigrants have US citizen children In California in 2014 it was estimated that there were 1.3 million US citizen children with at least one undocumented parent. So what are the impacts of deportation on these California children and families? In 2013 the US government deported 70,000 parents claiming a US citizen child and in 2015 after the Obama administration implemented its new priority enforcement program, the number fell to 31,000. In the most severe cases deportation results in the termination of parental rights. In 2011 an estimated 5,100 of deported parents were in the child welfare system nationwide. More commonly, one parent is deported and the other remains with their children. Men are vastly over-represented among deportees. As a result, the deportation of father creates quote suddenly single mothers. Who suffer severe economic consequences due to the loss of the primary wage earner in their household. For example, in census data, it is found that the median income of households with at least one undocumented member is $41,300. If that member were removed from the household, the median income would fall to $22,000 which is below the poverty level for a family of four. This would raise poverty rates from about 33% of undocumented immigrants to over 50%. The economic impacts extend well beyond the immigrant households. Economists have used simulation models to estimate what would happen to the size of the US and state economies if all undocumented people were deported. Using a wide range of assumptions about those impacts, one report estimated that 10 year loss to the California economy. Would be in the order of $103 billion, without outsized impacts on agriculture, leisure and hospitality, and wholesale and retail trade. But deportation doesn't just have economic consequences. For families, the consequences are far more profound. Research finds that some families never recover. Deportation is a triggering event that eventually leads to marital dissolution. And a large body of social science research that children are healthier, perform better in school, are less likely to become teen parents or delinquents, and have better adult outcomes when they live in stable family environments. Other families attempt to stay together in the face of deportation. My colleague at the College of Mexico Claudia Masferrer Leon is an expert on the return migration to Mexico. She and I are beginning a study of the well-being of nearly 500,000 US citizen children who have returned to Mexico in the past decade. Some of these are voluntary returnees who have left with their parents after the great recession, but others are returning with their parents who were deported. It's unclear how their return to Mexico will impact the lives of these young, US citizens. But Professor Mesfer's early research suggests that integration into Mexico is fraught with difficulties. Still, other deportees intend to return to the United States in spite of the serious criminal and immigration penalties they face if they're caught. In a research study I wrote on men deported to El Salvador, the single most important factor predicting their intent to return to the United States was having a US citizen child left behind. The majority of fathers in this study intended to return. While these impacts on families who experience deportation are severe, a much broader swath of children and families experience deportation threat, which is risk and fear of oneself or family member being deported. I recently spoke with a Davis community member about this. She and her husband have lived in the United States for 11 years and both are undocumented. They have three kids. The eldest is undocumented and two are US citizens. All are enrolled in elementary and high schools in Davis. Following the Trump administration's announcement about expanded enforcement efforts, she expressed the terror she felt. She says she went to the Walmart in West Sacramento and it was unusually empty. She had heard that ICE frequents Walmart in quote, Mexican stores, to pick up undocumented people. She became paralyzed with fear that ICE was at her Walmart and that she would be picked up. Her vision blurry, heart racing, unable to hear, she grabbed her children and she fled from the store. She told me this story two days later on the verge of tears, she was so traumatized by it. What should we do, Erin? Shall we take the children out of school and go back to Mexico? She's worried about drug violence in her home town in Mexico, she's worried that her children's speaking English better than Spanish and her eldest daughter who's a straight a student wants to go to UC Davis. But she's also terrified of being separated from her children if she is detained this is not an isolated occurence. A similar story appears in today's Sacramento Bee, and research also confirms that this fear is widespread. It has real consequences for families and communities. For example, a study of 132 Latino parents in 2009 found that 45 percent reported that the mere existence of deportation affects how their child performs in school and 53 reported that the existence of deportation affects their ability to financially provide for their children. This study included documented and undocumented immigrants, and it predated the current enforcement climate, so we can imagine that these are lowball estimates of current impacts of deportation. Deportation threat also affects how community members live their lives. My collaborator, Jaqueline Hagan at UNC, has studied this topic extensively. She found that immigrants, like the community member I just mentioned, respond to deportation threat by withdrawing from public spaces like libraries, parks, churches, and school meetings, the very places that create community and support immigrant families. In a county in North Carolina where police were trained to collaborate with ice under the 287G program, immigrants withdrew to such an extent that some immigrant serving businesses reported sales plummeting between 30% and 90%. Research in Arizona found that SB1070, which expanded police power to stop and detain people suspected of being undocumented undermined police community relations, and trust in immigrant communities. A final point that is not just a family members of undocumented immigrants who suffer the consequences of deportation, this issue is constructed in such a way that many children conflate the terms immigrant and illegal, and experience this stigma of undocumented status. Even if they or their family members are not undocumented. This in turn threatens two characteristics that sociologists think are very protective about immigrants. One is immigrant optimism, or the belief that hard work and investments will pay off, and ethnic pride, which is a bulwark against discrimination. And as my colleague Caitlin Patler will now discuss, similar consequences can be seen with immigrant [INAUDIBLE]
[{'start': 19, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 3985, 'end': 4007, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4458, 'end': 4464, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6051, 'end': 6055, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7172, 'end': 7187, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8521, 'end': 8535, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Caitlin Patler: great, well good afternoon, senators. thank you for having me here today. my name's caitlin jonah patler. i'm an assistant professor of sociology at uc davis. my research focuses primarily on the experiences of immigrant communities here in california. and part of my ongoing work examines how laws and legal processes like detention and deportation impact immigrant families and communities. my work has been cited in recent supreme court cases pertaining to immigrant's rights related to daca and to long-term immigration detention. so dr. hamilton and i were asked to discuss the status of social science research on the impacts of detention and deportation on california's children, family, and communities. so dr. hamilton has provided you with a backdrop for understanding the economic and social impacts of deportation. and so now i'm going to focus in on a little more on detention. and i just want to start by sharing a little bit of background on immigration detention that i think adds to what we've already heard in the other panels. according to trac, the website we were just discussing in the last panel, in 2015, there were more than 325,000 individuals who left ice custody. california accounted for about 11% of all of those individuals. as you know, ice does not have jurisdiction to hold people for criminal convictions. so any individuals who are held by ice, even those who are held mandatorily, are not completing a sentence, but rather are awaiting adjudication on their removal proceedings. while they wait, they're held in jails or facilities run by think that it's a very common public perception that people pass quickly through detention on their way to deportation. but the fact is that many people remain in ice custody for very long periods of time. so in 2013, ice detained over 10,000 people for six months or longer. and a recent study by the mexican government found that over 15% of mexican nationals who were deported from the interior of the united states reported for-profit correctional corporations. and as previous panelists have mentioned, any non-citizen can be detained and that includes lawful permanent residents, people with temporary protective status, etcetera. and one other thing i wanted to mention is that i having been detained for more than a year prior to their removal. with about half of those people having been detained for more than three years. and a full 29% of individuals who were part of that study were from california. so our state is detaining a lot of people. and detaining them for long periods of time. so, i thought what i would do today is share a little bit about what might be at stake for california communities if we continue to detain people for long periods of time. or if we increase the number of people that we are detaining and the amount of time that they're being detained. and so, you might think of this as the collateral consequences of our detention system. so i'm going to tell you a little bit about a research project that i've been doing since 2013 in which i conducted surveys with 562 immigrants who were detained in california for six months or longer. and then followed up with interviews with many of their family members. data from this study show that long term detention produces financial insecurity at the individual household and community levels. first, it removes millions of dollars from local communities in the form of lost wages. so for example, just for these 562 people who i talked to, if we assume the same rate of pre-detention employment levels and earnings, the collective loss of wages is estimated to be about $43,000 a day. just for the people in my small study. and that's about $15.7 millions a year, just in lost wages. beyond these economic ties,  many detainees have deep and established ties to their families and communities. so on average respondents in my study had been in the us for 20 years. and 69% of them have a us citizen or a lawful permanent resident spouse or child. and nearly everyone, 94% reported being a source of financial or emotional support for their families in the period prior to being detained. so given the level of these family ties, long-term detention really causes increased economic strain at the household level. for example, while 16% of the detainees reported there families had been late paying rent, mortgage, or utility bills in the six months prior to detention, that number shot up to nearly two-thirds during the time in detention. but the inability to pay bills wasn't the only was that families were affected. 42% of families reported being unable to pay for necessary medical care. and a full 37% reported that their families were unable to pay for food at one point or another. so, i just want to share with you the stories of two families that i think illustrate some of the ways that detention impacts children in these families in our state. so the first family, the first is the case of a man, joaquin zamora and his family. so joaquin is a father of five us citizen children, ranging in age from eight to 25 years old. joaquin first came to the united states in 1981 when he was just 14 years old. in 2012, he was arrested for a traffic violation, and that arrest revealed a previous deportation from the mid 90s. after which time, he had re-entered the united states illegally to reunite with his family. ultimately, joaquin ended up being detained for 18 months while he tried to fight his deportation, until he was finally released on a $12,000 bond. when he was released, he only had $40 to his name. all of his life savings had been spent throughout this process. prior to his detention in 2012, joaquin had been the main source of income for his family. he was earning about $1,000 a week and supporting his wife martina and their five children and two grandchildren. he described to me how his family was evicted from his home while he was detained and had to live in the car. and these are his words. the sheriff went to the house and kicked my wife out. gave her a three day notice. my family lived on the street in our truck. i really felt like dying. one time i called them from detention, and it was raining. raining like crazy and the car had broken down and there they were, living inside the car. and they didn't even have $5 to buy gas. and the pets, my wife had to throw them out into the street. my puppies, she had to give them away, throw them out, abandon them in the street. it was either the dogs eat or the family eats. so detention was devastating for this family. martina, now a suddenly single mother, was left trying to find a job and also having to care for three minor children and two grandchildren. she's a us citizen now by the way. she fell into a deep depression and ended up being diagnosed with pre-diabetes during this time. it was a very difficult time. but perhaps the most damaging impacts were felt by the children. so i told you there were five children in the family. well, the zamora's oldest son was caught shoplifting food on one of the nights that the family was living in the car and had nothing to eat. the oldest daughter had just enrolled in community college when her dad was detained and had to drop out of school and get a job at the home depot. earning minimum wage in order to try to help the family pay bills. the youngest zamora daughter, who was just five years old at the time of the arrest, began having night terrors and wetting the bed. she stopped speaking completely. except for when she would sob inconsolably and scream for her father while having nightmares. so there's one additional story that i want to tell you, the gomez family. mateo gomez was born in guatemala in 1971 and he came to the us for the first time in 1994 with his wife sofia. hoping to earn enough money to support their two young sons. the couple settled in san bernardino county and mateo began earning good money working in construction. in 2003, their youngest child, camila, was born. just a few months after camila's birth, sophia was diagnosed with breast cancer. and one day in 2004 when she was about a year old, and sophia was still in chemotherapy, mateo and sophia were out doing errands, and they were stopped at a border control check point. when they couldn't provide proof of legal residence, they were both arrested. sophia pleaded with an agent to let her return to her baby daughter and continue her treatment. she even lifted up her shirt and showed the border patrol agent the scars from her mastectomy. the agent did let sophia go, but kept mateo in custody and eventually deported him. sophia was still in treatment and caring for their infant daughter at the time. and, so as i imagine many husbands and father would do, mateo came back to the united states as soon as he could. the family moved to la and mateo began working in a construction there. all was well until 2013 when sophia discovered a lump in her other breast. devastated, mateo began to drink more frequently and was arrested in 2013 for being drunk in a parked car. he did six days in jail, and then was transferred into ice custody where he ended up being held for six months. so sophia wasn't working at the time of his arrest, so that she could focus on her health. she is in constant pain, but she says she's afraid to go to the doctor. because she says "we can't afford any additional bills." without the main breadwinner, the family couldn't even afford basic necessities like books for the children and new shoes. so i'm going to try to wrap up here.
[{'start': 84, 'end': 104, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 490, 'end': 494, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 542, 'end': 550, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 719, 'end': 727, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4971, 'end': 4985, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5005, 'end': 5012, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5097, 'end': 5104, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5396, 'end': 5403, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5679, 'end': 5686, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5797, 'end': 5804, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6568, 'end': 6575, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7359, 'end': 7365, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7667, 'end': 7672, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7681, 'end': 7692, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7786, 'end': 7791, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7902, 'end': 7907, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7989, 'end': 7995, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8031, 'end': 8037, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8047, 'end': 8053, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8143, 'end': 8149, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8177, 'end': 8182, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8187, 'end': 8193, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8351, 'end': 8357, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8560, 'end': 8566, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8580, 'end': 8585, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8626, 'end': 8632, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8762, 'end': 8767, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8847, 'end': 8852, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8921, 'end': 8927, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8979, 'end': 8984, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 9189, 'end': 9195, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Judy London: thank you so much for inviting me today and thank you for staying here at this late hour. my name is judy caitlin london and i'm directing attorney of public counsels immigrants rights project. we have a staff of 20, including 11 full time attorneys, 2 law fellows, 2 social workers, and 5 support staff. our program looks quite similar to central legal. we provide full scope legal representation in immigration courts, the federal courts. and for affirmative relief, such as u visas before uscis. the one difference with public counsel is that we also do impact litigation. so we use our experience with our clients to inform our litigation and identify significant impact issues that need to be addressed. we are co-counsel in the franco litigation, which established a right to counsel for immigrant detainees with severe mental disabilities. and just to paint a picture of this, when a government building is labelled a court house, we imagine that the function of that building, of the court, is to render justice. and we imagine when we have a picture in our head of what a just court looks like, as a judge and two parties on an equal playing field each represented by counsel. so, after spending 20 years in immigration courts i can tell you that this crisis is not new. i've never believed that we should be calling these institutions courts because there cannot be any degree of fairness when you have people from other countries facing life and death decisions who do not have a right to counsel. and it is public counsel's goal to rectify that and to join you in making that happen. that is why we ware very pleased that there is this amendment to sb 6 to essentially recognize that everyone deserves due process, everyone deserves a lawyer. in the case of mr. franco, our detention attorney found mr. franco at the santa ana jail. he had been detained there for over five years, after a judge had closed his case, determining that he lacked mental competency to represent himself. he was lost in detention at tax payers expense, for five years. and this is what happens when there is not a right to counsel. we are also co-counsel in j.e. f.m. v lynch and we continue to seek to establish a right to counsel for all children under 18 in immigration court. one of the senators referenced the fact that our government thinks an eight year old can represent themselves. well, that government has argued that a one year old can represent themselves. some of our clients are one years old. we had a one year old who went to court for, that same month, the government had granted permanent protection in this country to the teen mother of that one year old. and yet ice argued in court that the one year old remained an enforcement priority of the united states government. this is a one year old who would have been deported away from the only parent that one year old had back to central america, the most violent place in the world for children. so that struggle continues. but i bring up the point of impact work because it has been very important and will be very important in the days ahead. and it's informed when lawyers have access to courtrooms and can be there to observe what is happening and not rely on representations of the government. i'm going to briefly touch on some of the gaps i see in legal services, other than this massive gap of representation. and foremost, the detention, where nearly 70% of detainees go unrepresented. just to tell you what our program looks like, we have a lawyer assisted by two law fellows who are with us only for a short amount of time to cover the orange county detention centers. in my 20 years working in southern california, i have never seen funding for more than one full-time lawyer in southern california to provide removal defense to immigrant detainees. i don't think people understand that. they think maybe there's a dozen, maybe there's 20. there's 1, perhaps, right now there's 1.5, if we don't include the fellows. there is an organization that is funded to go do know your rights presentations but not provide the actual representation that we provide. we are, one attorney is able through pro bono support to represent approximately 35 detainees in orange county each year and to educate another 600 detainees about their immigration rights. the other gap i want to touch on is on accompanied minors in southern california. this population is immense and this is specifically due to the spiraling violence in central america. the vera institute has funded many providers in southern california. so three years ago there was basically no capacity to serve this population,. today in the los angeles area, there are approximately 1000 children provided full scope representation. most of the funding is federal funding through the vera institute and we anticipate loosing that funding eminently, which means that 1,000 children will be subject to deportation and lose counsel. we look forward to working with the senate on resolving the unaccompanied minor problem. we see this population as particularly vulnerable. i wanted to speak a little bit about scaling up, because the scaling up that we have experienced for the unaccompanied minors crisis has been an amazing education for dozens of manager and lawyers, throughout the state of california. again, going from no resources at all and in three years to over 100 lawyers across the state has been a very rapid growth. when we began the ramp up, we were told we had two weeks to be operational, that was a challenge. some of that rapid growth created real strains. but with vera, we were able to have a funding stream that made sense, instead of money coming at the beginning and end of a case, when the end can take five years. the money is essentially, we get a ceiling budget, and each agency negotiates its own budget to recognize the flexibility in budgets that are needed for the unique cultures and economies of each agency. so we have a lot of control, as long as we stay under a budget ceiling as to who we hire, the proportion of lawyers, and how we meet our goals. also, because we bill monthly, we don't have problems making payroll. frankly, public counsel could not take the state funding because the mechanism did not provide enough funding on an ongoing basis to hire staff up front. so that's something we look forward to talking to you more about. one final point about vera is that it plays the role nationally as a coordinator and essentially pulls in best practices and training. and those best practices can then be rolled out in a very quick amount of time across the country. i'm going to stop there because i'm taking too much time, i just want to, bring one example of another issue of detention which has to do with family separation to your attention. and it, again, speaks to the urgent need for due process and legal representation in the detention system. we met anna last year. she has three us citizen children, ages 16, 9 and 8. she was a victim in california of extreme domestic violence by her partner. he took the family back to mexico and relocated there where the violence escalated. she feared for her life and last fall she fled to the united states border and she sought asylum. after seeking asylum she was detained in orange county california. her three children, u.s. citizens were taken from her. she was not given any information as to where they were. but for public counsel's lawyer she would today be deported and would have no way to find whereabouts of her u.s. citizen children without any process whatsoever, terminating her parental rights. when we advocated and went to the deportation officers and cited parental interest directive which guides immigration officers across the country in regards to how they must treat families when a parent is detained. the deportation officer said he had never heard of that directive. it had been in effect for two years. lawyers are needed. we were able to secure the release of anna. she has an approved new visa. she is reunited with her three children. there was never a single allegation of neglect. and, they are living and thriving in southern california. i don't want to take up more time. i know you may have questions. thank you, very much for listening to all of us, today, and for organizing this hearing.
[{'start': 101, 'end': 120, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 734, 'end': 740, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1774, 'end': 1780, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1815, 'end': 1821, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6924, 'end': 6928, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8004, 'end': 8008, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ronald Coleman: good afternoon coleman, director of government affairs with california immigrant policy center. thank you very much for putting this hearing together for these very important issues. i do want to start on the criminalization front. i think we really need to be careful as we do create this program and allow the program to have the flexibility so that legal representatives can assess whether or not a person has relief. and not necessarily get into the business of creating categories of who are the good immigrants and who are the bad immigrants. certainly we shouldn't be treating people differently just because they are non -citizens. we do know that there are immigration consequences when people do get caught up in certain situations. but we do believe that people should be able to return back to their families, just like a us citizen would when they have served their time after they have been convicted. we must remember that in communities of color there is over policing, there is racial profiling. there are situations that get people caught up into certain types of situations that land them in the criminal justice situation. and we have to be mindful and flexible with the different fact patterns that people will come into to make sure that we're not directly playing into trump's own play book, and also echoing trump's own words as he talks about who he is going after. essentially california is going to be ground zero for the deportation crisis, we have 2.6 million undocumented immigrants. millions more lawfully present immigrants that don't have citizenship that are susceptible to the same type of immigration enforcement. so what does this mean? we heard a lot about that today. we know that this can increase homelessness, cause people to end up in foreclosure, a lack of food security. we know that it could trigger people going into foster care, which is going to cost the state money. it could increase people who are eligible being on certain types of public benefits. all of this is something that can certainly be prevented if california actually makes a small investment up front to ensure that we have legal representation for everybody that is going through removal proceedings. and for those reasons, we really appreciate this effort, and thank you very much for this hearing, thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1292, 'end': 1297, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1332, 'end': 1337, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Stacy Shargroni: Good afternoon, my name is Stacy Shargroni, I'm with the Vera Institute of Justice, and we have offices here in Los Angeles and also in New York. And I wanted to talk a little bit about the New York program that people have spoken about. And the decision there to follow a universal representation model where as long as someone is financially eligible, unrepresented, and wants representation, they get an attorney. So there are no carve-outs for people with criminal convictions or anything of that sort. And what we're finding in having run this program for about three years, and currently working on a comprehensive evaluation of it, is that the universal representation model provides obviously greater access to justice, but also efficiency, both for the court system and for the program itself. I think a lot of the immigration lawyers in the room have long experience with the triage model, where we're trying to quickly screen cases and figure out who might have a quote, unquote winning case. But we all know, and have lots of examples that during a one time screening, it can sometimes be really hard to develop the pertinent facts. That can often take multiple meetings to kind of figure out if someone has a case and even if that criminal charge that is being lodged makes the person deportable, removable. And so what we found is that it takes a huge up front effort to kind of sort who deserves and doesn't deserve an attorney. Lots of legal time that is ultimately not used to represent the person so we've made a decision in New York City to give everyone representation as the panel described too. That doesn't mean, the judges are still deciding on whether the person stays or not, but there's a due process right to that representation. And so just wanted to share that experience from New York for your.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rob Oglesby: Good morning Mr. Chair. Rob Oglesby the Executive Director of the California Energy Commission. Great to be back here again and see you Good Member Fong. Good to meet you for the first time. I was asked to begin with a note review of our programs and our budget funding. But then I'll drill down into research related items in more detail. But by way of introduction to the Energy Commission, the Energy Commission administers a broad range of programs related to all forms of energy in California including electricity, natural gas, transportation, fuels, and vehicles. The Legislature created the Energy Commission as the state's energy policy and planning agency. And empowered the Commission initially to be a one stop shot for a thermal power plant permitting. On the demand side of the equation the Commission was also assigned the responsibility to set efficiency standards for buildings and appliances. And over time the mission of the agency has grown to include research which, as I said I will discuss in more detail later and energy forecasting and analysis. One of our annual tasks is the production of an integrated energy policy report, good reading to those who have a specialized interest. It's an academic exercise on energy supply and demand as well as energy resource trends and recommendations. And it is used by other participants and the marketplace to determine investments and strategies and a view forward on energy policy and investments. The Commission tracks transportation fuel supply and prices and makes plans for emergencies. And administers $100 million program that we invest to promote alternative and renewable transportation fuels in vehicles. That program is fondly referred to as the ARFVTP program. It trips off the tongue. We support climate change goals through integrated resource planning, renewable energy development, and system integration under SB 350. We share that mission with the California Public Utilities Commission, the Air Resources Board. The Energy Commission certifies eligible renewable resources for both investor owned utilities and public owned utilities and we verify compliance for the state's 44 publicly owned utilities for the RPS, Removable Portfolio Standard. The Commission also designed and administers energy efficiency and solar grants to school districts under Proposition 39. Mostly the focus of another Budget Committee, but I want to mention it here because the Proposition provides about 400 million a year to over 2,000 school districts and charter schools. And to date, the Commission has approved energy plans for over 1,000 districts, involving over 4,000 projects for energy saving and solar. Basically we've approved 1 billion out of 1.36 to date under the program. And we provide low interest loans for energy, efficiency and solar improvements by local government schools and hospitals through our Energy Conservation Assistance Act or ECAA program. To date, more than 400 million has been loaned to over 850 recipients with no defaults. Now on our total budget. None of the CECs proposed funding in the proposed budget that you'll consider later today are general fund dollars. This year's budget included $15 million in general funds for fuel related research, but that was kind of a one-time deal. The Energy Commission's proposed fiscal year 2017-18 budget is 486 million includes 672 positions. All of those are located in Sacramento. 74% totalling 359 million of the proposed budget is for pass through funding activities and the remaining 26%, which is $127 million, is for operations and support. The Energy Commission's primary funding source for staffing programs and operations is the Energy Resources Programs Account, or ERPA, with revenue generated from a surcharge on the consumption of electricity. That surcharge amount is currently 0.00029 cents per kilowatt hour. ERPA experienced modest, almost flat, revenue growth due to energy efficiency improvements and huge increases in behind the meter energy that's produced and not metered and subject to the fee. The Commission's 2017-18 budget proposes 75 million in ERPA expenditures. The proposed budget also includes 106 million from the ARFVTP program, 140 million from the EPIC program, the Electric Program Investment Charge fund, and 29 million from the natural gas sub climate which is a Public Interest Research and Development Demonstration Fund. We have a remaining $136 million of proposed funding, and that's from 11 different funding sources. But none of them as significant as the ones I just mentioned. Lets move on to the research budget, which is really the focus of this hearing. In 2016, 17, the Energy Commission received approximately 158 million to support research. This funding came from three sources. Three-quarters came from the Electric Program Investment Charge Fund or EPIC program. 14% came from the Public Interest Research Development and Demonstration Fund, it's a natural gas sub-account. And 9% came from that one-time general fund appropriation. The research programs that were supported by these funds are invested in the development and demonstration of clean energy technologies. We don't receive any funds from federal sources for research, although a lot of work compliments work that is supported by federal funds. The Commission administers several clean energy research and development programs that drive innovation, and advance science, and technology. The largest is the EPIC program. This program is aimed at advancing energy research to provide rate pair benefits, such as reliable and cost effective energy as well as safety. The program is funded through a fee on electric usage by consumers from the three electric investor owned utilities, PG&E, SE&E, SDG&E and the research fund receives approximately $120 million a year. The EPIC projects are selected through a competitive process. And between 2015 and 2017, the Commission made the following investments with the programs's funds. Most went to energy efficiency projects that got 33% of the programs funds. Transmission, distribution and energy storage got 23%. Market facilitation projects got 18%. Now, renewable energy and advanced clean generation received 16% of the funds. The balance went to climate and environmental projects. 4% to match federal funds and transportation received 2% of the moneys. The energy commission also administers the natural gas research program. This program's research fund is approximately 21 million and its research project is generally focused on energy efficiency, renewable energy integration and gas pipeline safety. Between 2015 and 17, the Energy Commission made the following investments under this program. Energy efficiency projects got 34% of the funds, renewable energy and advanced generation received 20%. Natural gas infrastructure, safety and integrity received 19%. And natural gas transportation received 15% and energy-related environmental research received 12% of the funds. Under this program, the Energy Commission funds research to improve the estimation of methane emissions sources from natural gas system. The research is critical to understanding California's methane sources and provides the foundation for effective mitigation strategies. For example, the Energy Commission funded a research aircraft to monitor emissions, leaks of a natural gas system and that came in handy when the Aliso Canyon storage facility sprung a leak, because we were able to deploy and redirect that aircraft to monitor the emissions that were coming from that storage site. Climate science research in addition to funding clean energy technology developed in a demonstration projects, the Energy Commission also supports climate science by funding research and leading state agency efforts to help the energy sector to adapt to climate change impacts. The chair of the Energy Commission also chairs the Climate Action Team Research Working Group, which is comprised of about 20 state agencies and supports climate research by steering the state's climate change assessments. The Energy Commission is a major contributor to the climate change assessments. They provide scientific evaluations of the potential impacts of climate change in California and identify strategies to address the issues. The Energy Commission manages the energy part of the assessment and the Natural Resources Agency is responsible for the research for other sectors of the economy, such as public health, forestry, agriculture, coastal and oceanic resources. The Energy Commission is supporting research that energy utilities are using. For example, a project with SDG&E examines energy infrastructure that is vulnerable to sea level rise, wild fires, inland flooding and other factors. SDG&E is using the information to prepare for extreme events and reduce disruptions to delivery of electricity, and natural gas. The Energy Commission invested $16.6 million in regional climate science in the past five years. Of that, 9.9 million was devoted to studies to clarify climate related risks and adaptation options. In the area of emissions mitigation, the Energy Commission directed 6.7 million to projects improving quantification of methane emissions from natural gas sector. The energy develop research priorities through a public process. We are currently developing our next three year investment plan and it's perfect time to find recommendations to steer the direction of the program. We work with our sister agencies and educational institutions, and other organizations to help develop the plan, and we have research partners in the University, and lab sector which you'll hear more about shortly. I want to close with just a mention of the work that we're doing to reach out to diverse communities. The Energy Commission is committed to ensuring that all communities can benefit from clean and efficient, and resilient energy. In April 2015, the Energy Commission adopted a resolution outlining, formally, expressing its commitment to ensure that California's in the programs that we administer and our diversity goals including increasing participation of diverse business enterprises in Energy Commission funding opportunities. Increasing Energy Commission program benefits and disadvantage communities as defined by CalEnviroScreen and increasing diversity at the California Energy Commission to ensure all Californians have an opportunity to apply for career, and procurement opportunities. We worked with a variety of communities to produce under SB 350, the low income barrier study which examined barriers to participation outlined above and we have put in place a number of actions that include outreach to disadvantaged communities. Meeting with dozens of community leaders, holding sessions using social media to engage the community. And since 2014, the Energy Commission is awarded 50 EPIC projects of either headquarters or a project demonstration sight in a disadvantage community. In 2016, 35.7% of the funding awarded to technology and demonstration appointment under EPIC went to projects that included at least one site in a disadvantaged community. We're making progress. We have more to do, but I wanted to mention our efforts to reach out to that. And with that, I'll close for now and be available to respond to questions.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 148, 'end': 152, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jay Keasling: assemblymember bloom and members of the subcommittee, thank you for holding this important hearing and for asking lawrence berkeley national laboratory to offer testimony. my name is jay. i am here on behalf of lawrence berkeley national laboratory, where i serve as the associate laboratory director for biosciences. i am also a professor of biochemical engineering at the university of california, berkeley, and chief executive officer of the doe sponsored joint bioeenergy institute in emeryville. my testimony will focus on berkley lab's world leading resources and expertise in clean energy, environmental and climate sciences that are not on policies in these areas. berkley lab is part of the us department of energy's national laboratory network, and it's the only lab managed exclusively by the university of california. with more than 3,200 researchers and employees and approximately 1,000 post doctoral fellows, graduate, and undergraduate students, berkeley lab is internationally recognized for its basic and applied research, and for training the next generation of scientists. berkley lab scientists are at the forefront of physics, chemistry, computing, biology, earth and environmental sciences, and energy technologies and is distinguished by it's successful history of bringing teams from these diverse disciplines together to tackle complex problems whose solutions require scientific breakthroughs. with 13 nobel prize winners and a long history of scientific achievement, berkley lab has contributed to the state's and the nation's innovation leadership for more than 80 years. it is important to note that berkeley lab conducts no classified research. before i begin i first want to take a moment to express the lab's deep gratitude to this committee, the energy commission, and the administration for it's support of berkeley lab. the state of california has funded critical clean energy and energy efficiency research at berkeley lab since the 70s. when uc berkeley physicist, art rosenfeld, pioneered the lab's work on energy efficiency. the results of dr rosenfeld's work, the researchers he trained, and the institutional legacy he left at berkeley lab have made an incredible difference in california's and the nation's energy use and is now spreading around the world. in particular, i want to thank this committee for its funding last year that enabled our joint bioenergy institute, which i lead, to compete for a federal grant worth potentially $150 million in federal funds. i am pleased to let you know that with your support we made it to the next round. i was in washington, dc yesterday defending that proposal with my colleagues. after the federal government, the state of california is the lab's second largest source of funding. fy16 and 15 average annual budget authority from california agencies was approximately $10 million. however total contract value from all california agencies, which spans multiple years was $72 million, of which cec was 65 million. with respect to the topics of today's hearing, i'm pleased to discuss berkeley lab's role in advancing solutions to address challenges in earth and environmental science and clean energy. the lab operates a number of world leading facilities for the benefit of researchers who compete for the opportunity to use them. these include the national energy research scientific competing center, or nersc, which operates the world's fifth largest, fastest super computer. the advanced light source, which uses x ray and ultraviolet beams to reveal the atomic and electronic structure of matter, a first step toward designing new materials, just better batteries and inexpensive solar cells. the joint genome institute in walnut creek, which is one of the busiest genome sequencing facilities on the planet. the molecular foundry, which enables us to understand, design, and synthesize nanomaterials. and flex lab, the world's most advanced building efficiency test bed. all of these tools are critical to our environmental research. for example, our supercomputers enable us to map changes in the earth's climate with much greater precision. in 1990, supercomputers made global models of squares 5,000 kilometers across. today, supercomputers operate a million times faster and resolutions of 25 kilometers are possible. within a decade, we except to have supercomputers that will enhance the resolution to one kilometer. precise enough to allow california scientists to build climate models and forecast local impacts with greater statistical certainty. california benefits enormously from our research. in 2015, for example, more than 2,200 of our 6,000 supercomputer users were from california academic institutions, including uc campuses across the state. our facilities help attract world class talent to the university of california and 46 startups have launched from our technologies. our fy16 funding was nearly $900 million. approximately 85% of our funding comes from the us department of energy. approximately half of this amount is devoted to developing strategies to better understand earth and environmental sciences including climate change, develop clean energy technologies and foster us economic leadership. our research related to today's hearings is loosely divided among three of our research areas, earth and environmental sciences, energy technologies and biosciences. in earth and environmental sciences, we have 200 scientists and researchers working to solve urgent complex earth science issues. in 2016 we received approximately $60 million in us funding for these activities that included using microbes to clean up toxins in the environment, improving predictive understanding of climate and extreme events, predicting, protecting and enhancing the ability of earth's ecosystems to absorb greater quantities of atmospheric co2,- and improving the availability and quality of fresh water for agriculture and urban use by better understanding the impacts of droughts and floods and changes in timing and magnitude of snow melts in western us water sheds. in energy technologies, i've already mentioned the work of art rosenfeld, who led berkeley lab. this area is playing a leading role in the development of energy efficiency research, leading to innovations like advanced window coatings. efficiency research leading to electronic fluorescent ballasts for lighting and appliance standards, and these steps have contributed more than $484 billion to the us economy since the 70s. the energy technology area receives $100 million in 2016 from department of energy and they work on cutting building energy consumption by half by 2030. curbing transportation petroleum use through making transportation systems more efficient and improving battery and fuel cell technologies. reinventing the electricity grid to enable 50% of our electricity to come from distributed renewable sources by 2030, and developing new water and energy efficient technologies to reduce the cost of delivering potable water from nontraditional sources. finally, in biosciences we are a leader in using biotechnology to solve critical problems in energy and environment. and we are focusing on strategic goals like developing cost competitive and sustainable bioenergy solutions that use domestic agriculture sources to reduce us dependence on petroleum. understanding the genetic and molecular mechanisms of microorganisms so we can harness microbes and plants as solutions to problems such as environmental remediation. improving human health by better understanding how biological diversity impacts responses to environmental challenges. and developing and demonstrating scalable, flexible, cost effective, sustainable, biologically based manufacturing infrastructure. in 2016, bio-sciences received approximately $130 million in department of energy funding. in summary, berkley lab is pleased to partner with the state to continue critical energy and environmental research. i'd be pleased to answer any questions you have and serve as a resource for your moving forward. thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 20, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 183, 'end': 186, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2003, 'end': 2016, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2083, 'end': 2092, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6138, 'end': 6151, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Shannon Muir: good morning, i would first like to thank the chair and the subcommittee for the invitation to testify today. my name is muir and i'm a senior program associate for the california council on science and technology. otherwise, known as ccst. i'll start by giving some background about ccst and then i would like to build off the testimony of my colleagues. we've already heard from the cec, carb, the uc and i'm very pleased to have a representative from the berkeley lab here. i'm going to focus on ccst's laboratory affiliates, which form a network of scientific experts that ccst can help you tap into. ccst itself is a nonprofit organization that was established via a california assembly resolution in 1988 by sam farr and john garamendi. ccst is a national academies style organization that convenes experts from california's best academic and research institutions to provide nonpartisan objective advice to california state government on policy issues involving science. so, that's why we're here to connect california decision makers like you to california's best scientists. ccst's core funding comes from our sustaining institutions which include the ucs, the csus, all the community colleges, stanford and caltech and then all of the department of energy and nasa laboratories in the state which include lawrence livermore, lawrence berkeley, sandia, the slac national accelerator laboratory, nasa ames and nasa jpl. the department of energy and nasa labs together make up our ccst laboratory affiliates program, and you can see a summary of the labs in the information that i provided. for more than a decade, ccst has been partnering with our laboratory affiliates to provide california decision makers with nonpartisan trusted information on a wide variety of topics. ccst recently worked with scientists from lawrence berkeley lab among others to assess the impacts of hydraulic fracturing in california per sb 4, which is by by paddling in 2014. and currently, sb 826 from the budget act of 2016. ccst is working with scientists from our laboratory partners to produce a study about natural gas storage facilities after the methane leak in aliso canyon and that has been brought up previously. in fact, as we speak, ccst leadership is meeting at lawrence berkeley with expert scientists from across the state to talk about that very study. many of the laboratory affiliates can trace their origins to our national investment in the military research during world war ii and the cold war, and then the space race. but today, the laboratory affiliates have a combined annual budget of about $5.5 billion and provide jobs for thousands of californians. lawrence livermore alone has a budget of about 1.7 billion and employs of about 6,500 workers. although each of the labs has a distinct mission, the portfolios the labs include all facets of assets of nation security from ensuring safety and reliability of the nations nuclear stock pile to protecting the energy grid from threats both natural and man-made, but what do the labs specifically do for california? i'm going to give you some brief examples of the work that the labs have done that benefits california and you each have one pagers on each of the labs in your packets. so as the chair mentioned, california has set ambitious goals in terms of co2 reduction, vehicle efficiency and renewable energy. these goals may not be achievable with today's technology and the laboratory affiliates are in the prime position to invent new technology that will allow california to become less reliant on fossil fuel, more energy independent and more agriculturally efficient. the laboratory affiliates, have a long history of helping california decision makers with issues that require scientific expertise. for example, nasa jpl uses remote sensing technology to measure water in the snow pack in the air in the sierra nevada mountains and jpl can also detect changes and threats to critical infrastructure such as the bay delta levies and provide information to emergency responders after natural disasters. nasa ames which is located in silicon valley has partnered extensively with the california department of water resources to integrate there satellite data and nasa ames also partnered with the california division of boating and waterways to map a aquatic weed growth and distribution in that sacramento and san joaquin river delta. the slac national accelerator laboratory has partnered with industry to develop a way to collect data and manage the electrical grid as it incorporates more sources of renewable energy. sandia as provided counsel for the gas leak at the porter ranch and is also helping to develop a zero-emmision hydrogen fairy. lawrence livermore has been studying the effects of climate change for years and also the connection between climate change and drought, cloud formation, wildfires and ocean health. and as dr. keisling mentioned, lawrence berkeley is home to the flex lab which allows users to test energy efficient building systems under real wold conditions to ensure that buildings will be as green as possible before construction even begins. the berkeley lab is also participating in the global food initiative which aims to develop scientific approaches to increase food production while simultaneously decreasing input of water and fertilizer. my take home message is that california's department of energy and nasa labs are an important resource for california's decision makers. beyond their economic impact, federal labs are an independent trusted source of information to all who work with it in science and technology and ccst is here to help you connect to their expertise. so, how can federal labs and ccst help state leaders? ccst can convene federal lab experience to produce the independent assessments and reports like they have done before with the sb 4 study on fracking and we are currently dealing with sb 826 on the natural gas storage facilities and on biomethane and ccst can also help state leaders navigate our federal labs to find experts. and information, such as informational hearings, bill analysis and other briefings. californians look to you to take on climate change, renewable energy, cybersecurity, resource scarcity and international competitiveness and these federal labs stand ready to help. so when you have a problem that is technically complex and politically sensitive, call us. that concludes my remarks and i will be happy to take questions.
[{'start': 121, 'end': 125, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 714, 'end': 722, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 727, 'end': 741, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1315, 'end': 1333, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4719, 'end': 4737, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4912, 'end': 4920, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
 : Absolutely. In fact, I brought our 16, 17 annual research plan. I'll leave that behind. But in addition to that, every study that we do gets published on the website the final report we'll make sure that we get that to you as well.
[]
Anne McLeod: Good afternoon, chairs and members of the committees, Anne McLeod, California Hospital Association, on behalf of all the hospitals in California. The new federal rule that Ms. Cantwell described was finalized in two parts as she indicated towards the end of her testimony. First, in May of 2016, and then a second set of provisions on January 17th, 2017, three days before the inauguration. The two rules will have a significant impact on how the hospital fee program will be implemented, but the provisions in that second rule are even more damaging for that program. The Medi-Cal program fails to cover the cost of treating Medi-Cal patients in hospitals by more than $8 billion a year. The hospital fee program is used to draw down those unclaimed federal funding, those dollars, to help mitigate less than half of that massive shortfall. Nearly every general acute care hospital or hospital system benefits from the hospital fee program, including public hospitals, rural hospitals, and all safety net hospitals. The funding follows the patient. Therefore, there are several methods for making payments, including fee for service, supplemental payments, and as Mary Cantwell mentioned, managed care supplemental payments. The managed care plans, over the last eight years, have been very good partners in helping get these payments to the hospitals that treat the Medi-Cal patients. The current method of making these supplemental payments through the Medi-Cal managed care plans is not aligned with the requirements in the final rules. They are considered pass through payments, and they must be phased out starting July 1, 2017, just a few short months away. As pass through payments are phased out, they can be replaced with an allowable directed payment. These directed payments can be an add-on to the adjudicated claims by a fixed amount or a flat percent. And quite frankly, it's really not much different than how we are passing through the dollars now. But this nuance creates two significant problems that we want you to be aware of. First, the final rule states that these allowed directed payments can only be made to network providers. This will impact the ability to make a supplemental payment for all Medi-Cal patients. Even non-contracted or out of network patients that receive care in a children's hospital, or a tertiary care hospital that provides some of the highest acuity and specialty care to children or others with extremely complex health issues. These payments on an annual basis are potentially about $2 billion a year, or about 20% of the entire hospital fee program. If we can't find a solution for this problem, it'll be difficult for CHA to support this funding strain continuing. The second issue, the directed payments must be made on current adjudicated claims rather than utilizing, than using utilization trends to calculate a lump sum payment. And while we don't anticipate, there being much of a change about the distribution among the hospitals of the payments. It does raise a number of questions on how we resolve related to ensuring that hospitals are not at risk for excess directive payments made to the health plans, and how health plans are not at risk for making directed payments if they haven't had the funds allocated by the department. Let me give you an example. If funds are allocated to a health plan based on historic utilization of say, 100,000 medical impatient days, and the plan only experiences 75,000 days in that period, the plan will be holding excess funds with no ability to get those funds to the hospitals. Those funds represent hospital dollars matched with federal funds. It is not state money, it is the hospital fee program and the federal dollars. This guessing game could result in hundreds of millions of dollars being at risk to hospitals. Another scenario that CHA can't support. On the flip side of that example, the health plan could actually experience more utilization. Let's say they experienced 125,000 inpatient days, yet they only received funds to cover 100,000 inpatient days. The plan could be at risk for making those payments as directed by the Department of Healthcare Services. And again, CHA does not support putting the plans at financial risk to pass this dollars through. As Mary said, these are really complex issues, probably some of the toughest that we've had to grapple with for a long time. What is at risk if we don't find solutions? I think that is the big question. The hospital fee could be much smaller than any of us want it to be, billions of dollars less. This means less money for hospital care from Medi-Cal beneficiaries and it means that for every dollar we might have to shrink the program, the state loses $0.24. That's because the state shares in the net benefit of the hospital fee program. And is currently planning on $1 billion of new general fund revenue for the state budget in 1718. If we had to reduce the size of the hospital fee program by half, representing the Medicaid managed care payments, the estimated amount of the phase out portion, that could cause the state general fund up to a half $1 billion every year. Happy to answer any question now or after the panel.
[{'start': 54, 'end': 65, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 176, 'end': 184, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1165, 'end': 1178, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4187, 'end': 4190, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4277, 'end': 4281, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Erica Murray: good afternoon, i'm erica jonah murray. i'm the president and ceo of the california association of public hospitals and health systems. i really appreciate that opportunity to speak before you. and i especially appreciate the staff's work in putting this together so we can all learn about this really important issue, so thank you. i have never used a powerpoint in this room, so and i am not terribly technologically savvy, okay.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brianna Lierman: well, a two-hour hearing dedicated to hundreds of pages of federal regulation, and i'm sitting at the seat apparently with flu bugs. so i'll try to stay focused and then i'll follow up with anyone. i have to think later if i catch the flu. i'm not making eye contact with anyone in particular. brianna erica lierman, ceo of the local health plans of california.
[{'start': 294, 'end': 315, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mari Cantwell: all right, thanks again. this is mari brianna cantwell with department of healthcare services. so, we were asked to speak on several issues, as was just laid out. so i'm going to cover the first four and then turn it over to my colleague sarah brooks, who will talk more in depth about the network adequacy requirements. and the proposal that the department recently released. so the first item i'm going to touch on is the quality rating system. so the rule does require that states implement a quality rating system for managed care plans and report on managed care compliance, plan compliance. cms is actually expecting to develop their own standard system over the next several years through a stakeholder process. we certainly anticipate that it would look potentially somewhat similar to their medicare star rating system. once they've developed that is that when states have to come into compliance with the quality rating system. they do allow for states to implement an alternative system with their approval. given the timeline, like i said, it's going to be several years before this requirement becomes effective. but i do want to highlight all the work that dhcs has already been doing in this area, and how it will serve us as we come to meet the effective date of the quality rating system. so as we've talked about in both of the committees before on our medi-cal managed care plan side, we've been issuing quarterly performance dashboards that really look at things like hedis measures and utilization. and grievances and appeals that we publish every quarter. and we actually, before the publication of this rule, we're already working on a quality rating system for our medi-cal managed care program. and so that is still in development. similarly on the county mental health side, under the requirements of our waiver, we already are reporting on performance dashboards for the county mental health plans. and then similarly we have reporting that we do for the dental managed care plans. so we're actually going to continue that work and likely come out with the quality rating system for the medical managed care plan some time later this year. in advance of whenever cms actually develops their standard system. and then once that gets released, we'll certainly then at that point in time evaluate whether we will move to the cms standard system or apply to use our own. we already touched briefly earlier on the new medical loss ratios. so just as a reminder, there is a new requirement in the rule that plans report on mlrs. but it does provide states a bit of flexibility. one in how the mlrs are going to be reported, so whether it's by individual aid category. so do we keep adults and kids separate from others or across the entire medicaid business. and then again, as we talked about before, whether to implement a recoupment if plans don't meet the minimum mlr. in addition, the rule has an element where states are being required to use that mlr information in future rate setting to really target that plans would be meeting at a minimum an 85% mrr. although states can set a minimum that's higher than that. so, i mentioned earlier where we currently are with the proposal on the medi-cal managed care side. we haven't traditionally had an mlr in the medi-cal managed care side, but we have measured it from time to time. and i would say, in general, what we see from our plans is anywhere from 80 to 95% mlr. so i don't think it's going to be a huge change to have that minimum of 85% but certainly there could be some impacts. on the dental managed care side, however, is a different story. our current contracted requirement for medical loss ratios on dental managed care is 70%. and so certainly we anticipate a shift to 85% potentially having significant impacts. we actually commented on this issue, when cms released the rule in draft form. because we were very concerned about the concept of taking a minimum mlr that really was developed for a full scope coverage program. and applying that to a specialized program like dental. and the reason being that for dental plans or other states have vision plans in the same situation. those plans have very much lower capitation rates, right? in the 20s and 30s and 40s, not in the hundreds of dollars. and so the fixed cost of administration don't go down that much compared to the total cost of the services. so you actually expect an mlr to be lower than what you would expect from a full service plan. so we are concerned about the potential impact on our dental managed care plans and sustainability of that. and what impact it might have on their rates, since again, we're going to have to use the mlr to target an 85% in the rate setting. and so we're going to continue with our dental manage care plans on what that might mean for them and how we will comply with that part of the rule. the third piece i'm going to touch on, i mentioned that the states are required to have what's called a beneficiary support system. that's effective july 1st, 2018. the system really has three major areas of focus. the first is something that will provide assistance to beneficiaries to help them understand how managed care operates, how to navigate the system, and how to choose providers. the second is choice counseling and enrollment assistance to help them understand what are their plan options and to help them select a plan. and finally, the third requirement is to provide assistance for those who access long-term services and support through managed care. and we are required to provide this support through a variety of methods including online, by phone, and in person. states do have flexibility in how they establish this beneficiary support system. and so what we're really looking at is what resources do we already have in place that meet some of these needs? and then where do those need to be enhanced in order to meet the requirements of the rule? so, for example, we already have our healthcare options contractor that already does enrollment assistance and choice counseling for both our medi-cal managed plans and our dental managed care plans. and then because of the way the county system operates, it's not a choice process, right? and so that doesn't really apply to them. we're also currently in the process of combining our separate mental health ombuds and our managed care ombuds programs which assist beneficiaries with navigating managed care and a variety of other issues. and so, we will be looking at how we utilize that and whether that needs to be expanded for dental and substance abuse disorder services. we also have the coordinated care initiatives ombuds program, that is utilized to assist with long term services and support. we're really looking on building on those elements and where we might need to add additional enhancements. and then finally, the last thing i'm going to touch on relates to grievances and appeals. as i mentioned, the final rule did make some significant changes to the grievances and appeals process for beneficiaries. they really made these changes that's probably the one example where they were fairly consistent with the medicare program as well as the private marketplace. so those key changes include beneficiaries being able to file a grievance at any time. currently for us, we require that to happen within 180 days. one of the most significant changes for both plans and beneficiaries is that the rule actually requires that a beneficiary go through the plan's appeal process before they can go to a state fair hearing. the way that we operate currently in california, they can do that. they can do both simultaneously, or they can just do a state fair hearing. so this will be a change for both plans and the beneficiaries. and because of this, we are also extending the timeline for when a beneficiary can request a state fair hearing because of the additional process that they have to go through. plans are limited to one level of appeal only, and then there are certain timeframes that were shortened for how quickly plans must resolve appeals. 30 days for resolution of standard appeals and 72 hours for expedited appeals. so with that i'll turn it over to sarah brooks to talk about the network adequacy components.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 238, 'end': 250, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8229, 'end': 8241, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sarah Brooks: Good afternoon. Sarah Brooks, Deputy Director over Healthcare Delivery Systems at the Department Of Health Care Services. As Ms. Cantwell mentioned, I'll talk today about network adequacy and its applicability to our delivery systems as is set forth in the final role. I want to clarify that the effective dates for these requirements is July 1 of 2018. And so we will be continuing to work on these in the near future. With regards to network adequacy, the final rule sets forth requirements, but provides flexibilities to states to develop standards, as long as certain considerations are made when setting those standards. In developing the standards that we've proposed, our thinking is that it is important to set a floor that plans must meet but at the same time, provide for reasonable, timely access to care for beneficiaries. We've developed these standards with the beneficiaries and plans in mind. Our priority is to promote access to services that beneficiaries will need while balancing the plans ability to meet them as well. We carefully consider the plans existing networks and the reality of providers that actually exist in the state when setting them. We are also aiming to set standards that are not complex and are easy to understand and measure. As Ms. Cantwell noted earlier, these requirements apply to all four areas of the delivery systems as well. For Medical managed care and dental manage care health plans, California already has network adequacy standards in place today. You'll hear a little bit from our partners at DMHC later today about that. Both for time and distance, and timely access. These standards are set forth in both knox keene regulations. But and also, in contracts between managed care and dental managed care health plans and the Department of Health Care Services. For county specialty mental health plans, network standards do not currently exist and thus, it will take a little more work for these systems in the department to implement network adequacy standards for them. For DMCODS health plan that Ms. Cantwell talked about earlier, we will utilize network adequacy standards per the requirements under the waiver as we initially implement them and they roll out in California. The final rule does require network adequacy standards in a number of areas we establish. They'd be established for primary care, specialty care, hospital, OB-GYN, behavioral health, pharmacy, pediatric, dental. And also for LTSS services that are required when beneficiaries are actually travelling to providers, as opposed to when providers are travelling to beneficiaries. The department recently released a final role network adequacy proposal that is out for stakeholder comment right now. Ms. Leirman mentioned it earlier. Comments are due today, however we do continue to welcome feedback. When setting the proposed standards in the department's network adequacy proposal, we first considerd standards that already existed today. So we looked at knox keene standards, we looked at what was included in our contracts with our Medical managed care plans and our dental managed care plans, and we looked at what was included in the 1115 waiver. Whenever possible, we really mirrored those standards. So we kept in place the standards, or we proposed the standards that are already in place today to continue under our proposal. Those standards include for Medical managed care and dental managed care plans, primary care, and hospital time and distance standards. And then primary care specialist mental health and pharmacist timely access for non urgent appointments as applicable. When setting any new standards prescribed in the final rule, when we didn't have standards already in place, we considered a number of different things. Many of them are required by CMS. And examples of those are expected enrollment and utilization of services, characteristics and needs of specific populations. Number and types of network providers, and geographic location of network providers. In addition, we also considered other factors such as Medicare standards, we utilized geo-mapping and looked at state medical board data. We also took a look at what current alternate access standards have been submitted to the department entity and may see for consideration purposes. When developing our core specialist list, we considered the specialists that are most critically used and also the reality of what specialists are available across the state in California. We excluded facility-based specialists such as anesthesiologists because time and distance standards really don't make sense and really are not applicable to them. The final rule requires network adequacy standards for LTSS services, when the beneficiary is traveling to the provider. So in this instance for example, IHSS, MSSP services, we wouldn't set standards, because the provider is going to the beneficiary. We also did not set standards when the beneficiary was residing at a facility such as a skilled nursing facility because the beneficiary, again, was not traveling to the provider. I also wanted to touch on the fact that there is an ability, as Ms. Leirman mentioned, to have alternative access standards requested. So we do work in partnership with the Department of Managed Healthcare to approve this alternative access standards. This would occur in a place such as a rural area, where there just simply aren't providers. Or there aren't certain types of specialists available, and so we are able to approve separate standards than what is set forth in the core standard requirements. I want to talk a little bit about monitoring today, so how do we make sure that the plans actually meet these requirements, and how will we do so moving forward? We will continue to build on our existing processes to monitor our plans as we implement these additional requirements. Examples of what we do today include plan submission of their provider networks. They submit grievances and appeal reports ombudsman and state for a hearing reports, we work with them on corrective action plans. And more recently, we have started to work with our independent entity, our External Quality Review Organization or EQRO, to do quarterly surveys of timely access for our providers with our health plans. I want to note that DHCS will also have to annually certify our networks to CMS, that's something that Ms. Cantwell will need to sign off on when it is submitted to the federal government. But, and we will collect data annually, so that we can make sure the individual plans continue to meet those network adequacy standards so that she can sign off on them. One way that DHCS does intend to monitor health plan compliances through a new system that we have built, called the managed care provider file. This new system collects data monthly from our health plans through an automated system that will reject data if it is not accurate. It collects full information about health plan networks down to the delegated level, and allows us to collect information about provider panel size and whether or not they are open or closed. It also provides automatic reports about individual and all health plan performance in compliance with network adequacy standards. This is a new system that we really have just recently implemented and we're really excited about all of the opportunities that it will provide for us. Findings from this system and from our monitoring program will be included in the managed care program report that we will submit to CMS annually. This is a requirement that is set forth in the final rule. And this report will be made publicly available on our website along with postings of our network adequacy standard which is also required in the final rule. Our proposal as I mentioned is currently out for public comment and it includes additional detail than what I talked about today. We welcome stakeholder feedback on it. Thank you for the opportunity to talk with you and we're happy to answer any questions.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 129, 'end': 137, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1275, 'end': 1283, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2059, 'end': 2067, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2734, 'end': 2741, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5159, 'end': 5166, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6403, 'end': 6411, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Marta Green: Thank you. So as you said, my name is Marta Green. I'm the Chief Deputy Director of the Department of Managed Health Care. I want to thank you all for having us here today. The DMHC license and regulate health plans that provide coverage to more than 25 million Californians. We regulate the vast majority of commercial plans and the majority of the medical managed care plans in California. Our mission is to protect consumers' healthcare rights and ensure a stable healthcare delivery system. We do this by administering the Knox-Keene Act. There are many topics in the Knox-Keene Act, but two of the big ones are network adequacy and financial reporting. And those are the two that the Committee staff has asked me to touch on today. So first, I'll talk about network adequacy. Plans provide to the DMHC, information on their networks in a variety of ways. A critical among those is the plan's annual network submissions. Plans submit their entire network to the DMHC on March 31st of each year. And this report also includes the results of all grievances related to networks throughout the year. All health plan policies and procedures must comply with the geographic standards set forth in the Knox-Keene Act. Specifically, 15 miles and 30 minutes for access to primary care physicians. And there's a list of types of physicians that fall under that category for the DMHC, as well as to hospitals from either their home or their workplace. Some health plans do request alternative access standards for many of the reasons that we've talked about here today. And we analyzed those alternative access standards against permitted justifications in the act. And that can be such as a lack of practicing providers in a specific geographic region. Generally, all our alternative access standards are limited to specific affected zip codes. For all other provider types, so non-primary care, non-hospital, the Knox-Keene Act requires that all health plans provide reasonable access. So to identify reasonable access, we look at access to specialists at a specific plan and compare that to all other plans that operate in that similar geographic region. As well as access standards or benchmarks that are generally accepted in the marketplace, such as the Medicare access standards. So to perform this analysis we used software, as does everybody these days. And we use a Geographical Information System, or GIS system software, to map the distances that enrollees must travel for a large number of provider types. So the primary care providers we look at include family practice, general practice, internal medicine, OBGYN, and pediatrics. We looked at a very wide array of specialty types, I won't name them all, but they do include psychiatry, HIV-AIDS specialists, mental health professionals, and hospital based providers. Our software also maps the location of hospitals, in-patient hospice facilities, ambulatory surgical clinics, and urgent care locations. Another important aspect of our network adequacy review is our timely access standards. These standards require health plans to maintain provider networks sufficient to ensure that people can get a timely access to an appointment. The requirements are based on the individual's specific clinical condition, and they set forth certain standards for types of appointments. So 48 hours for urgent care when no prior authorization was required. All of the way up to 15 days for non-urgent appointments with a specialty physician or other ancillary providers. So to demonstrate compliance, health plans conduct an annual telephone survey of the providers to assess availability of appointments. This information has then compiled together into a report given to the DMHC. We review the report, issue findings regarding the data, and make recommendations for changes. Unfortunately, the DMHC's 2015 report issued earlier this year, stated that the DMHC was unable to determine whether health plans met the timely access standards due to significant inaccuracies in the data. The report also detailed a number of next steps for health plans in the DMHC, to design to improve the accuracy of the data reporting so that we will have a better report next year. These steps do include some data validation steps, vendor requirements, as well as some enforcement investigations. Last week, we held a stakeholder meeting with plans, providers, other interested parties, to discuss these next steps. The next topic I've been asked to address is the DMHC's role in ensuring health plans meet the affordable care act's Medical Loss Ratio, or MLR, for short requirements. So to ensure that consumers receive value for their premium dollar, the Affordable Care Act and California State law require commercial health plans to meet certain MLR requirements. So health plans offering coverage in the individual and small group market must spend at least 80% of premium revenue on clinical services and activities that improve health care quality. And health plans in the large group market must meet an 85% standard. That means that health plans are limited in the percent of premium revenue that they can spend on administrative costs or profit. Health plans that fail to meet these Medical Loss Ratio requirements must provide rebates to consumers. I won't get into the details of what falls into each category, but if you have questions about what's in the clinical and what's in health care quality, versus what's in administration profit, I'm happy to go over that. So since the new requirements were enacted, California consumers have received a total of 206 million in rebates for the five reporting years of 2011 to 2015. This breaks down to a total of 64 million in rebates for the individual market. 139 million in rebates for the small group market, and 3 million in rebates for the large group market. We can audit health plans for compliance with the Medical Loss Ratio requirements for commercial coverage. We review their reporting that comes into the DMHC, and we determine whether or not to conduct an audit based upon that reporting. So, for an example, if a Medical Loss Ratio report came into the DMHC that was very, very close to the threshold, that may trigger an audit. When we conduct a Medical Loss Ratio examination, a health plan must submit a significant amount of data, which the DMHC reviews to verify the plan's representations on the reporting form. We review the validity of the data on expenses and premiums including the appropriateness of plan allocations for expenses, taxes, and revenues. And reviews the allocation and classification of expenditures for quality improvement activities. We can, under state law, require a health plan to pay an additional rebate to consumers if the examination identifies the plan inaccuracies. We have completed three Medical Loss Ratio examinations since reporting began, and we're in the process of completing three more. Now, we post the final reports of all Medical Loss Ratio exams on our website. In addition to our Medical Loss Ratio of commercial plans, we have historically performed some limited Medical Loss Ratio work on behalf of the Department of Health Care Services through an inter-agency agreement. This inter-agency agreement is set to terminate on June 30th of this year. This concludes my prepared remarks. And I'm happy to answer questions.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Nguy: linda mari nguy with western center on law and poverty. we act as a support center for the health consumer alliance, a statewide collaborative of consumer assistance operated by community-based, local legal aids. the final rules have significant implications for low income californians, as nearly 80% of medical members or 11 million, receive care through a managed care plan. california, as was mentioned, has some of the strongest consumer protections in place, many of which are borrowed from the knox-keene act. so urge conformity to ensure uniformity across delivery systems. i will focus my comments on network adequacy requirements as well as due process rights. as ms. cantwell had noted, county mental health plans organized deliver systems for substance use, disorder services, and denti-cal plans, are subject to the same rules as the medi-cal managed care plans. so we urge coordination among divisions throughout the department to ensure consistent implementation of the rules. in terms of network adequacy, dhcs proposes to implement the standards through health plan contracts, all plan letters, and county information notices. although we appreciate the opportunity to provide feedback, dhcs must establish and update these standards through the the regulatory process to comply with the california administrative procedures act. the scope of these standards qualifies as regulations and are not subject to any exemption from rule making. as dhcs mentioned, they proposed established standards based on three county types. although we would prefer one standard across the state, we recognize california's diversity and the goal to limit exceptions, which may necessitate designating areas with different standards. therefore, we recommend collapsing large and medium counties together, and applying the large county standards while keeping rule to small county standards the same. regardless of how standards are determined, any exception must be limited as they are now to the discrete zip code level, not city or county level. the standards for these exemptions should be clear and transparent. where the plan must document that there are no available providers in the plan's geographic region in or out of network. while time and distance standards are important, having an in-network provider across the street means very little to a patient who cannot schedule an appointment, because that provider is not accepting new patients or has a wait list that spans months. therefore, we emphasis the importance of monitoring and verifying provider directory and timely access through interagency agreements with the department of managed health care, as well as other efforts. in terms of due process, dhcs proposes to implement its grievance and appealed processing change through all plan letter. but we believe this should also be done through regulation to ensure consistency, clarity, and compliance. now that the final rules require the member to exhaust the plan level appeal process before being able to request a state fair hearing. we recommend dhcs prohibit plans from requiring members to participate in multiple levels of internal review before seeking a fair hearing. the new rule also gives states the option to require a voluntary external medical review process as part of their appeal. currently, consumers in knox-keene licensed plans have access to an independent panel of medical experts, through an independent medical review imr. consumers and county organized health system codes that are not knox-keene licensed can not access the imr process. for these consumers, their only recourse is a state fair hearing before the administrative law judge, a lengthy process that is determined by someone with legal, not medical training. to illustrate the need for an independent medical review, a 28 year-old man in lane county with a chronic illness, had his medication denied by his cosplan as being ineffective. this was a major dispute between the consumer's doctors, and the plans and the medical director. both of whom appeared at the state fair hearing. the administrative law judge conducting the hearing had no idea which doctor to believe. and ultimately asked the consumer to seek a third opinion from another infectious disease specialist. the whole process from hearing requests to seeing a third specialist took several months. and the consumer would have been much better served by going to imr. therefore, we urge dhcs to make an imr available to all medi-cal managed care members so that beneficiaries' rights aren't dependent on what county they live in. with the shift in the medi-cal delivery system tomanaged care due to mandatory enrollment, it is critical that members throughout the state have access to medically necessary services in a fair and consistent manner. given the uncertainty of federal regulations, and for conformity of knox-keene, we recommend codifying these changes in state statute. thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 678, 'end': 686, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tam Ma: good afternoon, mr. chairs and members. my name is tam linda ma, and i'm with health access california. we are the state wide health care consumer advocacy coalition, working for quality and affordable healthcare for all californians. so today i'm going to focus my comments on network adequacy, and then comment on a couple of other items. and health access actually sponsored most of the underlying legislation, that established the network adequacy requirements that have in california law today. and we've also worked very hard to, over the years, to strengthen oversight, over plans and making sure they do meet those network adequacy requirements. so the whole point of network adequacy is to ensure that health plans have enough doctors in their network, so that consumers get the care that they need, when they need it, in a language that they can understand. so as you've heard from other speakers, we have different ways of measuring network adequacy. it's through provider directories, which are supposed to list all the providers that are in network, so that consumers can find somebody who's in their network, who is taking new patients, where they're located and everything. we have timely access standards that ensure that patients don't have to wait a long time to get an appointment with the doctor. we also have time and distance standards, so that people don't have to travel too far to see a doctor. so, i think my main message today about the federal medicaid managed care rule and the work that california needs to do around that work adequacy, is not complicated. because we already have an existing structure and framework for time and distance standards in california law. so as other speakers mentioned, you know, we have time and distance standards for primary care and for hospital care. and it is a single, statewide standard, that provides a floor, and then there is a process for alternative access standards. that plans can require us from the regulators, and those are determined on a case by case basis. looking at situations such as, or factors such as the uniqueness of a service, whether it's an urban or rural area, what the population density is in a particular area. the distribution of consumers that are enrolled in the plans network versus the doctors that are available to provide a service. so we think that existing framework that is there now for time and distance standards, and timely access standards, is what the state should follow when implementing time and distance standards for the new provider types that are required under the federal regulations. and the standards that we have now apply across the different lines of business, across different kinds of plans. so the same standards apply to the medical plans as they do to commercial plans. so, consumers know and expect the same standards no matter what kind of plan they are enrolled in. i also want to note that we already do have time and distance standards for specialists in other areas. so for example, the california department of insurance for the insurance products that are regulated by cdi, they have a requirement of 30 miles, or 60 minutes for specialists. as does the department of industrial relations for provider networks and workers compensation. they also have a 30 miles, 60 minute standard, and the same with medicare. so there is already folks out there in other situations that have come up with standards, and we think that's a good starting point, to look at applying these to the medical managed care plans. so we, we'll be submitting written comments in response to dhcs's proposals, and we'll share those with members of the committee. but i do want to say that, the way dhcs has proposed, approaching the time and distance standards, is a little bit overly complicated, and it doesn't actually guarantee that consumers have access to care. so dhcs's proposal is based by county and county population, and we don't think that makes a whole lot of sense. just because every, most counties whether it's los angeles or santa barbara, sacramento, sonoma counties, and others, vary in population density and vary in geographic reach. so having a single standard within the county, based on population, doesn't make any sense. and we do think that the existing framework that we have now, with a single floor for the state, and then alternative standards available depending if a plan requests it, would be a more sensible approach. and i think you know alongside having a standard that's consistent with existing law, is also important to have monitoring and enforcement that's consistent with what we're already doing as well. so right now, we have existing enforcement mechanisms to monitor network adequacy, monitoring plan networks. and ms green talked about it, and along with folks over at dhcs talked about what they do now to monitor access to care. and so we think that whatever time and distance standards that are applied to specialists and other provider types, should undergo the same kind of monitoring and oversight. and this would really allow the regulators to look at network adequacy and provide oversight or plans in a holistic way. because this is not just about whether plans are meeting time and distance standards, but as ms. wei alluded to, it's about whether people are getting those appointments in a timely manner, whether they're getting them the language assistance that they are entitled to. and i think, want to echo ms. lay's comments too about the need to do this through the statutory and regulatory process. we do disagree with dhcs's proposal to do this through a sub-regulatory process, through like all plan letters and guidance through plans. we do think that they do need to go through a rule making process, and that consistent with other network adequacy requirements, this also should be done in statute and applied to the, be included in the knox keene act. so that the dmhc which is the primary regulator of manage care in california, can conduct the enforcement and oversight that they already do now as well. and so that's really like what i want to say today about network adequacy, i just want to address two other issues quickly. the first is, the external medical review option, that the rule highlights. and this deals with giving consumers the opportunity to appeal to an outside entity, if the health plant denies care that they think they need. but for most medical consumers, they already have access to the independent medical review process at dmhc for the 2 million or so people that are in co's plans that are not knox keene license right now. they don't have an opportunity to use the imr process, so as ms. lay stated, these folks have to ask for a state fair hearing, and appear before an administrative law judge. that takes a long time, a lot longer than the imr process right now. and it's really an inappropriate process for people to have to use and go through, to get medical care that is often time sensitive and much needed. i'm a former legal aid attorney, and i have represented clients before state administrative law judges, and they are the worst people to try to explain medical conditions to, they are not doctors, they are lawyers. and so for the doctors and folks on the panel who have had medical training, you wouldn't want a lawyer kind of stepping in your shoes to make judgments about what is medically needed care. and as consumer advocates, we don't think that those folks are the best people to make those decisions. so as a result, we do think that all of the medicaid managed care plans should be knox keene licensed, so that the consumers in those plans can avail themselves to the imr process. and also have the same kind of consumer protections that are available to most medicaid managed care plans. so that they, you know have the same, can expect the same kind of oversight over networks and network adequacy. so that, we also don't create separate and duplicative processes in state government. and then, one last note on provider directories. we did compare the requirements in the medicaid managed care rule with what's in california law, law now thanks to senator hernandez's sb137. i think by and large california's law is much stronger than the requirement of the federal rule. and, there are some small differences and we know that the state regulators know at tmhc and cdi are working with plans to ensure the plan, plans are in compliance with state law. and like, kind of reconciling the small differences with the federal rule. but, unlike, we don't think, you know, any work, legislatively, that needs to be done at this point on provider directories. and with that, i'm happy to take any questions.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 26, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 51, 'end': 63, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 4778, 'end': 4783, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5284, 'end': 5287, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5487, 'end': 5490, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8199, 'end': 8208, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sarah Steenhausen: Good afternoon. Thank you, member of the Health Committees. It's great to be here. My name is Sarah Steenhausen. I'm with the SCAN Foundation. We're a non-profitable charitable foundation. That's focused on improving the continuum of care so people can age with dignity and Independence. What I'm going to focus on today are the long term services and supports provisions of the managed care regulations, that impact older adults and people with disabilities. In order to highlight the importance of these regulations in our continuum of care, I want to start off with a very brief story of a woman named Gloria who is dual eligible for both Medicare and Medical. She's been hospitalized several times over the past few years due to multiple strokes and having fallen in her home. After hospitalization, she's been placed into skilled nursing facility care for temporary time for rehabilitation. And then, she's transitioned home. She was able to transition home because she had the support of her daughter who lived a few miles away. But the challenge for her daughter has been weaving together a range of services and supports that can meet her mother's needs in the community. And as time has progressed, she's found it very hard to find a variety of services that would meet her mother's needs in the home and in the community setting. And so, her daughter's is Fearing that she might have to put her mother into long term nursing home placement which is really not anyone's desire ultimately in the end. To address this problem of a significantly fragmented system, our state has endeavored to move towards a system of managed long term services and supports. So this enables managed care entities to assume responsibility not only for the healthcare services side of the ledger but for specified long-term services and supports. California authorized it's movement towards managed long-term services and supports as part of the coordinated care initiative, which is a demonstration in seven of our California's counties that was implemented beginning in 2012. So the regulations, when they were finalized last year, did a lot to improve the system of care and build on some of the system components that were outlined in the Coordinated Care Initiative. And what I want to do now is highlight some of the provisions that are really critical to the needs of older adults and people with disabilities who are in managed LTSS and the CCI counties. The first, that has already been highlighted, is the development of network adequacy standards. Before the federal regulations were finalized, there have been no requirements for LTSS network adequacy standards. And basically what this means is that right now, two of the Home and Community-Based Services Programs that are included within the managed LTSS programs. One is the Community Based Adult Services Program, or CBAS, and the Multipurpose Senior Services Program, or MSSP. Both of these programs have reported significant waitlists or inability for consumers to access services. For example, the MSSP program in the seven CCI counties reports that waitlists, average wait time of anywhere between 30 days and 365 days for people in the CCI counties to receive services in that program. For the CBAS program, which actually is a state-wide Medi-Cal Manage Care Benefit, they have centers only operating in 26 of our state's 58 counties. So if you're a beneficiary that resides in one of the very rural areas of the state, one of those 32 counties, you might not be able to receive community based adult services. So, we did provide feedback to the department and the development of the proposed network adequacy standards. We believe that the intent of the federal standards was not met in the way the department to find its proposal. And we're actually looking for the state to establish a task force to thoughtfully consider how to develop LTSS network adequacy standards. The second component that I wanted to highlight on the LTSS network adequacy standards is that of the institutional long term care that's also provided in a managed LTSS setting. So this gets to what Mr. Wood was talking about previously with skilled nursing care. The department has indicated that time and distance standards do not apply to skilled nursing facilities, because the beneficiary resides at the facility for their care. However, we would argue that most beneficiaries do not reside long term in nursing home facilities. Most beneficiaries are transitioning to facilities, like Gloria did for brief periods of time. Sometimes up to 90 days or so for rehabilitation and then they would like to transition home. If the facilities in the northern part of the state, like Mr. Wood said, were to have closed, that would have left 60% of the Medi-Cal beds in that part of the state without access to care for those residents. So they would have been forced to move much further distances away to receive their services. And we actually believe that it's not good for the consumer, it's not good for the caregiver, it's not good for the transition home if you have to transition to scale nursing care two or three hours away. So we think that the standards deserve careful consideration and again, encourage the state to develop a task force to really thoughtfully think about what it would take to develop these standards. Second, as it's already been alluded to, the standards, excuse me, the proposed, the final regulations, outlined important beneficiary support system requirements for the managed long term services and support system. We do have a number of programs that operate in the Department of Healthcare Services, the Department of Managed Healthcare, and Department of Aging, to provide ombudsman-like services. But we think that, what has been outlined in the Federal Regulations, gives a great opportunity to really provide in depth choice counseling and enrollment assistance, to people, like Gloria, who need access to managed LTSS but don't know where to go. Another important provision of the federal regulations, is the care coordination requirements. The federal regulations require that, managed LTSS plans comprehensively assess, and develop plans of care for enrollees. This is very important, because if Gloria had been comprehensively assessed for her range of needs, not just her healthcare needs, but her long-term care needs, she would have been able to have a plan of care developed that met all of her needs, and helped her stay out of the institution on a long-term care basis. So, the state indicates that it believes that Medicaid managed plans are indeed meeting these requirements. But what is missing right now is the data to really understand how these care co-ordination services are being provided, and where the best practices are and where the challenges are. So we think that we look forward to learning more as this program rolls out. And finally, the managed care regulations provide very important provisions regarding state oversight and quality metrics. In the area of quality metrics, it requires that plans, report on data including the quality life of the beneficiaries, the amount of services that have been received in home and community based setting as opposed to institutional settings. And a number of other quality metrics that we believe go along way to help understand how manage long terms services and supports are being provided in this settings. And finally, the state over sight requirements that are outlined in the federal regulations we believe are probably the most important. Because, while all of these provisions I've outlined are very promising and can go a long way to helping older adults and people with disabilities access, the services they need, they really won't mean anything if there isn't adequate oversight and enforcement. So we really appreciate your having this hearing today to bring light to the issues, and are happy to answer any questions you may have.
[{'start': 94, 'end': 111, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 605, 'end': 611, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4138, 'end': 4142, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4526, 'end': 4532, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4720, 'end': 4724, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5953, 'end': 5959, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6273, 'end': 6279, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Alley : hi, good afternoon, i am jennifer tam alley with the california association of health plans and today, i will be giving you cap's feedback regarding the draft proposal. the dhs came out with regarding the network adequacy standards. and i would just like to acknowledge that dhcs has conducted numerous stakeholder meetings and we really appreciate their effort and would like to thank the department for their hard work on this effort. the proposal that's before us establishes time and distance standards based on three county designations, as you heard earlier, and that's rural to small, medium, and large and that's based solely on county population. and while we support creating standards based on the uniqueness of a county, we think that this approach does not sufficiently measure or reflect access differences through an entire county. we think county size and population density are extremely important to be taken into consideration when developing the requirements that my members will be required to adhere to. for example, we heard about san diego earlier today, san bernardino is the same. it has a very large county with a small urban area and then the majority of the county is rural. and so it would be very difficult for a plan in that county to have one access standard with the different geography that exists within that county. and so, like my colleague from lhpc stated earlier, we think it is important that the population be classified, it should include some density and geographic factors and to allow us to identify alternative access needs to build the network at the onset of the process, rather than trying to have a base standard and then submit a request to have an alternative access need met. plan support access alternative modalities for access specifically in rural counties who may not have specialty providers available. that includes the use of tele-medicine. and again, including that the use of that in building the network from the onset of the process because it's a critical and effective tool to ensure access for beneficiaries in rural areas. and we suggest that the department could use location of the tele-medicine porter hub which would be where someone would go to access tele-medicine be used to calculate the time and distance standard rather than just where the provider is located. but, some of the specialties that are identified in the departments proposal are not suitable for tele-medicine. for example, ear, nose, and throat, orthopedic surgery, and cardiology. and we request that for those specialty provider types where telemedicine is not suitable or inappropriate that the department consider establishing the frontier standard that you also heard about earlier today. there isn't anything that prohibits use of the california medical service study areas which are used to determine where professional shortages exist in medically undeserved in rural populations. and so, mcap members believe that time and distance standards should be applied according to designations that reflect differences in service area based, again, on population density, provider supply, and geography. mcap believes that the time and distance standards for specialist should account for member utilization and member supply so that we can actually comply with the standards. our members are concerned that the course specialist list includes providers that are extremely short supply and/or otherwise do not typically contract with plans. in situations where plans cannot meet, the baseline time and distance requirements for specialist alternative access standards should be allowed, and we again think that it's important to recognize the alternative access needs at the onset of our network development. the implementation of the network adequacy standards is important to help ensure that medi-cal managed care enrollees have access to necessary services. mcap and its members look forward to continuing our hard work with dhcs and the legislature to successfully implement future requirements.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 43, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Suzanne Tavano: Good afternoon, hi, I'm Dr Suzanne Tavano. I'm the Behavioral Health Director for Marin County and the current President of the California Behavior Health Directors Association, and on behalf of the Association want to thank you for inviting us to participate today. I feel like a little bit of an odd duck on this particular panel but I'll try to be consistent with what was being talked about. So, I'm representing Marin County, and the 57 other counties throughout the state, and two participating city entities are very committed to moving forward with effective implementation of the manged care role. A few words and this has been referenced a bit through various testimonies, but the county behavioral health plans contract with the state Department of healthcare services to operate the specialty mental health program which serves adults with serious mental illness, and youth with severe emotional disabilities. We also are contracted to provide the benefits under the state plan for drug Medi-Cal benefits and now, for those counties opting into the drug Medi-Cal ODS waiver, the full array of those services. And as has been mentioned by way of opting in and operating under those waivers, we are considered a pre-paid insurance hospital plan, and so subject to all of the managed care regulations. I'll say on a personal note, I entered community mental health in 1996 and in that time, we were just starting with phase one and phase two implementation of managed Medi-Cal. So it's been a very interesting 20 year journey to see where we started under the state Department of mental health and where we are now, and are going onto the State Department of Healthcare Services. So, about the final rule, we do see that there are opportunities here. We very much want to promote and support the goals of the final rule, in terms of improving access to care, quality of care, client satisfaction. And, we are also in agreement that bringing us into closer alignment with the managed care plans, it will be a beneficial outcome as well. We are working with the State Department of Health Care Services to understand our obligations as they are being clarified and identified and will continue to do so. We do appreciate that in the governor's proposed budget, there was some funding to address the Proposition 30 obligations for providing 50% of the non-federal share for implementation of new federal requirements. While we do appreciate that, we already are estimating that that allocation is not going to be sufficient. And we also are wondering where the other 25% for these functions will come from. In terms of practical challenges, while we feel that there are opportunities and we base our delivery system on recovery principles and so hope is a key element of that. We are being hopeful about this, but we are also very cognizant of challenges that we will probably be facing and so wanted to highlight some of those. First, and this has been discussed many times, the timelines for implementation are very aggressive, the manage care plans I think in some ways have been progressing sooner, we are being brought up to speed at a very fast pace. So aggressive timelines will be somewhat challenging, particularly for smaller counties that have smaller administrative bandwidth. A lot of this is administrative work and as you know, as the mental health behavioral health plans, we're not only a managed care entity, but we are the direct service provider as well. We are always balancing administrative responsibilities and cost with direct service delivery which we really prioritize as frequently as we can. We have some particular areas of impact that we are concerned about, and of course they include increased data tracking and reporting requirements that not only will require more administrative staff, but will require significant changes to our data system, our information systems, and we are taking that into consideration. The shortening of time frames that will be required will also require changes in staffing patterns. The expedited grievance appeals, and expedited treatment authorization going from 3 business days to 72 hours seems perhaps insignificant, but essentially that means we will have to have administrative staffing on Saturdays and Sundays, which we don't currently do. So that's another shifting of resources or additional resources. These challenges, as we talked about before, will be particularly challenging for smaller counties that have smaller allocations, smaller budgets, and how they resource the administrative support that it will take to pull this off. So support, technical assistance, and flexibility as permitted under the rule will definitely be needed to help us overcome these challenges. And we continue to work with DHCS in a very hopeful way. In terms of network adequacy challenges, again many of them had been discussed already. Again, aggressive timelines that we're working with and substantive changes that will need to be made to our delivery system. And we have submitted comments to the current DHCS network adequacy proposal. Just to comment a little bit on time and distance, there has been a lot of discussion about that. As you know counties are classified according to size and size is population. And population doesn't always equate to geography, which has been discussed. And also as discussed, even for counties that are considered medium and large in population, we often have different segments of our county that fall into the different designated areas. For Marin County, the majority of our population are along the 101 corridor, which really is along the Bay. As we go across hills and mountains in through woods and forests, and then through agricultural land, we land at the ocean. And as you move further and further out, sparser and sparser population areas. So we are all trying to take into account that, again, it is particularly a small county issue. Particularly for small county and border lying counties, we do want to acknowledge that in those counties, Frontier Counties, that sometimes a beneficiary may choose to access services in the bordering county, because they're more accessible. And even at times, cross into other states, that border more closely. We are particularly concerned, as been talked about in other ways, about specific provider types and adequacy. And what we would highlight is psychiatry, psychiatrists, psychiatrists in general, child psychiatrists in particular. I think we all spend a great deal of our time recruiting and trying to retain psychiatrists. It's one of our biggest administrative functions I think for all of us. So that's certainly of concern. And then, also, those of use who are opting in to the drug Medical organized delivery system, while we have been putting a lot of preparatory work into launching that, I think four of us now have actually received our contracts, and so now the actual doing will start. So the aggressive timelines just as we're building and launching a whole system, will provide some challenges. In terms of timely access to services as well as provider types, again, the more stringent timeline standards through the 19. So this is a little bit divergence, there's been reference to the special terms of the 1915B waiver that we are now working with. And those are being further defined, really have to do with access and timeliness of services, and include additional measurements that have been in play. Previously there has been mention of the dashboard that is now required, the first one has been produced, published that included statewide information, the next to be produced will be county specific. So, while we have been working very hard, particularly in our special terms and conditions, to address timeliness standards, I would say that it is a work in progress. We have been looking through time studies, what the times are around the state, we are showing progression but there will take some time to get as fully in compliance with time distance and timeliness to access. We urge the state, again as been brought up, to view alternative access standards and be able to employ those as much as possible, as we've talked about before when it comes to small counties, and, I would say all counties. One of the great strengths of specialty mental health under the 1915B waiver is that we can and do provide services anywhere they are needed. And so it allows us to be more culturally sensitive and more appropriate in serving traditionally under served populations. We can provide a service in our clinics, in schools, in churches, in the community, under bridges, homeless encampments, etc. So we really feel strongly that that capacity be considered when timeliness standards are being taken into consideration. And as has been spoken about before, we increasingly have moved towards Tele-Health Psychiatry, again really speaking to the needs for cultural linguistic capacity, so I wanted to highlight that. So I could go on, this has been a long day for you all. I so appreciate your patience and your forbearance in hearing all of us, so I really am going to stop there. So thank you so much for this opportunity.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stuart Thompson: mr. chair and members, stuart jennifer thompson on behalf of the california medical association. i just want to first thank the committee for extending the invitation to allow us to speak at the hearing today. cma does have concerns about, specifically about the network adequacy requirements. in the final rule, as you heard from the testimony, this is not a new issue but we would ask the state rely upon two resources available to them, the 1115 waiver access assessment committee as well as the expertise of dmhc in this field. we submitted a comment letter to dhcs and i'll make sure the committees and your staff receive that. and again, thank you for having the hearing. thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joanna Morris: mr. chair and members, joanna stuart morris on behalf of the urban counties of california. this issue has been on our priority list for a couple of months, primarily because nine urban counties all have public hospitals. we are obviously concerned about the part of the rule that has the financial implication on the supplemental payments. and would align ourselves with the comments from caph and help to work through the bills and what other process we have to ensure that the rule doesn't disproportionately affect our public hospitals and our safety net services. thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 389, 'end': 393, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Anne McLeod: good afternoon, chairs and members of the committees, anne jonah mcleod, california hospital association, on behalf of all the hospitals in california. the new federal rule that ms. cantwell described was finalized in two parts as she indicated towards the end of her testimony. first, in may of 2016, and then a second set of provisions on january 17th, 2017, three days before the inauguration. the two rules will have a significant impact on how the hospital fee program will be implemented, but the provisions in that second rule are even more damaging for that program. the medi-cal program fails to cover the cost of treating medi-cal patients in hospitals by more than $8 billion a year. the hospital fee program is used to draw down those unclaimed federal funding, those dollars, to help mitigate less than half of that massive shortfall. nearly every general acute care hospital or hospital system benefits from the hospital fee program, including public hospitals, rural hospitals, and all safety net hospitals. the funding follows the patient. therefore, there are several methods for making payments, including fee for service, supplemental payments, and as mary cantwell mentioned, managed care supplemental payments. the managed care plans, over the last eight years, have been very good partners in helping get these payments to the hospitals that treat the medi-cal patients. the current method of making these supplemental payments through the medi-cal managed care plans is not aligned with the requirements in the final rules. they are considered pass through payments, and they must be phased out starting july 1, 2017, just a few short months away. as pass through payments are phased out, they can be replaced with an allowable directed payment. these directed payments can be an add-on to the adjudicated claims by a fixed amount or a flat percent. and quite frankly, it's really not much different than how we are passing through the dollars now. but this nuance creates two significant problems that we want you to be aware of. first, the final rule states that these allowed directed payments can only be made to network providers. this will impact the ability to make a supplemental payment for all medi-cal patients. even non-contracted or out of network patients that receive care in a children's hospital, or a tertiary care hospital that provides some of the highest acuity and specialty care to children or others with extremely complex health issues. these payments on an annual basis are potentially about $2 billion a year, or about 20% of the entire hospital fee program. if we can't find a solution for this problem, it'll be difficult for cha to support this funding strain continuing. the second issue, the directed payments must be made on current adjudicated claims rather than utilizing, than using utilization trends to calculate a lump sum payment. and while we don't anticipate, there being much of a change about the distribution among the hospitals of the payments. it does raise a number of questions on how we resolve related to ensuring that hospitals are not at risk for excess directive payments made to the health plans, and how health plans are not at risk for making directed payments if they haven't had the funds allocated by the department. let me give you an example. if funds are allocated to a health plan based on historic utilization of say, 100,000 medical impatient days, and the plan only experiences 75,000 days in that period, the plan will be holding excess funds with no ability to get those funds to the hospitals. those funds represent hospital dollars matched with federal funds. it is not state money, it is the hospital fee program and the federal dollars. this guessing game could result in hundreds of millions of dollars being at risk to hospitals. another scenario that cha can't support. on the flip side of that example, the health plan could actually experience more utilization. let's say they experienced 125,000 inpatient days, yet they only received funds to cover 100,000 inpatient days. the plan could be at risk for making those payments as directed by the department of healthcare services. and again, cha does not support putting the plans at financial risk to pass this dollars through. as mary said, these are really complex issues, probably some of the toughest that we've had to grapple with for a long time. what is at risk if we don't find solutions? i think that is the big question. the hospital fee could be much smaller than any of us want it to be, billions of dollars less. this means less money for hospital care from medi-cal beneficiaries and it means that for every dollar we might have to shrink the program, the state loses $0.24. that's because the state shares in the net benefit of the hospital fee program. and is currently planning on $1 billion of new general fund revenue for the state budget in 1718. if we had to reduce the size of the hospital fee program by half, representing the medicaid managed care payments, the estimated amount of the phase out portion, that could cause the state general fund up to a half $1 billion every year. happy to answer any question now or after the panel.
[{'start': 54, 'end': 71, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 182, 'end': 190, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1171, 'end': 1184, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4193, 'end': 4196, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4283, 'end': 4287, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Erica Murray: Good afternoon, I'm Erica Murray. I'm the President and CEO of the California Association of Public Hospitals and Health Systems. I really appreciate that opportunity to speak before you. And I especially appreciate the staff's work in putting this together so we can all learn about this really important issue, so thank you. I have never used a PowerPoint in this room, so and I am not terribly technologically savvy, okay.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brianna Lierman: well, a two-hour hearing dedicated to hundreds of pages of federal regulation, and i'm sitting at the seat apparently with flu bugs. so i'll try to stay focused and then i'll follow up with anyone. i have to think later if i catch the flu. i'm not making eye contact with anyone in particular. brianna anne lierman, ceo of the local health plans of california.
[{'start': 294, 'end': 314, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mari Cantwell: all right, thanks again. this is cantwell with department of healthcare services. so, we were asked to speak on several issues, as was just laid out. so i'm going to cover the first four and then turn it over to my colleague sarah brooks, who will talk more in depth about the network adequacy requirements. and the proposal that the department recently released. so the first item i'm going to touch on is the quality rating system. so the rule does require that states implement a quality rating system for managed care plans and report on managed care compliance, plan compliance. cms is actually expecting to develop their own standard system over the next several years through a stakeholder process. we certainly anticipate that it would look potentially somewhat similar to their medicare star rating system. once they've developed that is that when states have to come into compliance with the quality rating system. they do allow for states to implement an alternative system with their approval. given the timeline, like i said, it's going to be several years before this requirement becomes effective. but i do want to highlight all the work that dhcs has already been doing in this area, and how it will serve us as we come to meet the effective date of the quality rating system. so as we've talked about in both of the committees before on our medi-cal managed care plan side, we've been issuing quarterly performance dashboards that really look at things like hedis measures and utilization. and grievances and appeals that we publish every quarter. and we actually, before the publication of this rule, we're already working on a quality rating system for our medi-cal managed care program. and so that is still in development. similarly on the county mental health side, under the requirements of our waiver, we already are reporting on performance dashboards for the county mental health plans. and then similarly we have reporting that we do for the dental managed care plans. so we're actually going to continue that work and likely come out with the quality rating system for the medical managed care plan some time later this year. in advance of whenever cms actually develops their standard system. and then once that gets released, we'll certainly then at that point in time evaluate whether we will move to the cms standard system or apply to use our own. we already touched briefly earlier on the new medical loss ratios. so just as a reminder, there is a new requirement in the rule that plans report on mlrs. but it does provide states a bit of flexibility. one in how the mlrs are going to be reported, so whether it's by individual aid category. so do we keep adults and kids separate from others or across the entire medicaid business. and then again, as we talked about before, whether to implement a recoupment if plans don't meet the minimum mlr. in addition, the rule has an element where states are being required to use that mlr information in future rate setting to really target that plans would be meeting at a minimum an 85% mrr. although states can set a minimum that's higher than that. so, i mentioned earlier where we currently are with the proposal on the medi-cal managed care side. we haven't traditionally had an mlr in the medi-cal managed care side, but we have measured it from time to time. and i would say, in general, what we see from our plans is anywhere from 80 to 95% mlr. so i don't think it's going to be a huge change to have that minimum of 85% but certainly there could be some impacts. on the dental managed care side, however, is a different story. our current contracted requirement for medical loss ratios on dental managed care is 70%. and so certainly we anticipate a shift to 85% potentially having significant impacts. we actually commented on this issue, when cms released the rule in draft form. because we were very concerned about the concept of taking a minimum mlr that really was developed for a full scope coverage program. and applying that to a specialized program like dental. and the reason being that for dental plans or other states have vision plans in the same situation. those plans have very much lower capitation rates, right? in the 20s and 30s and 40s, not in the hundreds of dollars. and so the fixed cost of administration don't go down that much compared to the total cost of the services. so you actually expect an mlr to be lower than what you would expect from a full service plan. so we are concerned about the potential impact on our dental managed care plans and sustainability of that. and what impact it might have on their rates, since again, we're going to have to use the mlr to target an 85% in the rate setting. and so we're going to continue with our dental manage care plans on what that might mean for them and how we will comply with that part of the rule. the third piece i'm going to touch on, i mentioned that the states are required to have what's called a beneficiary support system. that's effective july 1st, 2018. the system really has three major areas of focus. the first is something that will provide assistance to beneficiaries to help them understand how managed care operates, how to navigate the system, and how to choose providers. the second is choice counseling and enrollment assistance to help them understand what are their plan options and to help them select a plan. and finally, the third requirement is to provide assistance for those who access long-term services and support through managed care. and we are required to provide this support through a variety of methods including online, by phone, and in person. states do have flexibility in how they establish this beneficiary support system. and so what we're really looking at is what resources do we already have in place that meet some of these needs? and then where do those need to be enhanced in order to meet the requirements of the rule? so, for example, we already have our healthcare options contractor that already does enrollment assistance and choice counseling for both our medi-cal managed plans and our dental managed care plans. and then because of the way the county system operates, it's not a choice process, right? and so that doesn't really apply to them. we're also currently in the process of combining our separate mental health ombuds and our managed care ombuds programs which assist beneficiaries with navigating managed care and a variety of other issues. and so, we will be looking at how we utilize that and whether that needs to be expanded for dental and substance abuse disorder services. we also have the coordinated care initiatives ombuds program, that is utilized to assist with long term services and support. we're really looking on building on those elements and where we might need to add additional enhancements. and then finally, the last thing i'm going to touch on relates to grievances and appeals. as i mentioned, the final rule did make some significant changes to the grievances and appeals process for beneficiaries. they really made these changes that's probably the one example where they were fairly consistent with the medicare program as well as the private marketplace. so those key changes include beneficiaries being able to file a grievance at any time. currently for us, we require that to happen within 180 days. one of the most significant changes for both plans and beneficiaries is that the rule actually requires that a beneficiary go through the plan's appeal process before they can go to a state fair hearing. the way that we operate currently in california, they can do that. they can do both simultaneously, or they can just do a state fair hearing. so this will be a change for both plans and the beneficiaries. and because of this, we are also extending the timeline for when a beneficiary can request a state fair hearing because of the additional process that they have to go through. plans are limited to one level of appeal only, and then there are certain timeframes that were shortened for how quickly plans must resolve appeals. 30 days for resolution of standard appeals and 72 hours for expedited appeals. so with that i'll turn it over to sarah brooks to talk about the network adequacy components.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 225, 'end': 237, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8216, 'end': 8228, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sarah Brooks: Good afternoon. Sarah Brooks, Deputy Director over Healthcare Delivery Systems at the Department Of Health Care Services. As Ms. Cantwell mentioned, I'll talk today about network adequacy and its applicability to our delivery systems as is set forth in the final role. I want to clarify that the effective dates for these requirements is July 1 of 2018. And so we will be continuing to work on these in the near future. With regards to network adequacy, the final rule sets forth requirements, but provides flexibilities to states to develop standards, as long as certain considerations are made when setting those standards. In developing the standards that we've proposed, our thinking is that it is important to set a floor that plans must meet but at the same time, provide for reasonable, timely access to care for beneficiaries. We've developed these standards with the beneficiaries and plans in mind. Our priority is to promote access to services that beneficiaries will need while balancing the plans ability to meet them as well. We carefully consider the plans existing networks and the reality of providers that actually exist in the state when setting them. We are also aiming to set standards that are not complex and are easy to understand and measure. As Ms. Cantwell noted earlier, these requirements apply to all four areas of the delivery systems as well. For Medical managed care and dental manage care health plans, California already has network adequacy standards in place today. You'll hear a little bit from our partners at DMHC later today about that. Both for time and distance, and timely access. These standards are set forth in both knox keene regulations. But and also, in contracts between managed care and dental managed care health plans and the Department of Health Care Services. For county specialty mental health plans, network standards do not currently exist and thus, it will take a little more work for these systems in the department to implement network adequacy standards for them. For DMCODS health plan that Ms. Cantwell talked about earlier, we will utilize network adequacy standards per the requirements under the waiver as we initially implement them and they roll out in California. The final rule does require network adequacy standards in a number of areas we establish. They'd be established for primary care, specialty care, hospital, OB-GYN, behavioral health, pharmacy, pediatric, dental. And also for LTSS services that are required when beneficiaries are actually travelling to providers, as opposed to when providers are travelling to beneficiaries. The department recently released a final role network adequacy proposal that is out for stakeholder comment right now. Ms. Leirman mentioned it earlier. Comments are due today, however we do continue to welcome feedback. When setting the proposed standards in the department's network adequacy proposal, we first considerd standards that already existed today. So we looked at knox keene standards, we looked at what was included in our contracts with our Medical managed care plans and our dental managed care plans, and we looked at what was included in the 1115 waiver. Whenever possible, we really mirrored those standards. So we kept in place the standards, or we proposed the standards that are already in place today to continue under our proposal. Those standards include for Medical managed care and dental managed care plans, primary care, and hospital time and distance standards. And then primary care specialist mental health and pharmacist timely access for non urgent appointments as applicable. When setting any new standards prescribed in the final rule, when we didn't have standards already in place, we considered a number of different things. Many of them are required by CMS. And examples of those are expected enrollment and utilization of services, characteristics and needs of specific populations. Number and types of network providers, and geographic location of network providers. In addition, we also considered other factors such as Medicare standards, we utilized geo-mapping and looked at state medical board data. We also took a look at what current alternate access standards have been submitted to the department entity and may see for consideration purposes. When developing our core specialist list, we considered the specialists that are most critically used and also the reality of what specialists are available across the state in California. We excluded facility-based specialists such as anesthesiologists because time and distance standards really don't make sense and really are not applicable to them. The final rule requires network adequacy standards for LTSS services, when the beneficiary is traveling to the provider. So in this instance for example, IHSS, MSSP services, we wouldn't set standards, because the provider is going to the beneficiary. We also did not set standards when the beneficiary was residing at a facility such as a skilled nursing facility because the beneficiary, again, was not traveling to the provider. I also wanted to touch on the fact that there is an ability, as Ms. Leirman mentioned, to have alternative access standards requested. So we do work in partnership with the Department of Managed Healthcare to approve this alternative access standards. This would occur in a place such as a rural area, where there just simply aren't providers. Or there aren't certain types of specialists available, and so we are able to approve separate standards than what is set forth in the core standard requirements. I want to talk a little bit about monitoring today, so how do we make sure that the plans actually meet these requirements, and how will we do so moving forward? We will continue to build on our existing processes to monitor our plans as we implement these additional requirements. Examples of what we do today include plan submission of their provider networks. They submit grievances and appeal reports ombudsman and state for a hearing reports, we work with them on corrective action plans. And more recently, we have started to work with our independent entity, our External Quality Review Organization or EQRO, to do quarterly surveys of timely access for our providers with our health plans. I want to note that DHCS will also have to annually certify our networks to CMS, that's something that Ms. Cantwell will need to sign off on when it is submitted to the federal government. But, and we will collect data annually, so that we can make sure the individual plans continue to meet those network adequacy standards so that she can sign off on them. One way that DHCS does intend to monitor health plan compliances through a new system that we have built, called the managed care provider file. This new system collects data monthly from our health plans through an automated system that will reject data if it is not accurate. It collects full information about health plan networks down to the delegated level, and allows us to collect information about provider panel size and whether or not they are open or closed. It also provides automatic reports about individual and all health plan performance in compliance with network adequacy standards. This is a new system that we really have just recently implemented and we're really excited about all of the opportunities that it will provide for us. Findings from this system and from our monitoring program will be included in the managed care program report that we will submit to CMS annually. This is a requirement that is set forth in the final rule. And this report will be made publicly available on our website along with postings of our network adequacy standard which is also required in the final rule. Our proposal as I mentioned is currently out for public comment and it includes additional detail than what I talked about today. We welcome stakeholder feedback on it. Thank you for the opportunity to talk with you and we're happy to answer any questions.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 129, 'end': 137, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1275, 'end': 1283, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2059, 'end': 2067, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2734, 'end': 2741, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5159, 'end': 5166, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6403, 'end': 6411, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Marta Green: Thank you. So as you said, my name is Marta Green. I'm the Chief Deputy Director of the Department of Managed Health Care. I want to thank you all for having us here today. The DMHC license and regulate health plans that provide coverage to more than 25 million Californians. We regulate the vast majority of commercial plans and the majority of the medical managed care plans in California. Our mission is to protect consumers' healthcare rights and ensure a stable healthcare delivery system. We do this by administering the Knox-Keene Act. There are many topics in the Knox-Keene Act, but two of the big ones are network adequacy and financial reporting. And those are the two that the Committee staff has asked me to touch on today. So first, I'll talk about network adequacy. Plans provide to the DMHC, information on their networks in a variety of ways. A critical among those is the plan's annual network submissions. Plans submit their entire network to the DMHC on March 31st of each year. And this report also includes the results of all grievances related to networks throughout the year. All health plan policies and procedures must comply with the geographic standards set forth in the Knox-Keene Act. Specifically, 15 miles and 30 minutes for access to primary care physicians. And there's a list of types of physicians that fall under that category for the DMHC, as well as to hospitals from either their home or their workplace. Some health plans do request alternative access standards for many of the reasons that we've talked about here today. And we analyzed those alternative access standards against permitted justifications in the act. And that can be such as a lack of practicing providers in a specific geographic region. Generally, all our alternative access standards are limited to specific affected zip codes. For all other provider types, so non-primary care, non-hospital, the Knox-Keene Act requires that all health plans provide reasonable access. So to identify reasonable access, we look at access to specialists at a specific plan and compare that to all other plans that operate in that similar geographic region. As well as access standards or benchmarks that are generally accepted in the marketplace, such as the Medicare access standards. So to perform this analysis we used software, as does everybody these days. And we use a Geographical Information System, or GIS system software, to map the distances that enrollees must travel for a large number of provider types. So the primary care providers we look at include family practice, general practice, internal medicine, OBGYN, and pediatrics. We looked at a very wide array of specialty types, I won't name them all, but they do include psychiatry, HIV-AIDS specialists, mental health professionals, and hospital based providers. Our software also maps the location of hospitals, in-patient hospice facilities, ambulatory surgical clinics, and urgent care locations. Another important aspect of our network adequacy review is our timely access standards. These standards require health plans to maintain provider networks sufficient to ensure that people can get a timely access to an appointment. The requirements are based on the individual's specific clinical condition, and they set forth certain standards for types of appointments. So 48 hours for urgent care when no prior authorization was required. All of the way up to 15 days for non-urgent appointments with a specialty physician or other ancillary providers. So to demonstrate compliance, health plans conduct an annual telephone survey of the providers to assess availability of appointments. This information has then compiled together into a report given to the DMHC. We review the report, issue findings regarding the data, and make recommendations for changes. Unfortunately, the DMHC's 2015 report issued earlier this year, stated that the DMHC was unable to determine whether health plans met the timely access standards due to significant inaccuracies in the data. The report also detailed a number of next steps for health plans in the DMHC, to design to improve the accuracy of the data reporting so that we will have a better report next year. These steps do include some data validation steps, vendor requirements, as well as some enforcement investigations. Last week, we held a stakeholder meeting with plans, providers, other interested parties, to discuss these next steps. The next topic I've been asked to address is the DMHC's role in ensuring health plans meet the affordable care act's Medical Loss Ratio, or MLR, for short requirements. So to ensure that consumers receive value for their premium dollar, the Affordable Care Act and California State law require commercial health plans to meet certain MLR requirements. So health plans offering coverage in the individual and small group market must spend at least 80% of premium revenue on clinical services and activities that improve health care quality. And health plans in the large group market must meet an 85% standard. That means that health plans are limited in the percent of premium revenue that they can spend on administrative costs or profit. Health plans that fail to meet these Medical Loss Ratio requirements must provide rebates to consumers. I won't get into the details of what falls into each category, but if you have questions about what's in the clinical and what's in health care quality, versus what's in administration profit, I'm happy to go over that. So since the new requirements were enacted, California consumers have received a total of 206 million in rebates for the five reporting years of 2011 to 2015. This breaks down to a total of 64 million in rebates for the individual market. 139 million in rebates for the small group market, and 3 million in rebates for the large group market. We can audit health plans for compliance with the Medical Loss Ratio requirements for commercial coverage. We review their reporting that comes into the DMHC, and we determine whether or not to conduct an audit based upon that reporting. So, for an example, if a Medical Loss Ratio report came into the DMHC that was very, very close to the threshold, that may trigger an audit. When we conduct a Medical Loss Ratio examination, a health plan must submit a significant amount of data, which the DMHC reviews to verify the plan's representations on the reporting form. We review the validity of the data on expenses and premiums including the appropriateness of plan allocations for expenses, taxes, and revenues. And reviews the allocation and classification of expenditures for quality improvement activities. We can, under state law, require a health plan to pay an additional rebate to consumers if the examination identifies the plan inaccuracies. We have completed three Medical Loss Ratio examinations since reporting began, and we're in the process of completing three more. Now, we post the final reports of all Medical Loss Ratio exams on our website. In addition to our Medical Loss Ratio of commercial plans, we have historically performed some limited Medical Loss Ratio work on behalf of the Department of Health Care Services through an inter-agency agreement. This inter-agency agreement is set to terminate on June 30th of this year. This concludes my prepared remarks. And I'm happy to answer questions.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Nguy: Linda Nguy with Western Center on Law and Poverty. We act as a support Center for the Health Consumer Alliance, a statewide collaborative of consumer assistance operated by community-based, local legal aids. The final rules have significant implications for low income Californians, as nearly 80% of Medical members or 11 million, receive care through a managed care plan. California, as was mentioned, has some of the strongest consumer protections in place, many of which are borrowed from the Knox-Keene Act. So urge conformity to ensure uniformity across delivery systems. I will focus my comments on network adequacy requirements as well as due process rights. As Ms. Cantwell had noted, county mental health plans organized deliver systems for substance use, disorder services, and Denti-Cal plans, are subject to the same rules as the Medi-Cal managed care plans. So we urge coordination among divisions throughout the department to ensure consistent implementation of the rules. In terms of network adequacy, DHCS proposes to implement the standards through health plan contracts, all plan letters, and county information notices. Although we appreciate the opportunity to provide feedback, DHCS must establish and update these standards through the the regulatory process to comply with the California Administrative Procedures Act. The scope of these standards qualifies as regulations and are not subject to any exemption from rule making. As DHCS mentioned, they proposed established standards based on three county types. Although we would prefer one standard across the state, we recognize California's diversity and the goal to limit exceptions, which may necessitate designating areas with different standards. Therefore, we recommend collapsing large and medium counties together, and applying the large county standards while keeping rule to small county standards the same. Regardless of how standards are determined, any exception must be limited as they are now to the discrete zip code level, not city or county level. The standards for these exemptions should be clear and transparent. Where the plan must document that there are no available providers in the plan's geographic region in or out of network. While time and distance standards are important, having an in-network provider across the street means very little to a patient who cannot schedule an appointment, because that provider is not accepting new patients or has a wait list that spans months. Therefore, we emphasis the importance of monitoring and verifying provider directory and timely access through interagency agreements with the Department of Managed Health Care, as well as other efforts. In terms of due process, DHCS proposes to implement its grievance and appealed processing change through all plan letter. But we believe this should also be done through regulation to ensure consistency, clarity, and compliance. Now that the final rules require the member to exhaust the plan level appeal process before being able to request a state fair hearing. We recommend DHCS prohibit plans from requiring members to participate in multiple levels of internal review before seeking a fair hearing. The new rule also gives states the option to require a voluntary external medical review process as part of their appeal. Currently, consumers in Knox-Keene licensed plans have access to an independent panel of medical experts, through an independent medical review IMR. Consumers and county organized health system codes that are not Knox-Keene licensed can not access the IMR process. For these consumers, their only recourse is a state fair hearing before the administrative law judge, a lengthy process that is determined by someone with legal, not medical training. To illustrate the need for an independent medical review, a 28 year-old man in Lane County with a chronic illness, had his medication denied by his cosplan as being ineffective. This was a major dispute between the consumer's doctors, and the plans and the medical director. Both of whom appeared at the state fair hearing. The administrative law judge conducting the hearing had no idea which Doctor to believe. And ultimately asked the consumer to seek a third opinion from another infectious disease specialist. The whole process from hearing requests to seeing a third specialist took several months. And the consumer would have been much better served by going to IMR. Therefore, we urge DHCS to make an IMR available to all Medi-Cal Managed Care members so that beneficiaries' rights aren't dependent on what county they live in. With the shift in the Medi-Cal delivery system tomanaged care due to mandatory enrollment, it is critical that members throughout the state have access to medically necessary services in a fair and consistent manner. Given the uncertainty of federal regulations, and for conformity of Knox-Keene, we recommend codifying these changes in state statute. Thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 673, 'end': 681, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tam Ma: Good afternoon, Mr. Chairs and members. My name is Tam Ma, and I'm with Health Access California. We are the state wide health care consumer advocacy coalition, working for quality and affordable healthcare for all Californians. So today I'm going to focus my comments on network adequacy, and then comment on a couple of other items. And Health Access actually sponsored most of the underlying legislation, that established the network adequacy requirements that have in California law today. And we've also worked very hard to, over the years, to strengthen oversight, over plans and making sure they do meet those network adequacy requirements. So the whole point of network adequacy is to ensure that health plans have enough doctors in their network, so that consumers get the care that they need, when they need it, in a language that they can understand. So as you've heard from other speakers, we have different ways of measuring network adequacy. It's through provider directories, which are supposed to list all the providers that are in network, so that consumers can find somebody who's in their network, who is taking new patients, where they're located and everything. We have timely access standards that ensure that patients don't have to wait a long time to get an appointment with the doctor. We also have time and distance standards, so that people don't have to travel too far to see a doctor. So, I think my main message today about the Federal Medicaid Managed Care Rule and the work that California needs to do around that work adequacy, is not complicated. Because we already have an existing structure and framework for time and distance standards in California law. So as other speakers mentioned, you know, we have time and distance standards for primary care and for hospital care. And it is a single, statewide standard, that provides a floor, and then there is a process for alternative access standards. That plans can require us from the regulators, and those are determined on a case by case basis. Looking at situations such as, or factors such as the uniqueness of a service, whether it's an urban or rural area, what the population density is in a particular area. The distribution of consumers that are enrolled in the plans network versus the doctors that are available to provide a service. So we think that existing framework that is there now for time and distance standards, and timely access standards, is what the state should follow when implementing time and distance standards for the new provider types that are required under the Federal regulations. And the standards that we have now apply across the different lines of business, across different kinds of plans. So the same standards apply to the Medical plans as they do to commercial plans. So, consumers know and expect the same standards no matter what kind of plan they are enrolled in. I also want to note that we already do have time and distance standards for specialists in other areas. So for example, the California Department of Insurance for the insurance products that are regulated by CDI, they have a requirement of 30 miles, or 60 minutes for specialists. As does the Department of Industrial Relations for provider networks and workers compensation. They also have a 30 miles, 60 minute standard, and the same with Medicare. So there is already folks out there in other situations that have come up with standards, and we think that's a good starting point, to look at applying these to the MediCal managed care plans. So we, we'll be submitting written comments in response to DHCS's proposals, and we'll share those with Members of the Committee. But I do want to say that, the way DHCS has proposed, approaching the time and distance standards, is a little bit overly complicated, and it doesn't actually guarantee that consumers have access to care. So DHCS's proposal is based by county and county population, and we don't think that makes a whole lot of sense. Just because every, most counties whether it's Los Angeles or Santa Barbara, Sacramento, Sonoma counties, and others, vary in population density and vary in geographic reach. So having a single standard within the county, based on population, doesn't make any sense. And we do think that the existing framework that we have now, with a single floor for the state, and then alternative standards available depending if a plan requests it, would be a more sensible approach. And I think you know alongside having a standard that's consistent with existing law, is also important to have monitoring and enforcement that's consistent with what we're already doing as well. So right now, we have existing enforcement mechanisms to monitor network adequacy, monitoring plan networks. And Ms Green talked about it, and along with folks over at DHCS talked about what they do now to monitor access to care. And so we think that whatever time and distance standards that are applied to specialists and other provider types, should undergo the same kind of monitoring and oversight. And this would really allow the regulators to look at network adequacy and provide oversight or plans in a holistic way. Because this is not just about whether plans are meeting time and distance standards, but as Ms. Wei alluded to, it's about whether people are getting those appointments in a timely manner, whether they're getting them the language assistance that they are entitled to. And I think, want to echo Ms. Lay's comments too about the need to do this through the statutory and regulatory process. We do disagree with DHCS's proposal to do this through a sub-regulatory process, through like all plan letters and guidance through plans. We do think that they do need to go through a rule making process, and that consistent with other network adequacy requirements, this also should be done in statute and applied to the, be included in the Knox Keene Act. So that the DMHC which is the primary regulator of manage care in California, can conduct the enforcement and oversight that they already do now as well. And so that's really like what I want to say today about network adequacy, I just want to address two other issues quickly. The first is, the external medical review option, that the rule highlights. And this deals with giving consumers the opportunity to appeal to an outside entity, if the health plant denies care that they think they need. But for most MediCal consumers, they already have access to the independent medical review process at DMHC for the 2 million or so people that are in CO's plans that are not Knox Keene license right now. They don't have an opportunity to use the IMR process, so as Ms. Lay stated, these folks have to ask for a state fair hearing, and appear before an administrative law judge. That takes a long time, a lot longer than the IMR process right now. And it's really an inappropriate process for people to have to use and go through, to get medical care that is often time sensitive and much needed. I'm a former legal aid attorney, and I have represented clients before state administrative law judges, and they are the worst people to try to explain medical conditions to, they are not doctors, they are lawyers. And so for the doctors and folks on the panel who have had medical training, you wouldn't want a lawyer kind of stepping in your shoes to make judgments about what is medically needed care. And as consumer advocates, we don't think that those folks are the best people to make those decisions. So as a result, we do think that all of the Medicaid managed care plans should be Knox Keene licensed, so that the consumers in those plans can avail themselves to the IMR process. And also have the same kind of consumer protections that are available to most Medicaid managed care plans. So that they, you know have the same, can expect the same kind of oversight over networks and network adequacy. So that, we also don't create separate and duplicative processes in state government. And then, one last note on provider directories. We did compare the requirements in the Medicaid Managed Care Rule with what's in California law, Law now thanks to Senator Hernandez's SB137. I think by and large California's law is much stronger than the requirement of the Federal rule. And, there are some small differences and we know that the state regulators know at TMHC and CDI are working with plans to ensure the plan, plans are in compliance with state law. And like, kind of reconciling the small differences with the federal rule. But, unlike, we don't think, you know, any work, legislatively, that needs to be done at this point on provider directories. And with that, I'm happy to take any questions.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 26, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 51, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 4772, 'end': 4777, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5278, 'end': 5281, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5481, 'end': 5484, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6698, 'end': 6701, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8193, 'end': 8202, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sarah Steenhausen: good afternoon. thank you, member of the health committees. it's great to be here. my name is sarah brianna steenhausen. i'm with the scan foundation. we're a non-profitable charitable foundation. that's focused on improving the continuum of care so people can age with dignity and independence. what i'm going to focus on today are the long term services and supports provisions of the managed care regulations, that impact older adults and people with disabilities. in order to highlight the importance of these regulations in our continuum of care, i want to start off with a very brief story of a woman named gloria who is dual eligible for both medicare and medical. she's been hospitalized several times over the past few years due to multiple strokes and having fallen in her home. after hospitalization, she's been placed into skilled nursing facility care for temporary time for rehabilitation. and then, she's transitioned home. she was able to transition home because she had the support of her daughter who lived a few miles away. but the challenge for her daughter has been weaving together a range of services and supports that can meet her mother's needs in the community. and as time has progressed, she's found it very hard to find a variety of services that would meet her mother's needs in the home and in the community setting. and so, her daughter's is fearing that she might have to put her mother into long term nursing home placement which is really not anyone's desire ultimately in the end. to address this problem of a significantly fragmented system, our state has endeavored to move towards a system of managed long term services and supports. so this enables managed care entities to assume responsibility not only for the healthcare services side of the ledger but for specified long-term services and supports. california authorized it's movement towards managed long-term services and supports as part of the coordinated care initiative, which is a demonstration in seven of our california's counties that was implemented beginning in 2012. so the regulations, when they were finalized last year, did a lot to improve the system of care and build on some of the system components that were outlined in the coordinated care initiative. and what i want to do now is highlight some of the provisions that are really critical to the needs of older adults and people with disabilities who are in managed ltss and the cci counties. the first, that has already been highlighted, is the development of network adequacy standards. before the federal regulations were finalized, there have been no requirements for ltss network adequacy standards. and basically what this means is that right now, two of the home and community-based services programs that are included within the managed ltss programs. one is the community based adult services program, or cbas, and the multipurpose senior services program, or mssp. both of these programs have reported significant waitlists or inability for consumers to access services. for example, the mssp program in the seven cci counties reports that waitlists, average wait time of anywhere between 30 days and 365 days for people in the cci counties to receive services in that program. for the cbas program, which actually is a state-wide medi-cal manage care benefit, they have centers only operating in 26 of our state's 58 counties. so if you're a beneficiary that resides in one of the very rural areas of the state, one of those 32 counties, you might not be able to receive community based adult services. so, we did provide feedback to the department and the development of the proposed network adequacy standards. we believe that the intent of the federal standards was not met in the way the department to find its proposal. and we're actually looking for the state to establish a task force to thoughtfully consider how to develop ltss network adequacy standards. the second component that i wanted to highlight on the ltss network adequacy standards is that of the institutional long term care that's also provided in a managed ltss setting. so this gets to what mr. wood was talking about previously with skilled nursing care. the department has indicated that time and distance standards do not apply to skilled nursing facilities, because the beneficiary resides at the facility for their care. however, we would argue that most beneficiaries do not reside long term in nursing home facilities. most beneficiaries are transitioning to facilities, like gloria did for brief periods of time. sometimes up to 90 days or so for rehabilitation and then they would like to transition home. if the facilities in the northern part of the state, like mr. wood said, were to have closed, that would have left 60% of the medi-cal beds in that part of the state without access to care for those residents. so they would have been forced to move much further distances away to receive their services. and we actually believe that it's not good for the consumer, it's not good for the caregiver, it's not good for the transition home if you have to transition to scale nursing care two or three hours away. so we think that the standards deserve careful consideration and again, encourage the state to develop a task force to really thoughtfully think about what it would take to develop these standards. second, as it's already been alluded to, the standards, excuse me, the proposed, the final regulations, outlined important beneficiary support system requirements for the managed long term services and support system. we do have a number of programs that operate in the department of healthcare services, the department of managed healthcare, and department of aging, to provide ombudsman-like services. but we think that, what has been outlined in the federal regulations, gives a great opportunity to really provide in depth choice counseling and enrollment assistance, to people, like gloria, who need access to managed ltss but don't know where to go. another important provision of the federal regulations, is the care coordination requirements. the federal regulations require that, managed ltss plans comprehensively assess, and develop plans of care for enrollees. this is very important, because if gloria had been comprehensively assessed for her range of needs, not just her healthcare needs, but her long-term care needs, she would have been able to have a plan of care developed that met all of her needs, and helped her stay out of the institution on a long-term care basis. so, the state indicates that it believes that medicaid managed plans are indeed meeting these requirements. but what is missing right now is the data to really understand how these care co-ordination services are being provided, and where the best practices are and where the challenges are. so we think that we look forward to learning more as this program rolls out. and finally, the managed care regulations provide very important provisions regarding state oversight and quality metrics. in the area of quality metrics, it requires that plans, report on data including the quality life of the beneficiaries, the amount of services that have been received in home and community based setting as opposed to institutional settings. and a number of other quality metrics that we believe go along way to help understand how manage long terms services and supports are being provided in this settings. and finally, the state over sight requirements that are outlined in the federal regulations we believe are probably the most important. because, while all of these provisions i've outlined are very promising and can go a long way to helping older adults and people with disabilities access, the services they need, they really won't mean anything if there isn't adequate oversight and enforcement. so we really appreciate your having this hearing today to bring light to the issues, and are happy to answer any questions you may have.
[{'start': 94, 'end': 119, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 613, 'end': 619, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4146, 'end': 4150, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4534, 'end': 4540, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4728, 'end': 4732, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5961, 'end': 5967, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6281, 'end': 6287, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Alley : Hi, good afternoon, I am Jennifer Alley with the California Association of Health Plans and today, I will be giving you CAP's feedback regarding the draft proposal. The DHS came out with regarding the network adequacy standards. And I would just like to acknowledge that DHCS has conducted numerous stakeholder meetings and we really appreciate their effort and would like to thank the department for their hard work on this effort. The proposal that's before us establishes time and distance standards based on three county designations, as you heard earlier, and that's rural to small, medium, and large and that's based solely on county population. And while we support creating standards based on the uniqueness of a county, we think that this approach does not sufficiently measure or reflect access differences through an entire county. We think county size and population density are extremely important to be taken into consideration when developing the requirements that my members will be required to adhere to. For example, we heard about San Diego earlier today, San Bernardino is the same. It has a very large county with a small urban area and then the majority of the county is rural. And so it would be very difficult for a plan in that county to have one access standard with the different geography that exists within that county. And so, like my colleague from LHPC stated earlier, we think it is important that the population be classified, it should include some density and geographic factors and to allow us to identify alternative access needs to build the network at the onset of the process, rather than trying to have a base standard and then submit a request to have an alternative access need met. Plan support access alternative modalities for access specifically in rural counties who may not have specialty providers available. That includes the use of tele-medicine. And again, including that the use of that in building the network from the onset of the process because it's a critical and effective tool to ensure access for beneficiaries in rural areas. And we suggest that the department could use location of the tele-medicine porter hub which would be where someone would go to access tele-medicine be used to calculate the time and distance standard rather than just where the provider is located. But, some of the specialties that are identified in the departments proposal are not suitable for tele-medicine. For example, ear, nose, and throat, orthopedic surgery, and cardiology. And we request that for those specialty provider types where telemedicine is not suitable or inappropriate that the department consider establishing the frontier standard that you also heard about earlier today. There isn't anything that prohibits use of the California medical service study areas which are used to determine where professional shortages exist in medically undeserved in rural populations. And so, MCAP members believe that time and distance standards should be applied according to designations that reflect differences in service area based, again, on population density, provider supply, and geography. MCAP believes that the time and distance standards for specialist should account for member utilization and member supply so that we can actually comply with the standards. Our members are concerned that the course specialist list includes providers that are extremely short supply and/or otherwise do not typically contract with plans. In situations where plans cannot meet, the baseline time and distance requirements for specialist alternative access standards should be allowed, and we again think that it's important to recognize the alternative access needs at the onset of our network development. The implementation of the network adequacy standards is important to help ensure that Medi-Cal Managed Care enrollees have access to necessary services. MCAP and its members look forward to continuing our hard work with DHCS and the Legislature to successfully implement future requirements.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 39, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Suzanne Tavano: Good afternoon, hi, I'm Dr Suzanne Tavano. I'm the Behavioral Health Director for Marin County and the current President of the California Behavior Health Directors Association, and on behalf of the Association want to thank you for inviting us to participate today. I feel like a little bit of an odd duck on this particular panel but I'll try to be consistent with what was being talked about. So, I'm representing Marin County, and the 57 other counties throughout the state, and two participating city entities are very committed to moving forward with effective implementation of the manged care role. A few words and this has been referenced a bit through various testimonies, but the county behavioral health plans contract with the state Department of healthcare services to operate the specialty mental health program which serves adults with serious mental illness, and youth with severe emotional disabilities. We also are contracted to provide the benefits under the state plan for drug Medi-Cal benefits and now, for those counties opting into the drug Medi-Cal ODS waiver, the full array of those services. And as has been mentioned by way of opting in and operating under those waivers, we are considered a pre-paid insurance hospital plan, and so subject to all of the managed care regulations. I'll say on a personal note, I entered community mental health in 1996 and in that time, we were just starting with phase one and phase two implementation of managed Medi-Cal. So it's been a very interesting 20 year journey to see where we started under the state Department of mental health and where we are now, and are going onto the State Department of Healthcare Services. So, about the final rule, we do see that there are opportunities here. We very much want to promote and support the goals of the final rule, in terms of improving access to care, quality of care, client satisfaction. And, we are also in agreement that bringing us into closer alignment with the managed care plans, it will be a beneficial outcome as well. We are working with the State Department of Health Care Services to understand our obligations as they are being clarified and identified and will continue to do so. We do appreciate that in the governor's proposed budget, there was some funding to address the Proposition 30 obligations for providing 50% of the non-federal share for implementation of new federal requirements. While we do appreciate that, we already are estimating that that allocation is not going to be sufficient. And we also are wondering where the other 25% for these functions will come from. In terms of practical challenges, while we feel that there are opportunities and we base our delivery system on recovery principles and so hope is a key element of that. We are being hopeful about this, but we are also very cognizant of challenges that we will probably be facing and so wanted to highlight some of those. First, and this has been discussed many times, the timelines for implementation are very aggressive, the manage care plans I think in some ways have been progressing sooner, we are being brought up to speed at a very fast pace. So aggressive timelines will be somewhat challenging, particularly for smaller counties that have smaller administrative bandwidth. A lot of this is administrative work and as you know, as the mental health behavioral health plans, we're not only a managed care entity, but we are the direct service provider as well. We are always balancing administrative responsibilities and cost with direct service delivery which we really prioritize as frequently as we can. We have some particular areas of impact that we are concerned about, and of course they include increased data tracking and reporting requirements that not only will require more administrative staff, but will require significant changes to our data system, our information systems, and we are taking that into consideration. The shortening of time frames that will be required will also require changes in staffing patterns. The expedited grievance appeals, and expedited treatment authorization going from 3 business days to 72 hours seems perhaps insignificant, but essentially that means we will have to have administrative staffing on Saturdays and Sundays, which we don't currently do. So that's another shifting of resources or additional resources. These challenges, as we talked about before, will be particularly challenging for smaller counties that have smaller allocations, smaller budgets, and how they resource the administrative support that it will take to pull this off. So support, technical assistance, and flexibility as permitted under the rule will definitely be needed to help us overcome these challenges. And we continue to work with DHCS in a very hopeful way. In terms of network adequacy challenges, again many of them had been discussed already. Again, aggressive timelines that we're working with and substantive changes that will need to be made to our delivery system. And we have submitted comments to the current DHCS network adequacy proposal. Just to comment a little bit on time and distance, there has been a lot of discussion about that. As you know counties are classified according to size and size is population. And population doesn't always equate to geography, which has been discussed. And also as discussed, even for counties that are considered medium and large in population, we often have different segments of our county that fall into the different designated areas. For Marin County, the majority of our population are along the 101 corridor, which really is along the Bay. As we go across hills and mountains in through woods and forests, and then through agricultural land, we land at the ocean. And as you move further and further out, sparser and sparser population areas. So we are all trying to take into account that, again, it is particularly a small county issue. Particularly for small county and border lying counties, we do want to acknowledge that in those counties, Frontier Counties, that sometimes a beneficiary may choose to access services in the bordering county, because they're more accessible. And even at times, cross into other states, that border more closely. We are particularly concerned, as been talked about in other ways, about specific provider types and adequacy. And what we would highlight is psychiatry, psychiatrists, psychiatrists in general, child psychiatrists in particular. I think we all spend a great deal of our time recruiting and trying to retain psychiatrists. It's one of our biggest administrative functions I think for all of us. So that's certainly of concern. And then, also, those of use who are opting in to the drug Medical organized delivery system, while we have been putting a lot of preparatory work into launching that, I think four of us now have actually received our contracts, and so now the actual doing will start. So the aggressive timelines just as we're building and launching a whole system, will provide some challenges. In terms of timely access to services as well as provider types, again, the more stringent timeline standards through the 19. So this is a little bit divergence, there's been reference to the special terms of the 1915B waiver that we are now working with. And those are being further defined, really have to do with access and timeliness of services, and include additional measurements that have been in play. Previously there has been mention of the dashboard that is now required, the first one has been produced, published that included statewide information, the next to be produced will be county specific. So, while we have been working very hard, particularly in our special terms and conditions, to address timeliness standards, I would say that it is a work in progress. We have been looking through time studies, what the times are around the state, we are showing progression but there will take some time to get as fully in compliance with time distance and timeliness to access. We urge the state, again as been brought up, to view alternative access standards and be able to employ those as much as possible, as we've talked about before when it comes to small counties, and, I would say all counties. One of the great strengths of specialty mental health under the 1915B waiver is that we can and do provide services anywhere they are needed. And so it allows us to be more culturally sensitive and more appropriate in serving traditionally under served populations. We can provide a service in our clinics, in schools, in churches, in the community, under bridges, homeless encampments, etc. So we really feel strongly that that capacity be considered when timeliness standards are being taken into consideration. And as has been spoken about before, we increasingly have moved towards Tele-Health Psychiatry, again really speaking to the needs for cultural linguistic capacity, so I wanted to highlight that. So I could go on, this has been a long day for you all. I so appreciate your patience and your forbearance in hearing all of us, so I really am going to stop there. So thank you so much for this opportunity.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stuart Thompson: mr. chair and members, stuart sarah thompson on behalf of the california medical association. i just want to first thank the committee for extending the invitation to allow us to speak at the hearing today. cma does have concerns about, specifically about the network adequacy requirements. in the final rule, as you heard from the testimony, this is not a new issue but we would ask the state rely upon two resources available to them, the 1115 waiver access assessment committee as well as the expertise of dmhc in this field. we submitted a comment letter to dhcs and i'll make sure the committees and your staff receive that. and again, thank you for having the hearing. thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joanna Morris: Mr. Chair and members, Joanna Morris on behalf of the Urban Counties of California. This issue has been on our priority list for a couple of months, primarily because nine urban counties all have public hospitals. We are obviously concerned about the part of the rule that has the financial implication on the supplemental payments. And would align ourselves with the comments from CAPH and help to work through the bills and what other process we have to ensure that the rule doesn't disproportionately affect our public hospitals and our safety net services. Thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 382, 'end': 386, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Paul Steenhausen: Thank you, Mr Chair. Paul Steenhausen with the Legislative Analyst's Office. The sergeant has distributed a handout, and the handout provides an overview of remedial education at the University of California, California State University, and Community Colleges. And the handout is intended to set the stage for the subsequent panelists that you'll hear from. So page one of the handout notes that community colleges, CSU and UC all have policies to determine the extent to which incoming students are prepared for college level work. And remedial education is intended to help college students who may still have pre-collegiate level skills in reading, writing or math. And as the state's most selective higher education segment, UC assumes that students who come in, who are admitted to UC are proficient in math, but UC does access certain students for proficiency in English composition. Community colleges and CSU both have assessments for students in math, as well as English. At the bottom of page one we do know that the remidiologication is know by different terms and different institutions, community colleges for example; commonly refered to as just basic skills education so you'll hear that. Page two you will see that each year community colleges Determined that about 75% of incoming students are unprepared for college-level math, English, or both. And CSU draws from the top one-third of high school graduates yet 40% or just over 40% of those students are assessed as needing additional help in math, English or both. At UC the percentages about 20-23%, 23% of students coming into UC are not able to demonstrate readiness for a college level English composition, via writing exam or other means. And whether a student is identified as college ready or not, can have a big bearing on their chances of completing, of graduating. At community colleges, there's a 30% point difference in graduation rates among transfer or degree seeking students, depending on whether they're deemed college ready or not college ready. And the differential at CSU is 20%ish points. So it's still pretty significant. Page three discusses kind of a traditional approach to remedial education that you reference Mr Chair. Traditionally, students who can't demonstrate proficiency via a test are placed in what's often times a multi level sequence of pre collegiate level courses. These courses often are lecture based and involved clack, abstract concepts and practice exercise that are very repetitive in nature. And research over the past several years has found that this approach can actually do more harm than good. For example, national research has shown that placement test often identify students as unprepared as pre-collegiate level in skills when in fact they could have been successful in a college level course. And community colleges, California Community Colleges are right now finding out that they've been systematically under placing students in remediation for years. For those students that really do need to be in remediation, they often find they're-
[{'start': 21, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kirsten Corbin: Hi, good morning. Kirsten Corbin, Dean in Academic Affairs at the California Community College Chancellor's Office. Thank you very much, Chairman Allen, Vice Chairman Wilk, and esteem Members of the Committee. Thank you for inviting the California Community Colleges Chancellor's Office to speak with you today. It is a privilege to be here. I am here to introduce Deborah Harrington from our partner organization at the California Community Colleges Success Network. And doing so, I want to provide a very brief introduction of the role of the Chancellor's Office in supporting basic skills education. In your background materials, you will find a more complete summary of our activities and accomplishments. Over the last 10 years, the legislatures consistent focus on and support for basic skills has aided the California Community College system in exploring effective practices and developing strong frameworks for scaling such practices through out basic skills programs. This work has taken place within the foundational principles of our system, local control and collegial consultation with the academics, and on academic, and professional matters. In March 2007, the report affectionately known as the Poppy Copy that was published. It indicates the 26 effective practices in basic skills programs. In the aggregate, implementing these practices would Institute a cultural change at the majority of our colleges. But one that is more holistic in nature, a whole college involvement and a whole student approach similar to that of guided pathways that you're hearing about now and integrated planning. This level of involvement from the entire campus is vital for finding solutions for an issue that impacts 70% to 90% of our student population, and for maintaining the momentum and motivation to persevere in the face of challenges. Since the inception of the basic skills initiative in 2007, we have steadily seen colleges adopt the effective practices that are called for in the Poppy Copy. Professional development events have provided colleges with specific examples of practices, principles, and programs. You will hear more about professional development and the 3CSN program from Deborah Harrington. The recent infusion of financial resources for basic skills, the $90 million for the basic skills and student outcomes transformation program, Paul mentioned earlier. $10 million for the Basic Skills Partnership Pilot Program, and additional funding for certain non-credit courses is providing significant opportunities to build effective practices to scale while also ensuring colleges have flexibility. At the Chancellor's Office we have undertaken an effort to integrate the college's planning of three major programs, the Basic Skills Initiative, the Student Equity Program the, and the Student Success and Support Program. These programs were selected because they share the same goals of increasing student's success while closing achievement gaps. However, they were also good candidates because when integrated, they involved the entire college and approaching students in a holistic manner to help them achieve their educational goals. In addition, the Governor's Budget proposes to invest $150 million in one time funding to support guided pathways. This one time infusion is vital to support our colleges in bridging existing student support programs and bringing clear and coherent academic pathways to scale like the associate degree for transfer. Our office is in strong support of the funding and see basic skill transformation as a key component of the success of pathways. I'm happy to answer any questions related to the Chancellor's Office role. But now, I would like to introduce my colleague Deborah Harrington, Executive Director of California Community College Success Network or 3CSN and Dean of Student Success at the Los Angeles Community College District.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 146, 'end': 151, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 167, 'end': 171, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 365, 'end': 383, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2197, 'end': 2215, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2360, 'end': 2364, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3730, 'end': 3748, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jessie Ryan: Good morning, Jessie Ryan, Executive Vice President for the Campaign for College Opportunity, a California-based nonprofit dedicated to ensuring that more students have access to college, and succeed in college. I could have easily become a statistic. As the daughter of a struggling single welfare mother, having attended eight schools between kindergarten and high school, I've viewed a college education as my ticket out of poverty. And like the vast majority of students in the state, I saw community college as an affordable way to access my college dreams. When I arrived at Sacramento City College, eager to begin my college journey, I was immediately ushered into a room, where I was told to take an assessment test. I hadn't prepared for the test, I'd skipped breakfast that morning. I was flustered from a missed bus connection, and was totally unaware that this high-stakes test could, effectively, determine my academic future. I passed the English assessment with flying colors, but was told that I placed into elementary algebra. I was dejected. I still remember the sinking feeling as I was handed a list of the several remedial math courses I would need to take before arriving at a college credit-bearing course that would actually count towards my degree. As a non-math major that only needed a single statistics class before transferring, the idea of adding three semesters of non-college credit-bearing math to my pathway left me seriously contemplating, as so many students do, giving up. As Paul Steenhausen shared, the reality is, frustrated by their placement, each year, thousands of students placed into remediation never show up for classes. However, I was lucky. With the support of a counselor, I managed to skip my required remedial math sequence and enroll directly in a statistics class, where I worked hard, earned a B+, and became part of only 4% of community college students that will successfully transfer within 2 years. Unfortunately, of the 80% of California community college students required to take remediation, less than a quarter will persist and, ultimately, successfully complete college-level English or math. This is astonishing, particularly when research shows that students just like me, who skipped their remedial assignments, do just as well in gateway courses as those who took remediation first. As Katie's testimony illuminates, remedial classes are a huge stumbling block on the way to a degree. But there's innovation occurring that bucks these troubling dynamics. Some phenomenal faculty across the state are leading efforts to fix the broken remedial education system. While there's broad awareness of the problem of remediation and its implication for students, colleges, and the cost to the state, the student perspective of this experience is not well understood. Any effort to improve the success of underprepared students must begin with an understanding of their experience. Each year, the campaign for College Opportunity trains a cadre of community college students, known as the Completion Core. For years, these students have identified reforming remedial education as among their top priorities. They've described their remedial education path as a game of chutes and ladders, with multiple slides, turns, and exit points along the way. Completion Core students share that community college students overwhelmingly enter a community college expecting to achieve their academic goal within two years. Lengthy remedial education sequences only add to frustration, and promote a feeling that community college is not, in fact, a college experience, but a high school redo. Many view basic skills math and English classes as, and this is a quote from students, where students go to die, and lament standardized testing that doesn't account for past academic success. Take, for instance, Olivia Light, a first-generation college student, who went directly from high school to a California State University, where she assessed into college level math. After her parents lost their home, due to financial hardships, she returned to her local community college to help her family get back on their feet. Olivia had to take yet another assessment test. But this time she was told that she had failed her math assessment and would need to retake algebra. Olivia was devastated, having completed algebra 2 successfully, with a B, in high school. She asked the community college if they could simply accept the results of her previous assessment, and was told no. She was distraught, explaining that she didn't get the disconnect that Senator Pan was talking about. How could multiple assessments yield different results? Why didn't her successful completion of high school courses and her GPA land her into college-level math? Like many students, Olivia decided this process was not student-centered. But she resigned herself that she would have to take a few years longer before she would achieve her dream of a college degree. Lula Matute on the other hand, the daughter of Hondurian immigrants, having completed all her high school math requirements, was totally demoralized after placing into the lowest level of remedial math. Insulted by assignments, like basic arithmetic, that she felt were far below her ability, she was thrilled to discover an accelerated statistics pathways. And you've heard about this pathway from many who've testified before me. At City College of San Francisco, it was a great fit for her political science major. She excelled in the class, was able to transfer to UC Berkeley within 2 and a half years with a 3.9 GPA, and has since become an outspoken advocate for scaling the accelerated statistics course sufficient to meet student demand across the state, emboldened by the visible inequities she witnessed in her class on the remediation pathway. Students like Lulu and Olivia, who were placed in remedial courses, get caught in a basic skills bottleneck that too often does not let them enter college-level classes that'll ensure they'll reach their college dreams and be prepared for good jobs, the jobs we know we'll need in a future California economy. However, faculty-led efforts like the California Acceleration Projects, aimed at increasing student completion of remedial education have demonstrated great gains. Across the state, with the aid of initiatives like the Basic Skills and Student Outcomes Transformation Program, courageous educators have crafted innovative ways to assess and place students, deliver math and remedial education alternatively, and provide vital student supports. In these efforts, as Katie stated, odds of completing college-level English have more than 200% gains. And math students are more than four times more likely to succeed. And I'll wrap up by just saying we must remember that college students come to community college campuses for college, not for an extension of high school. It's our responsibilities to honor these intentions and put all students on a road to success.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1513, 'end': 1529, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2356, 'end': 2361, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3856, 'end': 3868, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4169, 'end': 4175, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4318, 'end': 4324, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4604, 'end': 4607, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4809, 'end': 4815, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4991, 'end': 5002, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5861, 'end': 5865, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5870, 'end': 5876, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6622, 'end': 6627, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Laura Metune: hi, i'm metune and i'm vice chancellor of governmental relations. i would just say that we do have statute and regulation that speaks to multiple measures requirements. we've traditionally taken an approach that colleges have flexibility within those requirements in how they use those multiple measures. and i think that's probably a place where our new chancellor eloy oakley is interested at looking at, how we can encourage and support and if necessary, require more colleges to move towards processes that we know improve student outcomes.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 366, 'end': 377, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dawn Keopke: thank you, good afternoon mr. chair and members, dawn jonah keopke with keopke and associates, on behalf of the california council for adult education education and california adult education administrators association. both entities focused on k-twelve based adult education here in california. our adult schools in california, have been working,as you may know, under the new adult education block cramped, working with our community college partners, other community based organizations for the last few years on adult education. developing pathways from k-12 adult schools and into community colleges, career opportunities, and beyond, and one of the things i would just urge the committee to consider. as part of the discussion is the value that adult schools provide in terms of working with adults who perhaps need additional basic skills assistance, high school equivalency. as well as working with our immigrant populations to provide. cultural needs there, in terms of citizenship, esl and others that are also a pathway to addressing some of the issues discussed here today. so i'd really encourage the committee to keep adult schools in mind as you deliberate this year on a host of bills on these issues. they are again, working very collaboratively across the state with their community college partners and really trying to fill a need there when it comes to adults. i would just also note that with regard to that the challenge for them has historically over the last number of years been with funding. for maintaining capacity in the adult schools to meet those needs, so just understand this is not the budget committee, but just as it relates to filling the gaps and meeting those needs. funding is a critical issue for them. so, thank you, and appreciate your consideration.
[{'start': 49, 'end': 66, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 72, 'end': 78, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Julie Bruno: good afternoon mr. chair, mr. vice chair. my name is julie dawn bruno, the president of the academic center for california community colleges. the academic center is designated to legislation to represent all 58,000 faculty in the community college system regarding academic and professional matters including the area of curriculum, and student success and preparation. today, i'd just like to tell you a little bit about our approach to basic skills and my colleague, cheryl aschenbach, behind me, is going to give you a few more specifics. basic skills instruction, both credit and noncredit, is essential to our students, since it's the springboard that really launches them into achieving their educational and their career goals. we've had over and over today from your presenters that for instruction to be effective, we really need to tailor it to the students, to meet them where they are and then to take them to their next level to advance them further in their education. as educators, we know what works for one student may not work for another and we know that same principle works for our colleges, as well. with 113 colleges serving very different student populations, we must recognize that one approach to basic skills will not work for every college, just as one approach will not work for every student. the academic senate assists faculty in learning about a variety of successful approaches to basic skills by disseminating information providing professional development on evidence-based practices, as well as promising innovations. the academic senate frequently holds workshops and breakouts at our events. we partner with many of the folks that you had from our system. and we really do a lot of work at our instructional design and innovation institute, where we can get faculty together to really have some deep conversations. we also do presentations, regional meetings, events, and we publish articles and papers on things like multiple measures. we actually have two papers on multiple measures, because it is required in title v that our colleges use those methods. we've been able to provide greater opportunities for different approaches, thereby assisting faculty to select and implement the practice that can best serve their unique student populations. this is really critical because of the diversity of our communities in the state of california and the needs of our students in those communities. finally, the academic senate is often called upon to consult in developing state-level policy. as the organization that represents all community college faculty, we are often in the best position to provide the faculty perspective on pending legislation and system policies that will affect all instruction, not just basic skills, but it's a huge part of what we do. we look forward to collaborating with you and our system partners on future needs, and efforts on basics skills instruction, thank you.
[{'start': 53, 'end': 69, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 470, 'end': 487, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cheryl Aschenbach: Good afternoon, my name is Cheryl Aschenbach. I am Co-Chair of the Chancellor's Office Basic Skills Advisory Committee, a chair of the Academic Senate Committees on Basic Skills and Noncredit, and an English Professor at Lassen College. I am also an elected representative, as Julie said, of the Academic Senate. As she said, the Senate does not promote just one approach or innovation, but instead, we promote many, and help our faculty understand the options available to serve their students. We do partner with a number of different groups in order to accomplish that. One example of this is we have partnered with Career Ladders Project to help our faculty understand contextualized teaching and learning a little bit more, particularly in regards to basic skills. It's often not understood outside of CTE, or not well applied, and so we're trying to expand the use of that throughout the system so that basic skills can become more relevant to our students. It proves to be more motivational, and they accomplish at a higher rate. We also are working with 3CSN, and you heard from Deborah a little bit earlier, to launch an adjunct event that has a focus this summer on basic skills. And also on adjunct employment in our system because there's some barriers to that as well, to adjuncts becoming full-time, but that combination, because the reality is that our adjuncts teach a large number, the majority, really, of our basic skills students and so we want to have an event that pulls together the strengths of the 3CSN network, as well as the strengths of the Academic Senate, in order to better prepare those adjuncts for the rigors of teaching our basic skills students, and help them better understand the innovations that are being applied and that are available to them to choose from. We also are partnering with the Association of Community and Continuing Educators, the group that represents noncredit education in our system, Career Ladders, 3CSN, and the Chancellor's Office, all in order to host a noncredit summit for the first time this May, and that effort is centered around noncredit education, which as you know, often or primarily covers basic skills and CTE application, especially given the equal funding for those areas, and so that effort has been important to us in helping colleges recognize that noncredit education can serve a role in their basic skills sequence, or as co-req courses, or in contextualization with CTE, rather. And finally, multiple measures has been mentioned a number of times. The Senate, as Julie said, does support multiple measures, and it has been in regulation all along. The shift has certainly been occurring, with some of the evidence that you heard today, from placement as the primary means, with some input from multiple measures, to more multiple measures with placement as one of those measures, and it's been in legislation for quite a while, but is reinforced with the Common Assessment Initiative and the implementation of that. And the Senate supports that work, and is a leader in developing and providing input into the development of that common assessment. So there's much more I could tell you. I know time is short, so again, as the Senate being the sole organization representing the interests of our faculty and our students in academic and professional matters, we appreciate the chance to speak to you today, and look forward to having a future conversation, thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 277, 'end': 282, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1087, 'end': 1094, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2547, 'end': 2552, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Austin Webster: Thank you, Chair, Vice Chair, Austin Webster on behalf of the Faculty Association of California Community Colleges. We'd like to thank you for convening this hearing today. It's been a very enlightening conversation. In the interest of time, I'll echo the comments from my colleagues over at the Academic Senate. As we've heard multiple times today, faculty and counselors are a critical part of this conversation. Investing in full-time hiring, improving support for part-time faculty is definitely one of the things that we want to keep in mind as we're looking to address this. And we'll definitely help address some of the issues that we've discussed today and improve support for our students. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Leahy: Good morning, Senator Wieckowski and Members of the Committee. I am Brian Leahy, Director of the Department of Pesticide Regulation. I am here alongside Teresa Marks, the Chief Deputy Director of DPR, and Randy Segawa, Special Advisor to the Department and lead staff in this regulation. I have to tell you that every single word in this pages I am about to read has been gone over a few times to do it justice. I am simply going to read it, and then we can deal with the questions and what not. So, thank you for this opportunity to discuss the department's proposed regulation that we create a state-wide standard to provide an extra margin of safety around public K-12 schools and licensed childcare facilities, as pesticides are applied by their neighboring farms. We refer to these facilities as school sites. I will give a brief overview of the Department of Pesticide Regulation and how pesticides are regulated in California and the role of science in that process, then address specific questions of how the proposed regulation was developed, which stakeholders were consulted, and why the proposed regulation is health protective. We have recently received additional questions associated with the background material and we will be providing a written response to those questions as soon as possible. Nearly 40 years ago, I converted our family farm to an all-organic operation. Since then, California has made remarkable progress in how agricultural pesticides are applied. The Department of Pesticide Regulation is one of the most comprehensive, is the most comprehensive state pesticide regulatory program in the nation. Within our department are more than 300 scientists who are experts in everything from toxicology through environmental science. Our mission is to protect human health and the environment by assuring proper and safe use of pesticides essential in a modern society to protect public health, food supply and effective resource management. We also foster reduced-risk pest management. Before any pesticide can be sold or used in California, it first has to be registered by US EPA, and then registered by my department after a comprehensive evaluation of studies and a determination that its use, according to labor requirements, will not result in undue harm to human health or the environment. In addition, even after pesticides are registered for use in California, we continuously evaluate them for potential impacts to field workers, pesticide applicators, by-standers, the public, and the environment. We pay particular attention to the most vulnerable groups like children. This includes, assessments of acute exposure, chronic exposure, sub-chronic exposure, and lifetime exposure to monitoring and surveillance. Our scientists also review published peer-review literature. DPR monitors for pesticides in the air, water, and produce. We also track illnesses that may have been related to pesticide exposure, tracking and investigating pesticide illnesses provides important information to the department and assists us in making advances in pesticides safety. Important contributions to the improved application of pesticides have been made through education, licensing, and enforcement. All commercial applicators of agricultural pesticides are required to have a license in California. Education of applicators and farm workers is a critical component in promoting safe and effective pesticide practices. And of course, enforcement is a mainstay of any effective regulatory program. Our partnership with California's County Agricultural Commissioners to enforce pesticides use laws is unique in the nation. When I first became Director of DPR, I spent a lot of time out in the community, visiting farm workers, farmers, applicators, community members. I sat with individuals in their homes and yards, I visited schools and listened to their concerns. I contracted with the University of California to organize a series of workshops in In the summer of 2015, DPR hosted 15 workshops in five communities to discuss regulation concepts related to pesticides in schools. We listened to numerous stakeholders, both informally and formally in developing the proposed regulation, including school administrator organizations, health agencies, NGOs, labor unions, farmers, and pesticide organizations. DPR receive comments on regulation concepts from several thousand people, and those comments were instrumental in forming the basis of the proposed regulation. Some of the takeaways from these meetings were good communications and information between growers and their neighbors can help resolve conflict. Pesticide applicators are generally very responsible and take due care when applying pesticides near school sites. Schools and childcare facilities may not have the necessary information to prepare for and respond to a pesticide drift incident. Although some counties have ordinances governing pesticide use near school sites, there is a great need for a consistent, statewide standard for all agricultural pesticide applications near school sites in California. There were also concerns raised by recent studies about pesticide use AND community health. DPR scientists had already reviewed these studies including the California Department of Public Health's report entitled "Agricultural Pesticide Use Near a Public School in California," which focuses on the amount of pesticides useD near schools. We found these studies be useful, and we will continue to evaluate them in future research efforts. We asked for input from our county agricultural commissioners in order to better assess actual conditions on the ground. We surveyed county agricultural commissioners about the requirements and the conditions and effect when a farmer, adjacent to a public school, applied pesticides in their county. We looked at the effective practices used in reducing drift and the subsequent public concern. We also inquired of them as to what practices and approaches they thought could be effectively enforced. We evaluated our toxicity and exposure data, particularly recent air monitoring data, which indicates that the risk to children from agricultural pesticides applied near schools is low for most pesticides. This conclusion assumes compliance with current requirements in normal situations and does not account for exceptional circumstances or violations. DPR estimates that approximately 137,000 agricultural pesticide applications occur within one quarter mile of a school or daycare facility annually, 137,000. Given the large number of applications that occur around schools, the risk of potential exposure to children at schools, while small, is still present. Therefore, DPR decided to develop a regulation to provide an additional level of protection and address emergency preparedness issues for pesticide use near schools and childcare facilities. In other words, these regulations will provide an extra margin of safety for schools, in case something unexpected were to happen, for example a malfunction with the spray equipment or change in weather. And if an incident were to occur, these regulations would provide schools with information to assist them in appropriately responding to the emergency. The regulation published in September, 2016 included prohibitions on certain pesticide applications made within one quarter mile of a school site, Monday through Friday, during the hours between 6:00 AM and 6:00 PM. Certain other pesticide applications are prohibited within 25 feet or are not subject to restriction. That gets very detailed, we can go into it. The restriction will depend on the application equipment used, and the form of pesticide applied. The proposed regulation also requires the farmer to provide notification to his school site. The notification will provide, sufficient information to the effective school sites by identifying which pesticides will be applied and where, and who will make the application within a quarter mile the school site. To address local conditions, the proposed regulation includes an option for a written agreement between the farmer, school, and commissioner for alternative application requirements to achieve the same or increase levels of protection. DPR held three formal hearings for the regulation during the comment period. The comment period was extended beyond the required 45 days to 70 days to allow for additional pubic participation and ended on December 9th, 2016. DPR received comments from approximately 19,000 people, and is considering revisions to the proposed regulation based on the comments. DPR is in the process of evaluating and responding to the comments. DPR anticipates completing the rule making process and having the regulation adopted in the fall of 2017. Finally, I would like to make some key points about the proposed regulation. The purpose is to build an additional level of safety into existing systems by putting prohibitions on pesticide applications with the potential for drift during the hours when children are normally present and by establishing an additional buffer zone for the other applications. It also forces communications between farmers and their school neighbors. It simply makes it more difficult to create an unacceptable pesticide exposure at a school site. The current regulatory requirements for pesticide applications near schools vary from county-to-county and are primarily designed to prevent unacceptable exposures from normal pesticide use. The purpose of this proposed regulation is to one, provide minimum statewide standards for all agricultural pesticide applications near public K-to-12 schools and licensed childcare facilities. Two, provide an additional margin safety, in case of unintended drift or when other problems with application occurs. Three, increase communications between growers and schools and child care facilities. And four, provide information to assist schools and childcare facilities in preparing for and responding to pesticide emergencies. This regulation will add an additional layer of protection for children, while recognizing the needs of farmers. We believe it will provide Californians with the most robust protection in the nation for school children when agricultural pesticides are applied near their schools. And with that, thank you for this opportunity, and we will entertain questions.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 32, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 68, 'end': 79, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 153, 'end': 165, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 205, 'end': 217, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tony Linegar: excuse me, thank you, chair wieckowski and members of the committee. my name is tony jonah linegar. i'm the agricultural commissioner in sonoma county. and i'm here today representing the california agricultural commissioners and sealers association. county ag commissioners have been in existence since 1881. we act as an arm of the state enforcing state laws in regulations at the county level. so, we're acting an extension of the california department of food and agriculture, as well as are partners at dpr, the department of pesticide regulation. as such, we are the local authority with the responsibility for enforcing pesticide laws and regulations. we have a responsibility to protect the public health and the environment, as well as agricultural workers from adverse impacts of pesticide use. we take this responsibility very seriously. we work very closely with our state partners at dpr. dpr provides us with technical support, training, and oversight of our local enforcement activities. together, we administer the most comprehensive pesticide regulatory program in the country, if not in the world. the regulatory program at the county level is a very robust program that includes permitting for restricted materials, training for applicators, inspections, investigations, and enforcement. we rely on dpr's technical expertise to assess the risks that are associated with the use of these materials, and to promulgate science-based regulations designed to protect public health and the environment. we also rely on dpr registration branch to evaluate the pesticides prior to their use in california. so, the ag commissioner service to boots on the ground in the 58 counties throughout the state we provide input to dpr on regulatory issues with our knowledge and experience in the field. this is a vital relationship, as any good regulation must consider the farming practices involved, and the practical application of such regulations in the field. in mid 2014, after the release of the california department of public health's report, and with more attention being paid to this issue particularly on the central coast, we began to discuss amongst commissioners what different counties were doing in terms of conditioning restricted materials for pesticide use around schools. commissioners do have the authority to add site-specific permit conditions for the use of restricted materials. the application of these materials is also time specific, which gives the commissioner an opportunity to perform an inspection of the application. this ability allows the commissioner and his or her staff to take into account the site-specific conditions and to tailor the permit for the use of these materials to account for the pesticide that's applied and the particular conditions on the ground. such considerations include proximity to specific sensitive sites including schools, residences, water courses, the specific formulation of the pesticide, the weather conditions at the proposed time of application, the topography of the surrounding area, the timing, and the type of equipment used to apply the material. commissioners recognize the value of applying the site-specific conditions that allow them to more appropriately address and mitigate any potential impacts. through our initial conversations amongst commissioners, we recognized that ideally we would have a minimum standard statewide amongst counties with regard to restricted material permitting conditions. we also understood the importance of having the ability to condition a permit, to address the site-specific conditions on the ground. dpr releases suggested permit conditions for certain restricted materials, however commissioners also have the discretion to tailor those conditions to mitigate risk for the unique site and local situation. in late 2014, dpr put together a small group of ag commissioners representing the different areas of the state to begin discussing regulatory concepts around this issue. since commissioners do not have authority to condition the use of nonrestricted materials, we all recognized that the only way to have a statewide standard for pesticide use around schools is that it must come through regulation. we discussed the different approaches in consideration of the feedback that had been received at the public workshops. dpr conducted a survey of ag commissioners to determine just how common were drift or exposure incidents related to schools. the survey looked at a three year period from 2011 to 2014. of all the pesticide complaints received by the 39 responding counties, only two violations were associated with agricultural pesticide use near schools. neither of which resulted in an illness. conversely, there where eight violations associated with applications taking place on the school grounds. although the survey did not indicate a significant problem, we understood the importance of responding to the public's concern by building in an extra level of safety into the existing regulations. we also understood the benefit of increasing and improving the communication between the school and the farmers adjacent to the school. the result is the draft regulation released by dpr that we are here to discuss today. we believe the proposed regulation provides an additional layer of safety for children from pesticide exposure at schools. dpr not only looked at the toxicity of the materials, but also considered the formulation and the application method, as those all play a role in determining the potential for drift. after careful analysis, dpr proposed to prohibit applications during school hours that pose the greatest potential for drift. our state association supports the proposed regulation requirements to the degree that it provides uniformity and an additional layer of regulatory protection for schools. although the occurrence of drift incidents is extremely low, based upon a recent survey conducted by dpr, we feel that these regulations will further reduce potential for drift related incidents. most growers have already adopted these practices of not spraying near schools during school hours. so this aspect of the regulation will not have a tremendous impact on those growers. the area of greatest concern from a regulatory perspective is the 48 hour notification, and a few references have been made to that. administration of this requirement will be logistically challenging, time consuming, and will take valuable resources away from high priority enforcement activities. since the applications most prone to drift have already been prohibited during school hours, we believe there is limited value to providing notification for applications that are not prone to drift. we believe that public resources should be dedicated to efforts that have demonstrated value for reducing risk to benefit public safety for school children, farm workers, and the environment. thank you.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 38, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 80, 'end': 98, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Smith: thank you. good morning, mr. chair, mr. co-chair and committee members. i am dr. karen. the director of the california department of public health and the state public health officer. thank you for inviting me to speak for you today on this important topic. the proposed regulations put forth by the department of pesticide regulation are a crucial step in insuring that all students in california are protected from agricultural pesticides while at school. with city ph chair, with the department of pesticide regulation, a strong commitment to addressing this issue. i know you've already heard a lot about pesticides and how it so i'll try to keep it high level at this point because you'll hear more from my esteemed colleagues pesticides, i think you know and we've said, are an important component of modern agriculture. but they do pose a variety of both environmental and public health risks. to that end, california has been, for decades, at the forefront of pesticide controls, safety, and research. but despite these efforts, pesticide incidents do still occur and can pause a risk to the public's health. pesticides have well documented impacts on human health. historically, these health concerns have centered largely, as has been mentioned here, on emergency pesticide illnesses and acute effects. in the case of acute pesticide poisonings, individuals can experience anything from mild symptoms to, in more serious cases, even death. these impacts, however, are generally fast acting and visible, so they can be clearly linked to specific pesticide exposures. in response to these kinds of high-profile incidents and increased public concerns, regulatory approaches have been implemented to prevent incidents of acute pesticide illness. increasingly, however, public health research has also shown that repeated exposures to low level pesticides contribute to chronic negative health effects. associations have been demonstrated between living in proximity to agricultural pesticide use and cancer neurological disease, respiratory impacts, birth outcomes, and other adverse conditions in human populations. ongoing research being carried out in california's salinas valley and elsewhere. important to our understanding of how living in close proximity to pesticide may increase adverse health outcomes. particularly among children both prenatally and through early life exposures. this research has shown decreases in cognitive functioning in young children living near agricultural or pesticide applications. and in young children who may have been exposed prenatally. unlike acute illness resulting from pesticide poisoning this chronic health outcomes maybe multi factorial and not occurring until many years after the exposure. any cause effect, that relationship between the pesticides and these chronic illnesses would not be readily apparent. we also know that living in agricultural communities can place populations at risk for pesticide exposures. not only farm workers handling pesticides or working in the fields are exposed. research has shown that agricultural pesticide residues can be detected in nearby homes and rural communities. we also know that the children in general are most susceptible to health effects of pesticides exposure. relative to their body weight children eat, drink, and breathe more than adults increasing their exposure to environmental hazards on a pound for pound basis. children often exposed are also exhibit behaviors that increase their risk for pesticide exposures. playing outside, putting objects into their mouth, and spending time crawling around on the ground. finally, children are maturing and their physiology, and in particular their brain development undergo rapid precisely choreographed changes. toxic exposures during this time may interrupt to critical developmental milestones leading to long term damage. in april of 2014, the california department of public health released a report estimating the pounds of pesticide used to jason public schools. for 15 agricultural counties in california in 2010 which was the most recent year at that time for which data was available for the study. the purpose of the study was to characterize pesticide use near public schools for agricultural counties in california. incorporating the best publically available geospatial data of the time. the program mapped the boundaries of school properties and with assistance from the department of pesticide regulation and county agricultural commissioners. agricultural field boundary data were obtained from 13 of the 15 counties. when combined with the records of pesticide applications through the pesticide use reports data collected by dpr. this allowed us to better pinpoint where pesticide applications had occurred. using the intersection of pesticide use records and field location data, we were able to estimate the pounds of pesticides applied within a one quarter mile buffer around each school. the quarter mile buffer was used for this hazard assessment because it was the most common buffer size cited in county restrictions already in place on pesticide use near schools. and because it is the most common buffer used in published studies. this hazard assessment did not measure pesticide drift nor does it protect or predict pesticide exposure. the assessment was done to provide better data on potential pesticide hazard near schools. the assessment found out of 2500, 64% or about 1600 schools had no pesticide use within a quarter mile in 2010. while 36% of schools around 900 schools, had some pesticide use within that same buffer. of the top 5% of schools with any use nearby, this was 45 school affecting over approximately 35,000 students. pesticide use range from 2,600 pounds to 28,000 pounds. overall hispanic children are 91% more likely than white children to attend to school in the highest quartile of agricultural pesticide use. across the 15 counties assessed, three fumigants were the most heavily used pesticides within the quarter mile buffer. chloropicrin, 1,3 dichloropropene and methyl bromide, all three compounds are classified as classic air contaminants. 1,3 dichloropropene is a potential human carcinogen and methyl bromide is classified as a reproductive and developmental toxicant. of the top 10 most commonly used pesticides near schools nine have a half life in the range of days to months. six of the 10 remaining chemicals are active for 50 days or longer. all of these findings were documented in detailed and the report as well as break down of pesticides. pesticides use new schools for each of those 15 county.
[{'start': 81, 'end': 86, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matthew Allen: good afternoon, i'm first up it looks like. good morning, good afternoon, mr. chair and members of the committee. again, i'm matthew with western growers association. we appreciate the opportunity that you have provided us to speak about pesticides and the protection of children's health. our association represents farmers who provide 50% of our nations fresh fruits and vegetables, including half of the nations fresh organic produce and 99% of the nations tree nuts. as such we strive each day to grow and delivery a safe and secure supply of nutritious food for california, our nation and the world. our members include not only farmers but also grower processor companies. these companies grow and then process fresh produce before they shipped to restaurants, grocery stores, and other retail outlets. i want to stress that the out set that farmers prioritize maintaining a safe and healthy environment for their workers and for the surrounding farm communities which includes local schools. maintaining that level of safety is absolutely critical from both the human health perspective and from an operational perspective. to that end, farmers are diligent in making sure that pesticides are applied according to the law and because they also live and work in the same communities. it is a legal requirement of all growers and certified applicators to apply pesticides according to their label requirements. the labels are developed after a very lengthy scientific, and regulatory process by both the usepa and the epr, including comprehensive risk assessments to ensure that workers, by standers, surrounding communities and the environment are indeed protected. in fact california remains the only state that has a complete second level of review that builds upon the review by the us epa. furthermore, the existing scientific research and review process, account for potential off target movement of the product in labels and instruct operators to apply products in a manner that avoids drift. the potential for drift is modeled and the appropriate label restrictions are implemented in order to mitigate against this potential exposure. applicators and growers are also trained to apply pesticide in a manner that avoids exposure and they use utilize equipment that allows precise and target applications. western growers is necessarily concerned about the proposed dpr regulation on pesticide use near schools. because a review of the data demonstrates that growers and applicators are applying crop protection products according to their existing label requirements and that those requirements are working as designed to ensure safe use and mitigation against potential risk. the process that was used to create those regulation appears to discount the fact that real world data shows that the combination of current labeling, training, science and regulation is effective in protecting the our schools and school children. in 2013 the national academy of sciences conducted a program review dpr and came to the conclusion that the department provides a level of precautionary protection beyond what science indicates is necessary to assure safety. western growers is also opposed to the quarter mile buffer around public schools and child daycare facilities for aerial and spray blast applications or crop protection products. the quarter mile buffer would be a statewide standard and doesn't recognize but there are unique situations where flexibility is required or should be granted. uniform buffers are problematic, as supported in a recent 9th circuit court of appeals opinion, which affirmed the position of the us epa. which stated that uniform buffers are not an appropriate standard for the use of crop protection products. furthermore, the existing scientific research and review process accounts for potential off target movement of a product. and labels instruct operators to apply products in a manner that avoids drift. the potential for drift is scientifically modeled and appropriate label restrictions are implemented in order to address and mitigate this issue. an arbitrary one size a buffer does not reflect specific items like influencers like wind direction, physical barriers and also a lot of new technology that our growers continue to use and are bringing more more into the field. things like electrostatic or magnetic spray machines. we also believe that the annual and application-specific notification have the real potential to cause unnecessary concern and confusion for schools and child daycare centers. when the annual notification and application-specific notifications are received. these notification requirements are also impractical and inflexible when we kind of look at how our operations work on a daily basis. as an example, the 48-hour application specific notification does not recognize the daily challenges growers routinely face when responding to or planning for forecasted weather events. crop protection products are selected and applied in response to pest pressures, and again weather events, costs, logistics and many other factors in order to safeguard the crop from loss or to impede the spread of disease. it is critically important to be able to respond rapidly to the unique nature of each pest or disease problem in order to reduce the likelihood that additional applications need to be made. the 48-hour notice restriction ties the hands of the grower and puts california farms in a position of not being able to implement their pest and disease management plans. in closing, we believe that the existing federal and dpr registration and regulatory processes that utilize science to determine and address the risk of each pesticide product via the label, are working as intended. the result of this rule is likely to be many acres of land coming out of ag production in california. however, we do advocate that additional training and education about proper detection tools is always beneficial for both growers and schools. and that more substantial conversation really needs to occur regarding school site planning decisions and citing schools in agricultural zones. i want to thank you again for the opportunity this afternoon. and i welcome any questions.
[{'start': 125, 'end': 132, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Francisco Rodriguez: good afternoon, thank you for the invitation and allowing for the opportunity. but my name is francisco tony rodriguez. i am vice president with the california federation of teachers and president with the pajaro valley federation of teachers. the california federation of teachers represents about 100,000 members. we represent school employees everywhere from classified personnel, to early childhood education, adult education, community colleges, and uc lecturers. so we're spread out throughout the state. in pajaro, the pajaro valley unified school district extends from northern monterey county. we represent three schools there, two of them which are actually cited in several of the studies as having some of the highest exposures in the state, all the way to aptos in santa cruz county, where we represent about 28 school sites. several of our schools are directly adjacent to agricultural fields. i live in watsonville, and watsonville is a community that's for decades has had tensions with regards to the application of pesticides near schools and in general i would add but also, more on a personal note, i live about half a block from macquiddy elementary school. macquiddy elementary school is adjacent to a field that is fumigated. or in the past, has been fumigated. the playground where children go out to for p.e. is less than 70 feet from these fields that are fumigated. i have two young daughters, one, a four-year old and a two-year old. that would be great if they could walk to school every morning and i would feel safe or they would feel safe at that school and know that the school is doing everything in their power to inform me about any potential hazards in the school. and so, they're always talking about choice. and so, my wife is also a teacher. so, i could choose to send them to the school that she teaches at. but unfortunately, her school is also directly adjacent from schools or from fields that are fumigated as well. so, it doesn't leave us much of a choice when it comes to choosing a school site that is not adjacent to schools that are fumigated. our biggest concern as an statewide organization and as a local organization is the long term effects of this exposure. we just heard from the previous panel, and some of the information is concerning. i and many of our members are familiar with it because we have an interest in this and concerns, obviously. but we want to make sure that, as one of the speakers pointed out, the use of pesticides around schools doesn't turn out to be something like what turned out with lead poisoning. that we're going to find out several years later that we had it wrong all along. and so, what we would like to see is that there be a move towards a greater precaution rather than the status quo or looking at this as too much regulation. so, as far as the notification, our school district and our bargaining unit recently worked with the monterey county agricultural commissioner to come up with an agreement of a five-day notification. along with providing information on a specific website with regards to the applications and the schools and the pesticides that are used. we have not had any, as was expressed before, mayhem or complete chaos because of these notifications. in fact, in santa cruz county, we have had a five-day notification on this for quite some time now. and we don't understand the, how this would create the panic. we see this notification as a way by which the communities, the school, and the agricultural interest can sit down and have further dialogue with regards to what's in the best interest of everybody. first and foremost, of course, the students. we also understand that the community around the schools wants to know. they want to know what is being applied, i am hoping that as my daughters get older that i will be able to have the privilege to, if i know that there's going to be an application of a fumigant, to be able to spend the night or a couple days away from the area. i know it sounds a little crazy here because this is my home and but i am hoping that i receive enough notification so that i can do that. and i know many people around our communities would like to know. and it's not a panic is not a chaois.it's knowledge. and it's the ability to be able to have meaningful dialogue with both school personnel and the agricultural industry, which was pointed out earlier. many of the growers are, live in our community and are part of our community. and the people across the street from myself are in agriculture and my whole family i was going to mention to mr stone, he mentioned the costilla valley i grew up in the coachella valley. my family is in table grapes. i have several of them that are crew leaders and foremen for growers there. so i am quite familiar with the impacts, not just on the growers but on families whenever something goes wrong. with our agricultural industry. and so, just want to stress the point that notification is a good thing. and, seven days, i don't think is extreme. i don't think it's out of the realm of what is possible. the other point that was brought up was with regards to the burdensome or work that would be imposed on districts or the liability by notification. currently in the pajaro valley whenever we receive a notice of an application of fumigation we, the district rather sends out the notification via what are called robo calls basically we all gotten them during the election time. i've given them, too. yeah. so, you're quite familiar with them, but also they are already set up through the healthy schools act. so this is not an additional cost to districts. this is not anything that is going to require a lot of money. and they have been very efficient. we've received a lot of positive feedback from community members. they're just glad to know that there is going to be an application. and it's up to them what they want to do with that information. we have had, again, i repeat, no chaos, no mayhem. nobody jumping off of buildings because there's going to be an application or anything like that. the other point is that schools are no longer open from eight to 3:30, as it used to be. many schools, middle schools, high schools, have what they call a zero period. where students can come in and take an additional course or make up a course. there's extended learning that takes place usually after school, monday through fridays. it's not unusual to see buses picking up children after school at five or 5:30 sometimes. and of course, saturdays are just. it's not unusual for there to be an event or an activity on a saturday on the school campus. so having the notification be as long as possible allows for the school. we have seen it in our district. the ability for the school to work with the local growers and farmers. and we have had success in actually changing the schedule of an application. so it's been a good thing. in the past. i know, specifically in monterey county. prior to the five-day agreement. whenever there was a notice, people would be very. our members would be very upset that they didn't get enough time. and i would continue hearing it for days after that. with the five-day notification, people have more of an option as to what they personally want to do with regards to that specific application.
[{'start': 94, 'end': 118, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 4600, 'end': 4605, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Angel Garcia: Good afternoon, and thank you for making a space for community to be heard. Again, I am Angel Garcia. Founder of Coalition Advocating for Pesticide Safety. And a community organizer with El Quinto Sol De America. I was born and raised in Tulare County. Worked in the fields myself. And returned to my community after graduating from college. I want to start off by saying that as an advocate that works closely with rural communities. There is no denying that pesticide drift happens. Pesticides drift for miles and for days, even weeks. Even after application. So after hearing and meeting with numerous thousands of community members in Tulare County. They are urging for protection to be full time, full mile. [UNKNOWN] Is an integral component that cannot be left out of these regulations. So, California schoolchildren have the right to be protected from the most hazardous pesticides used near the schools they attend. Yet many schoolchildren. Especially Latino schoolchildren that live in a county like Tulare. Where they make up more than 71% of the student body. Continue attending schools were pesticides are used just on the other side of the chain link fence. Alarmingly, the high disproportionate likelihood of Latino schoolchildren attending schools where pesticides of public health concern are used nearby echoes throughout the other neighboring counties, as well. As it stands, and it was mentioned earlier, in the San Joaquin Valley, as it is in the whole state. School protection varies from one county to another. Take, for example, Tulare. We rank third in the state in overall pesticide use. The county schools there have a quarter mile protection only if the pesticide is officially restricted. And if it is applied from the air. The southern neighbor, Kern, which ranked second in pesticide use with 27 millions pounds. Schools have a more inclusive quarter mile protection for schools that is not limited to certain pesticide category or method of application. This is just two neighboring counties of where I am from. Again, I am from Tulare County. A region that reported 8 billion in agriculture sales. And produced 62% of the state's oranges. I come from a county where more than 60% of the population is of Latino background. And where there are over 45 undocumented residents living there. 45,000, excuse me. An area that prides itself on keeping things local. Where people that leave eventually come back to start a family. A place where people may physically leave the area. But in the words of a local Fresno poet, Gary Soto. They cannot shake off the dirt. A place where one becomes deeply rooted. I also come from a place with the most pesticide related illnesses of all California counties. Accounting for more than one in five incidences. I come from a place where Telone, a carcinogenic fumigant, was applied at the fourth highest level in the state at Sundale Elementary. And sixth highest at Cottonwood Creek Elementary. A place where Carboro, a cancer causing pesticide, was used within a quarter mile of Palos Verdes Elementary. More than in any other school in the state. I'm from a county where four schools were found to be in the top 10 for most Carboro use. I'm from a place where 63% of our schools in Tulare County had pesticides of public concern applied within a quarter mile. That's the highest figure in the state. I would also like to mention that, in my home county, there's a problem with this normalization. The idea where the empowered argue that the current DPR proposes another burden. And things should be kept the way they already are. Meanwhile, the reality of the disempowered. And I mostly mean the uneducated Spanish monolingual immigrant community that feeds the nation. Are expected to accept the dictated conditions. Furthermore, I come from a region where it is acceptable and expected for certain school administrators, that claim to care for their school children's safety, to have the audacity to not support a proposal that would protect students from the most dangerous pesticides because of liability concerns. Historical progress in pesticide safety was made in the fields, thanks to the United Farm Workers. But in the words of Cesar Chavez. And this was echoed in the research done by Dr. Smith, Hertz Piquiodo, and Dr. Hassad. Farm workers and their children demonstrate defects of pesticide poisoning before anyone else. Take the story of Senida Morales, for example. A mother who has a child diagnosed with autism and is currently expecting another child. This mother has lived in cities like Woodlake and Ivanhoe. Areas where brain and lung harming organophosphate, chlorpyrifos is applied in the orange groves. And though it is difficult to definitely link her child's autism to the skunky chemical smell that came from the air blaster across the street while she was pregnant. A 2014 UC Davis study noted earlier, found that women who live with a mile of fields where organophosphate insecticides were applied during pregnancy had a 60% increase in risk of having children with autism. In Senida's words. I thought the chemical that I would often smell during my first pregnancy was not harmful. Because they would spread across the street in your schools. But then again, I would ask myself. Why is he wearing protective gear? I would like to highlight this as an example that drift happens. This is further corroborated by the air monitoring result at Shafter High School in Kern. County. Where the concentration average of T lung was 0.26 parts per billion. That is 187% of DPR's previous cancer regulatory goal. And 256% of OIHA's recommended cancer risk mitigation. That is science. This is not pandering to emotion. I know that we are pressed for time. So I will just conclude my comments with the following. Once again, I urge this Committee to really consider my testimony. As Californians, we have a right to know what pesticides will be using near the schools that our children attend. And the right to be protected from hazardous drift. As a community resident of this state, I urge you to start from the premise that drift does happen and build on that. Mothers like Senida should not have to live in areas where neighborhoods and schools are susceptible to toxic chemicals. We have a responsibility to these mothers. Thank you for your time. And I am hopeful that children's health will be prioritized, because this is long overdue. Thank you.
[{'start': 88, 'end': 100, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2549, 'end': 2558, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4207, 'end': 4219, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4269, 'end': 4274, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4276, 'end': 4290, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4300, 'end': 4306, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4421, 'end': 4435, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5075, 'end': 5081, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6165, 'end': 6171, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Roger Isom: Good morning. Since I'm the last, I'm not going to read my comments verbatim. I'm going to try to hit the highlights of the points that I wanted to make here today, and maybe address some of the comments that have been made today, answer some of those questions. First of all, for the record, my name is Roger Isom. I'm with the California Cotton Ginners and Growers Association, representing cotton ginners and growers throughout California, and the Western Agricultural Processors Association representing almonds, walnuts, pecans and pistachios throughout California. I want to say, first of all, thank you for holding this hearing. We welcome the discussion. And many of the speakers today are right. We should be concerned, and we are concerned. Many of the comments have been about the school children that are our children. We live, work all around those schools. Some of my board members are actually board members of those rural school districts, and are heavily involved. And their kids go to those districts. I, myself, am from Tulare County and went to a rural school. So we are concerned, and you should be concerned as well. But that's the point I want to make today is that that that concern has been addressed. One point that has been lost today, although DPR kind of touched around it a little bit, is the review process that has already been done. It takes a minimum of seven years for a chemical to be registered. And the reason, actually it's more like 10, but it takes seven years worth of science at EPA and with the registrants. Biological, toxicological studies, what happens in the environment, how we apply it, all of that analysis is done. So that before it ever gets to EPA, we're presenting a chemical that we know is going to be safe. EPA will then take up to three years to review that data and make sure it's right. If it's not, they'll send it back, deny registration or ask for modifications and application rates or application methods. So the concerns that have been brought up have been addressed, as they should be. That's one step. What's different in California is that California does their own review on top of that. And that's very important, and I can give you a specific example. For example, there's a product called Bidrin that's used to address the brown stink bug. And we had an emergency situation a couple years ago where cotton growers down in Portola Valley were losing a bale, half a bale to a bale, of cotton because the brown stink bug was attacking the plants. Bidrin's a chemical that's registered in every state but California. We tried to file for a 24c, a special local needs application, or registration. We could not get that because they did not have a soil dissipation study that was done in California. There was one done in Mississippi, there was one done in Georgia. But California has regulations that require some of these tests to be done in California so that it mirrors and reflects California conditions. There's additional work. For example, there's worker exposure studies that have to be done because a lot of the crops grown in California are more labor intensive. So that goes above and beyond what EPA looks at. Environmental fate studies, to study the drift that people have talked about, that's additional that California requires on top of that to make sure that they're protective of the children, teachers, anybody that might be exposed out there. Because, again, I just want to remind you guys that is us. And I know that sounds like a lot of talk, but it isn't. One of the things that we do in the cotton industry, we don't want to spray pesticides. That's the last thing we want to do. And we have looked at ways to do this. For example, we're, knock on wood, going to be declaring the pink bollworm this year eradicated. That's a pest that when I started in 1992 in the cotton industry, we were having to spray seven times for. That's unacceptable. We developed a sterile release program where we sterilize moths, release those via an airplane, and they mate with the native moths, basically, where they don't reproduce. And so that technology, coupled with Bt cotton and some trapping, we're able to eliminate that pest without an ounce of pesticide. Taking that facility that growers paid for, we paid for that technology, we pay an assessment every year so that the CDFA that administers it, we're paying their people to go out there and monitor this. So it's 100% grower paid for. We're taking that technology and seeing if we can apply it to navel orangeworm, which is a big pest that we spray for in tree nuts. And we don't know if it's going to be successful, but we're trying so that we don't have to spray. That's just another area. Why are we concerned? Because, again, we want to see that whatever regulations we have to live with are based on fact. One of the examples that was handed out was this chart. And I agree, it correlates that the more we use, the more you're going to see out there. But what was left off of this chart, or not addressed, is the fact that it never exceeded the health screening levels that DPR put in there. So that's important to note. The concern we have with the notification, and I agree, and there's certain things. If you know, like a pre-plant fumigation, no problem. You can put that out, you know in advance. And so if there's a change in wind speed or whatever, hey, we can delay that. If we have an immediate pest problem, and we have a 48 hour notification under these rules and the wind speed changes to where we can't apply it within the regulations, so we stop, then we have to do another 48 hour notification. And so you get to the point where that pest, as I think one of the speakers talked about, might be a few trees or a few plants. But by the time you redo that notification and redo that notification, now you're out and you're dealing with the whole field. So that's a concern. The other concern is this annual notification where I have to notify, tell you of all the pesticides I might apply, probably 95% of which I am not going to apply, and 100% of which, I don't want to apply. But I'm going to have to list everything on there that I could use because the last thing you want to do is use something that wasn't on that list. So I'm going to list everything. So what's going to be on there? One of the things that one of the speakers talked about was organophosphates. Do a simple Yahoo search or Google search, take you to Wikipedia, it's going to tell you under organophosphates, nerve agent. When Joe or Ms. Homeowner sees nerve agent, they're going to pull their kids out of school. I mean it's the end of the world type thing, and I'll give you an example. I had a call three weeks, well, not three weeks ago, three months ago, I'm sorry, right before cotton harvest season. And it was a lady calling saying, hey, can you tell me when the cotton harvest is going to occur? And I said sure, why, why do ask? And she goes, well, because my daughter's coming out here to visit and I don't want her to be here during cotton harvest. And I said why not? And she goes, well, because you guys spray Agent Orange to defoliate the cotton. I said Agent Orange? We do not spray Agent Orange. But she had believed that. And she goes, well, why should I believe you, you're just a representative of the cotton industry? So I actually took her, I said, do you have a computer? I got her on the DPR's website. And I took her to their pesticide use database, and walked her through all of the chemicals that we actually apply on cotton, and took her back. I said, you can go back every year, back to whenever, 2008, 7, however far back it goes. And I said you can see that's not on there. But it's that fear that we're afraid of, and so when we see all these lists. And I can assure you, if I don't have to use an OP, I'm not going to use an OP. We do not want to do that. Again, every dollar I spend on that's a dollar less I make. But the real bottom line is, and DPR unfortunately didn't do a good enough job of defending themselves and talking about how rigorous a process that they have. It's incredible, sometimes to the point of being frustrating, because we spent 10 years to get through EPA. We have to spend another three years going through DPR and all of their studies and review that they require. One of the points that was made is looking at new softer chemicals. Even those new softer chemicals have to go to that entire review process. So we might have something out there right now that's less toxic, better for the environment, safer, but it's going to go through that due process just to make absolutely sure, makes it very difficult for us. So again, I just want to bring us to reality that it's gotta be based on facts, thank you. We would like to have science motivating us.
[{'start': 304, 'end': 314, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 6557, 'end': 6560, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Margaret Reeves: thank you very much .i promise to say something new. my name is margaret francisco reeves, i'm a senior scientist at the pesticide action network based in oakland,california. we are also members of the state wide coalition californians for pesticide reform. i want to say first that the regulations are an important step in the right direction. regulations are never the endpoint in and of themselves. they're important engines for change and i very much appreciate director lehigh's mention of change. we're looking for behavioral change. i just want to appreciate all the good discussion, and all the examples of effective notification in the central coast and the current county. i think those speak for themselves. what i want to talk about is the engine of change and solutions. i warn that i am getting a little bit out of the silo but i think this is an important piece of it. there's a going public concern about health hazards of pesticides exposure. but that's one several pressures and opportunities face by california farmers. one example of opportunity is of course, california's 2.2 billion in organic sales. from over 2800 certified farms on more than 687,000 acres with more in transition. also, california farmers increasingly recognize the importance of building soil health and i appreciate dr. humison's comments about both integrated pest management or ipm and the resources available in the uc system. and her very brief mention as she was leaving about soil health. think california's healthy soils initiative, or federal conservation programmes that are regularly oversubscribed in california. the practices supported by this programs include reduced till, continual cover, crop rotations, hedgerows, etc., practices that are common in organic production. but that they result in all sorts of benefits to agriculture, including pesticide use reduction. for the very same practices that increase soil health, infiltration of water, greater drug resistance, greater resistance to flooding are the very same practices that build healthy vibrant agricultural systems. greater resistance to pests and disease. and reduction in the dependence on the use of highly hazardous pesticides. so, i think it's very, very important that we keep this in the perspective of agricultural production. what are some of our opportunities, what are some of our tools? let's look to the uc system nrcs, epa, federal farm build programs that all are designed to help farmers make that transition. so, work with farmers, help them make those transition.
[{'start': 64, 'end': 89, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 475, 'end': 481, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1314, 'end': 1321, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Toni Trepare: mr chair. toni margaret trepare on behalf of the california teachers association. we want to align ourselves with mr. rodriguez who re-enmarks from pajaro, the federation of teachers. we've been working on this issue for a number of years. we support the notification, we'd like to see it a mile. we appreciate the hearing, we thought it was very informative and helpful for all concerned. so thank you to all, to you and to members of the committee. thank you.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 118, 'end': 127, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cynthia Cory: hi, chairman, cynthia toni cory, california farm bureau. i just want to take a second and ask you to get out of your lane and remove the cone that you were talking about earlier. very early in the morning you talked about we can't and go backwards, and i agree we can't go backwards. but what we need to think about is how we go forward and you've entertained a lot of folks. we have a very thorough discussion and we appreciate that. but i ask you to rethink when dr. himson talked about school citing. there is a huge nexus. we just passed a $9 billion school bond last november. there's going to be a heck of a lot of new schools. they're going to be sited on agricultural land. senator monning and i carried a bill last year. a lot of the agri organizations supported it. the agricultural commissioners supported it. it got out of the senate, sb-313. it was not, we were not able to get out of the assembly education committee. and the reason is because the builders wouldn't let it out. and i'm just being very candid here. i've done environmental issues for 27 years for the farm bureau. i did this, i took this bill because i have a very sick colleague. and he's on those lands for 39 years and i i kind of just gone to this hornet's nest. i have no idea about land use. i thought naively, i'll go to my builder friends who i've worked on many environmental issues with and say, come on guys. all i'm asking for is some transparency and some dialogue before you cite a school on agricultural land. i'm not saying, we're not taking away your jurisdiction. i'm not taking away your authority. i'm talking about some transparency just on agricultural lands, school siting. and they looked at me and they said, cynthia, you naive child. we use schools to build in this state and we're not going to let anything get in the way. so, i just want to leave you with that thought. if you really want to move forward, then think about that and please embrace the efforts that senator monning made. we're not doing it again this year because we are not going to be able to get out of that committee. but if you really want to approach this and think about a forward thought, please look at school sighting in this state.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 469, 'end': 475, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 690, 'end': 697, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1714, 'end': 1721, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1980, 'end': 1987, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cathleen Fillpatrick: Cathleen Fillpatrick I'm a retired school nurse from Pajaro. I have longer comments. I was told that the time would be limited. Can I just give that to you? I also studied occupational and environmental health at the University of Washington, that's part of a nurse practitioner program. Worked on pesticide exposure assessments of kids who lived in the orchards up there And was involved in safety training for pesticide applicators, field workers and their families. When I came back to California, I worked with families and students in [UNKNOWN] and also on policies and procedures for kids with all kinds of health problems that impact learning. That includes asthma, learning disabilities, ADD, autism, cancer, all of those have been linked to pesticide exposure. But our kids also come with a lot of social issues, poverty, hunger, housing issues, parents who work long hours, undocumented fear of deportation, lot of trauma. And all those can also affect health and learning. But we at the schools have little control over them. There is one thing we can control. Kids need to spend their day in a safe and welcoming environment. Our kids, our farmer kids, are exposed to pesticide throughout their development from multiple sources, multiple roots, multiple chemicals, and unknown interactions. In the 40 plus years I've been working on environment issues going back the agent orange, the evidence of harm for pesticides as only grown in spite of the chemical industry outstanding child health advocates both in the lab and in halls of government. For farmer, for children this is clearly is environmental injustice.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Dennis: my name's melissa cynthia dennis, and i'm a third grade bilingual teacher in monterey county. we have an air monitor at my school due to a lawsuit that happened in the 90s. that dpr installed. and i got into this issue due to constant meetings that i was having with families due to learning disabilities with their students, and coming from another school that wasn't next to agricultural fields. i was shocked at the back log of students that need special ed services who are not receiving them, because of the abundance of students that require those services. also our school has a little more than 500 students and in the last five years we've had three students with brain tumors. so, at our school common lunchtime conversation revolves around pesticides exposure that teachers and the students are receiving, and i've heard from numerous parents who are very concerned about their exposure to their students and to themselves from pesticides. i know that a lot of parents aren't showing up to meetings like commissioner rasmussen talked about. that he has sent out 10,000 letters and only 10 parents showed up but there's a lot of reasons for that. but it doesn't erase the fact that we do care. and my main point that i want to make today is about notification. we have a right to be notified. our parents have a right to be notified about first of all. what is being applied, how much of it is going to be applied, where is it going to be applied? what are the risks to human health and what are the symptoms when you've been exposed? and from what i've seen, there's been notification pilot programs that have happened in kern county, imperial county, monterey county. commissioner lauritzen has started a new program where we're getting five-day notifications. the hysteria, mayhem, panic, it's not there. our parents may not be the most educated people in the state. but they do understand when they're being put at risk, and they appreciate not being protected from their own panic. they appreciate being respected and being notified and informed of what's going on for their students at school. so i just like to finish with urging the dpr to go on further with larger buffer zones, more comprehensive. you can't call what they have right now a buffer zone, a buffer zone means there's no spraying at any time. they're still spraying right next to our schools one day a week, and since it drifts for a whole week then where is the buffer zone? it's not a buffer zone, so i'm urging them to create a buffer zone. and then make those buffer zones innovation zones. zones where our friends, our neighbors, who are the growers, the ones that help drive the economy in california. who we love and who are not our enemies, they're our allies. we need to support them through state-sponsored help, financial help for them to create innovation zones. for example, uc santa cruz, uc davis have agricultural departments that have been researching new techniques. and we need to make bridge that can create a better future, thank you.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1028, 'end': 1037, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1693, 'end': 1702, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sarah Alcapai: hi, my name is sarah melissa alcapai. i'm a student at uc santa cruz, and i kind of want to touch on what melissa just mention at the end about new systems of agriculture that we should really try to push forward. and i think that these regulations would encourage growers and industries to transition into those. so, like a couple of the other speakers right now have mentioned about agricology, which is just a novel way of agriculture. so, we're not opposing technology, so pesticides, we're not opposing pesticides. but, and said you'd be using pesticides in combination with like natural social human aspects to encourage soil health, crop diversification. ways to help the crops grow that don't need that intense pesticide action or like application. and if you did not, or if dpr didn't try to expand buffer zones, the information wouldn't be out there. people wouldn't really know about pesticides as much. we need to have comprehensive documentation of all of this. and that i think is a really big way to shift the way that we grow. and i think california is the biggest leader in doing that. and i think as senate members, it's a responsibility of you guys to really be the leaders also and helping us. it's not just the students, it's not just the thinkers here who have to go and do it and be lobbying for, right? it's more about everybody working together in order to do and that includes dpr and you guys as well. and actually shifting the way that we produce our food because it's just not sustainable right now,it's killing everything. but that it's my point and i hope you guys agree.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 106, 'end': 113, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lucia Calderon: hi, good afternoon, my name is lucia, and i organize group called safe ag, safe schools in santa cruz and monterey county. and we are a group of teachers and union leaders. farm workers, farm worker advocates, as well as healthcare professionals and actual students themselves. and i wanted to address some of the comments that mr. allen from western growers made. the first one is that all the label requirements are followed to reduce the risk of drift, and so this buffer zone regulation is not necessary. and i what i wanted to say was that even when all labor requirements are followed, pesticides persist in the environment. the department of public health study that was reported in 2014 told us that eight of the 10 pesticides that are most used in california persist in the environment for over a week. chlorpyrifos, which was the focus of the uc davis charge study, or one of the focusses of that study, persists in the environment for a third of a year paraquat dichloride which is used most, or was used most heavily in 2010 in north monterey county persists in the environment for 1,000 days. so labor requirements do not address chronic exposure to low levels of persistent chemicals and neither do dprs proposed regulations. the second comment that i want to address was that uniform standards are not appropriate and that many factors influence applications. so uniform standards may not be appropriate considering varying conditions in different counties. but a quarter mile buffer zone should be at least a base distance for county [inaudible] commissioners to improve upon based upon local conditions. and it's true that many factors influence why pesticides are applied, how they move and how they may affect people who are exposed or how they expose people. and we can't control the weather, but we can control when, where and how much pesticides are applied and i think we should start with that, thank you.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 332, 'end': 337, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bill Thomas: My name is Bill Thomas. I represent Blue River, a high tech firm based in Silicon Valley that's dedicated to advancements in pesticide application. The Blue River, it mounts on the tools bars tractors. Computer on each row with photos slides, that can distinguish between desirably placed lettuce and weeds. And then under hood there's one little spit of a pesticide to kill the non selected for lettuce in this case. This is just in the emerging even though what is in the field now in the Salinas Valley, the only one that is close to schools, these instant places. So there's a lot happening on the technology side of agriculture. This is just one application beyond interest the regulatory side, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Loomis: hi, my name is karen. i am a granddaughter, daughter, and cousin to rice and almond growers in colusa county. i'm also a reading intervention teacher to kinder and first grade students at ohlone and hall district elementary school in watsonville, california. schools are quite literally surrounded by conventional strawberry fields. with all due respect to representative stone, there's a fourth economic pillar to our california economy. we have hollywood, we have technology, we have agriculture and we're growing next generation of our innovators and workers out of schools. we need to consider their health an economic impact, their health issues cost our state. economics, the economic impacts to farmers of these regulations have been brought up. i want farmers to make a profit. do not doubt this. but let's consider other economic impacts of these pesticides. after only working two years at these schools, i was diagnosed with asthma. it is only getting worse. what is the economic impact to my district to pay for my health care? my school at ohlone has had three incidents of brain tumors in less than one decade. the most recent one is the first grade student named ally sota. this year, she had a brain tumor. she's been operated on, and she now has severe impacts to her eyesight. our district has had to convene a team of experts, and she now has a full-time aid. her parents are farm workers. they do not have private insurance. let's consider the economic impacts to california to pay for her care. let's consider the economic impacts to our district to pay for full-time aid. what are the economic impacts to our farmers? the dpr estimates that the largest cost to growers for this pesticide policy is an average annual cost of $1,200 for the annual notification. that works out to about $100 per month or less than $4 a day. my school's right to know that drift from pesticides are scheduled is worth at least $4 a day. my school district, pajaro valley unified, receives five-day advance notification of fumigant applications. that's beyond dpr's 48-hour proposal. no problems have resulted, only improved communications. and some of the applications have been moved to safer times. let me give you a specific example. just this year, i studied a quarter mile notification of fumigation that we are given at our school at hall district elementary. i noticed that on this map, just happened to be over a quarter mile of fumigation that was going to happen on a monday. i was really concerned, as were our staff and our parents that what would happen if there was acute emergency and this was happening on a monday morning? we called our agricultural commissioner. our agricultural commissioner talked to the grower. it was changed to the weekend. this happened also within our district. that was monterey county. it happened in santa cruz county earlier in this year. the same thing where it's going to happen within a quarter mile on a monday. we noticed, we called our county agricultural commissioner, they changed it to the weekend. notification does keep us safer. it doesn't create hysteria. i would like to urge dpr to think of the economic impacts these pesticides have when we consider the health of our students. but more importantly, i would like dpr to consider the moral costs of children exposure to pesticides, thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1178, 'end': 1187, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark Martinez: last but not least, my name is mark sarah martinez with the california strawberry commission. and i didn't bring my glasses, so, i'm not going to read my chicken scratch notes. but i'm going to reiterate some of the comments roger and cynthia made. first, california strawberry commission represents california strawberry growers, shippers, and processors. and the safety of our children are more important than anything. secondly, it's very common that our growers have direct communication with school principals, the administration, the athletic directors. by first name, do they know them? and cell phone communication is generally how the relationship works. and thirdly, as cynthia mentioned, it's really important to have a deeper discussion regarding where schools are built. so, i want to end on that, thank you.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 225, 'end': 230, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 235, 'end': 242, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 680, 'end': 687, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rick Rollens: Mr. Chair, members of the committee, and distinguished staff, Rick Rollens representing ARCA, the Association of Regional Center Agencies. We've submitted a four page letter to your committee outlining positions on all the issues before you today but you'll see a few personal appearances by me during the next hour or so on individual issues as well. First of all, we wanted to thank the administration and the Legislature for the great work last year, both in special session and in regular session, in working to help stabilize our system through the influx of funding through the MCO agreement, and also in the general budget. The regional centers are looking forward to working with DDS to ensure that the required reporting on the use of those funds be completed as efficiently and timely as possible. Thank you.
[{'start': 62, 'end': 74, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Will Sanford: Will Sanford, Futures Explored. I'm one of the lucky service providers whose worked for the department on a number of these issues. It's my highlight on this one, as I think the LAO raises an important point, we need to certify that we spent the money correctly. Which could be a simple certification, we spent the money correctly, which everybody could probably fill out relatively quickly versus some sort of detail. The other one is the Director made reference to the new standards that we have to be in compliance with by 2019, which is going to take in another huge lift in technical assistance. So the more time that our department has spent on that, we're going to focus on, how do we spend $170 million of state general fund correctly while we have the potential to lose $2.6 billion? So, I mean, I think that's a question that should be, at least, talked about.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barry Jardini: Good afternoon, Barry Jardini, from the California Disability Services Association. I'd like to echo Will's sentiments on the legislature, and, certainly, the Department's efforts, with rolling out ABX2-1. I know it's been complicated. We also have concerns about the reporting requirement. We're seven months into the fiscal year, where providers have been required to roll out this wage amendment pass through without clarity about what they're going to be asked on the back end. And to tackle Mr. Sanford's comments, we do think it might be the best use of time to make those as streamlined and as administratively simple as possible. So that we can get to the other huge amounts of work that everybody is having to do. I'd also like to comment on one of the items that was included in the ABX2-1 funding, which was the competitive integrated employment incentives, and the paid internship program. And I believe Director Bargmann spoke to this and some of the implementation challenges from the regional center level. Well, we'd like to see more consistency so that we can get that money out the door to providers to support individuals getting into competitive integrated employment. Thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 500, 'end': 507, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 925, 'end': 933, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jacquie Dillard-Foss: Hello, my name is Jacquie Dillard-Foss with the California Supported Living Network. First and foremost, we thank the Department because it has been a really inclusive, complicated event that we actually get to give our employees wage increases, so that's been extraordinary. Thank you to the legislature for making that happen. I do think that I was reading the LAO recommendations, it's going to be really complex. I can, maybe, consider myself one of the sophisticated providers and it will be, for these provider communities, very complex. I think that the 75% that you asked about is, in regulation, it talks about 75% of your time is in direct benefit to a person with a disability. Sometimes people misinterpret that to mean, I'm directly with a person, and that's not what that language means. So, I think there's providers that we've had to explain this, and DDS and I had had many discussion. And I think that will be, unless there's good clarity for a person, they'll go, well are they direct? Are they indirect? What does this really mean? So, I think that regulation, it's been there longstanding. What does direct services mean? It doesn't mean the person is working directly with, but directly for. And for us to understand to explain to a provider to understand. I do recommend that there is some delay because I think we're going to be in a complicated world. It's going to be all providers, from my understanding of talking to the Department of Finance during this. And you have providers who, it's going to be difficult, at best. And they are fearful. The supported living providers that I talked to, they're just afraid of losing their money, and then they're afraid of losing their rates. So there's a lot of fear based in something that should be a celebratory base because we fought for so long. So anyway, thank you to Legislature, thank you to DVS to continue to be inclusive. I look forward to moving forward. Anyway, thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Rath: hi, my name is, i'm not as tall as jacquie, okay? hi, my name is kevin jonah rath from the california respite association, also represent respite on the lanterman coalition, and we serve 1,300 clients in east bay. we support the lao recommendation, it would be great if we could just do what they said. i think it was very complete. we also believe that, unless, for the report back, unless it's an easy to use web-based application that could be accessed by a smartphone, or a laptop, or a notebook. that we will really have some problems with getting anywhere near 100%, and we demonstrated a model to the department during the survey period. and we have another model that we could demonstrate and show it's not as hard as it sounds, and we'd be happy to demonstrate that. and we hope that if we do have to do the report back, that it will happen because there are lots of group homes and small providers that don't even have the sophistication to easily handle a spreadsheet and fill it out. thank you.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 42, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 65, 'end': 81, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 229, 'end': 232, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sonja Petek: thank you, good afternoon, mr. chair and members, petek from the legislative analyst's office, you should have a copy of okay, great, the handout. i've been asked to present an lao overview and perspective on the developmental services budget, and to that end my talk will have three parts. i'm going to first highlight some recent state and federal policies that are really moving this system into a consumer independence direction, more focused on consumer choice. i'll also talk about some of the resulting funding pressures from those policies. i'll then, second, talk about some other funding pressures on the system, some of which nancy already mentioned. and then i will raise four issues for legislative consideration, including one of the items we were just talking about. so, if you'll turn to page one of our handout, i'm going to highlight three, i'm sorry, four policy areas that have had recent changes. the first being the hcbs home and community-based services waivers. as nancy already mentioned, and as some of our members of the public have already talked about, these, the home and community-based services waivers provide significant funding to the department. it's about 30% of the total department budget. and the new rules that the federal government passed in 2014, that the state has to be in compliance with by march 2019 exert financial pressures on the state. not only is there the potential loss of significant federal funding, but there's also the cost associated with getting these service providers into compliance. the next policy area that i would mention is the closure of the developmental centers. while this is an action that will likely result in reduced cost to the state, it was also a move to try to further integrate consumers into the greater community. and again, while this may save the state money in the end, i'm now on page two, there are some funding pressures associated with the transitional phase. namely, that the developmental center budget now relies much more heavily on the state's general fund. in addition, there is the cost to develop community resources for people moving out of the developmental centers. a third area that has already been mentioned today is competitive integrated employment, cie. and basically, cie means that people have full- or part-time jobs in integrated settings, making the going wage, or the minimum wage, whichever is higher. both state and federal law have moved in the direction of promoting cie for people with developmental disabilities, and generally prohibit sub-minimum wage pay going forward. there will be some funding challenges associated with these changes when it comes to training and educating consumers to training them for jobs. and then also, once they have jobs, to provide job coaching and job support. turning to page three, l'll just mentioned the last policy shift that we wanted to mention and which nancy already brought up, which is self-determination. she provided degree description of what self-determination means and we just would like to note that while self-determination could in the end, end up saving the state money the transitional roll-out period may end up increasing costs, at least temporarily. if you turn to page 4 for the second part of my talk, i just wanted to mention some other funding pressures on the developmental services system at large. the first has to do with changes in the labor laws. and specifically, the increases to the state's minimum wage has put a pressure on the state. there's precedent for the legislature to provide increased funding to cover service providers, staffing costs that are associated with paying staff the increased minimum wage. there are also other changes in labor laws. at the federal level, there was a law that limits the amount of unpaid overtime. and the legislature did provide a rate increase for home care providers to cover those increased overtime costs. at the local level, about 20 cities around the state now have a minimum wage that's higher than the state's minimum wage. however, there is not precedent for the legislature to systematically cover those increased staffing costs. it's more likely to come out as sort of individual consumer by consumer requests for additional funding by the service providers. and then lastly i just wanted to mention some demographic changes that are causing some funding pressures on the system, and nancy did a good job describing many of these. not only is there a rapidly rising overall growth in the consumer population, and it's outpacing overall state population growth. but on page five you'll note that there's the rising share of consumers with autism. and this has been shown on average to be the most expensive developmental disability to serve. there's a significant share of non-english speaking consumers. and consumers are living longer, which is a good thing, but it does come with increased costs. we have a chart at the bottom of page 5 showing the significant increases in consumer caseload growth as well as expenditures. and then, finally, i will bring up four issues for legislative consideration. the first we've already talked about a bit, but the lao is concerned that the state could miss the compliance deadline for the new hcbs rules, the compliance deadline being 2019. although the department has made efforts in this area, we're concerned that service providers have not been given enough guidance about what compliance means or what they will have to do to get into compliance by that deadline. what we would recommend at this time is that the legislature require the department to provide more information about the nature of the requests that were made in the fall for the $15 million. and i want to put one thing into context. as nancy mentioned, 900 service providers made requests for that funding. that is an impressive number but it's also only a fraction of the service providers around the state. and given that they requested $130 million, that's nearly nine times the amount of funding that was appropriated. so, this raises some concerns for us. we're thinking that the information they can provide about those requests could hopefully give a better sense of the extent and severity of non-compliance problems. and perhaps provide more information about what additional resources might be needed to get service providers into compliance. the next issue i want to discuss is the rate study. last year the legislature provided dds with $3 million for a contractor to conduct a study of the rate structure and to provide recommendations for reform. the department just issued a request for proposal. and within that rfp there is an activity that requires the winning contractor to provide recommendations about a rate maintenance process. we noted, as we read the rfp, that the rate maintenance process, we assume that that means recommendations for how to make adjustments to rates on an ongoing basis, but we note that it did not include consideration of economic conditions or other policy changes. and it's interesting because the current complexity and inflexibility of the rate structure is in large part due to those types of economic conditions and other policy changes. so the changes that were made during the recession. or the changes that are made to account for increased state minimum wages. what we would recommend, we respect that the rfp has already been issued. the proposals are due in early april. so what we would recommend during this month before the proposals are due is that the legislature ask the department to provide more clarity about what rate maintenance means and discuss with prospective bidders that that process could include consideration of some of these economic conditions, regional market conditions or other policy changes, and how those may be included and considered in a rate maintenance process. the third issue that we would like to bring up is last year the legislature appropriated some funding for the department to create a fiscal and program research unit. the department had requested the funding. we really think that this new unit can play a critical and crucial role as the system shifts toward a more consumer- oriented system of service delivery. without being overly prescriptive, we recommend that the legislature think about setting some more specific goals for the research unit so that it doesn't become overly focused on just responding to requests for information. and then lastly, to address the implementation of the rate increases from last year for the staff that spend at least 75% of their time providing direct care. we believe that the amount of time and the resources that it takes to implement, report, and enforce this rate increase has involved a significant amount of administrative work on the part of dds, the service providers, and the community, and the regional centers. we think that the cost of implementing and enforcing this requirement may outweigh the benefit of having targeted the increase to begin with. especially because a lot of the service providers are already limited in how much they can spend on administrative costs. we would note that requiring service providers to forfeit the increase if they don't meet that october 1st deadline sort of goes against the intent of the legislature from last year. to increase funding for these service providers. okay. thank you.
[{'start': 50, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 177, 'end': 180, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 637, 'end': 642, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 989, 'end': 994, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4428, 'end': 4433, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5793, 'end': 5798, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tim Hornbecker: thank you very much. my name is tim kevin hornbecker and i'm hoping that you received our information on the lanterman coalition. i'm the chairperson of the lanterman coalition, which is a coalition of 24 developmental disability organizations. so, we've gathered together, try to be on the same page to share our information and our goals, and some explanations of those goals. i also happen to be the interim executive director for earc of california. we did find a new director, so you'll have somebody new quite shortly. i'm also the parent of joseph, 35 with angelman syndrome living in the community with one on one supports. and as i start i want to share the impact of another legislator mentioned how these are life or death issues. and i share that with you because i have a son who has quite a life. number one, in the community with those supports. i also work for the arc of alameda county and in that capacity had a person who was in our program with a three-to-one ratio. and we had to say, we just can't keep you in this program, you need a one-on-one ratio. she wasn't able to get that one-on-one ratio, and within two weeks of being back home, she died. and that is how serious this is, and so when i share with you today, from the lanterman coalition and from the other knowledge that's been shared with you on our legislation. we're just so emphatic that this is, we're very grateful for the increase in funding that we received last year. but we're also as grateful as we are, we're also fearful of the cuts that might be coming down with the federal proposals possibly coming down. where we will lose to these federal matches, we rely over $2 billion a year in federal medicate matches. is the state going to have to come up with some of those funds? probably, if we want to keep people from not dying. that's how serious that is, so in number 1 we urge the state budget deliberations to include the recognitions of that. of the continuing need for sustaining of the services and the dds system in the future. in number two, the lanterman coalition continues to urge closure of the remaining developmental centers expeditiously. keeping each individuals health and safety central. these centers have lost federal funding and the state general fund has been forced to backfill those dollars. so when transferred to the community residence of the dcs, by definition, we'll now be eligible for federal funding. restoring that federal participation in their care and support. i'm going to try and go quickly here. so in three i'm just in short. keep the money in the system, we're saying that. and whether it's the money following the individuals into the system. whether it's the people that are already in the system who are lacking sufficient funds. and even considering what will happen when those facilities close. i'm not about to offer you some ideas of maybe making them into a whole foods and with the housing and then the state generates money from those. but whatever it takes, we're just hoping to keep those fundings that are generated in our system. because we're going to need it for our services for people with developmental and intellectual disabilities. on three, the next two years until that great methodology is completed, what are we going to do? i can't find people to work where i am for $14 and hour right now. minimum wage is $13 an hour in the bay area. down in orange county, i talked to our cohort, they're paying $10 an hour. in-n-out burger's paying $13 an hour. i know you've heard that before, trying to do a comparison, we really can't. and the people who do our work are dedicated people, direct support professionals. but they certainly should be paid more than we're able to pay them. the number five, actually number four, we've had programs that have closed. the linn center closed last year for children, early childhood intervention and children. are we going to have more programs closing? and i think we will. and again, nancy has in their reports and in arthur's reports, we have seen the numbers that have closed. so the funding for those and looking at the rate increase is going to be tantamount and paramount in the coming months. and finally -- okay, and finally on the abx 221 requiring the rate study, basically what we're asking for is transparency, input an actual cost base services.  not one rate fits all it's not just going to do it in our this incredible with our cost and differential. and we really do have to look at the cost where we're living. thank you.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 548, 'end': 554, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3983, 'end': 3988, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Amy Westling: Good Afternoon, my name is Amy Westling. I'm from the Association of Regional Center Agencies, also known as ARCA. ARCA represents California's 21 Regional Centers. Thank you so much for the opportunity to speak today. As Rick Rollens mentioned, we submitted a four page letter, and we've also submitted three additional handouts to explain our top three priorities this year. Just quickly, in a couple of minutes, wanted to review those top three priorities. Two of which, the latter two, overlap with The Lanterman Coalition positions that Tim just reviewed. Our first priority is examining how best to support families. And how to keep individuals with developmental disabilities living at home with their families when that's the desired outcome. Here in California we do a fantastic job of keeping people at home. 78% of the people we serve live at home with their families, compared with 57% nationwide. But we do know that the percentage of adults who live with their families differ significantly by racial and ethnic background. We know that 40% of Caucasians or so, reside at home with their families as adults, compared to approximately 75% of Asians and Hispanics. And so, these family support services really are essential. In 2009 as part of the great recession, the ability for Regional Centers to purchase camp and social recreation services as well as, was suspended and a cap was put onto respite. These are important family support services. These cuts were meant to be temporary, but they've become permanent. And, at this time, we would ask that they be restored. Additionally, we share The Lanterman Coalition's sentiments that the entire system is grateful for the cooperative work on ABX21. And for the additional funds that flowed in to the system last year. But we remain concerned about what's going to happen in the meantime while we're waiting for the rate study to be completed. One of the concerns that we have is that we know that as programs continue to close. That typically the programs that are developed to take their place or to serve those same people end up costing more. So is there a way to shore up good, quality programs if it won't cost us more to do that? And so we would ask that, as a cost-avoidance strategy, the department be given the authority, when a quality program will close. To increase the rate paid if it won't cost the state more to maintain that relationship with that service provider. Additionally, we appreciate the LAO's comments about unfunded mandates, specifically the local minimum wage. This is a significant challenge for service providers. In LA, the city and county, the minimum wage is expected to rise to $12 an hour in July. And in San Francisco to $14.00 an hour. Many of the rates, most of the rates in our service system are frozen and as the LAO mentioned, the primary mechanism for addressing this is through health and safety waivers. Each of these waivers must be completed for each person individually. There's one Regional Center that's told us that they expect to process about 4,000 of these just for transportation because of the local minimum wage. And it's a huge administrative burden for providers, Regional Centers, and the department alike. And in the best case scenario, if these waivers are approved you have a service provider who is paying an increased local minimum wage without additional funding to support that for months. And, eventually, if it's approved, they get the funding. But in the meantime you've got a service provider who is trying to float those costs and it's just making life very difficult for everyone. So, I appreciate your time and we would just ask on this issue that there be a more systematic process to address this rather than person by person and program by program. So, thank you for your time and I'll be happy to take any questions if there are any.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 222, 'end': 234, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 542, 'end': 545, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2480, 'end': 2483, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2822, 'end': 2825, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rick Rollens: Honorable Chairman and Members of the Committee, Rick Rollens representing ARCA, Association of Regional Center Agencies. We, of course, strongly support all efforts to fully fund both POS and operations, including service coordination, particularly while the rate study and the ops reform efforts are underway, thank you.
[{'start': 49, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Greg De Giere: Greg De Giere with the Arc and United Cerebral Palsy California Collaboration, which is a coalition of people with intellectual and developmental disabilities and their families, friends, and service providers. And we are a member of the Lanterman Coalition and, of course, support the five asks that you've all ready heard from. I want to focus on number four, the preserving programs that are on the verge of going broke. This is the ultimate safety net request, that these are programs that have gotten to the point where they have officially notified the Regional Center that they're going to close within six months unless they get more money to pay the bills. I just want to say that, in that case, if the Regional Center and the department agree that they're going to close, that they can raise the rates enough to keep them open. Because if they, well, from the point of view of those consumers, this avoids the transfer trauma and the disruption of their lives. From the financial point of view this avoids going to higher cost programs that the consumers will have to go into to meet their needs. We've given your staff language that we're not entirely married to, but we think it's a good approach. We'd like to discuss it with you. Our hope is that we may be able to adopt placeholder language so to keep this conversation going. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Evelyn Abouhassan: Evelyn Abouhassan with Disability Rights of California. I've provided DRC's written comments to the items on the agenda today. So, I'm just going to highlight a few things. We agree with many of the comments that were made up here today. I just want to say that, and related to the issue of social recreation and camping, those issues that really affect minority groups, under represented groups in the Regional Center system. We certainly support restoring those programs and looking at ways to bring that funding into play so that families can get the services they need. Those are the services that many under represented groups rely on. We have some ideas about how to make that happen. In terms of case load issues, agree with reduced case loads, particularly for those folks that are in crisis and in places like IMDs, those are the folks that typically would have ended up in the developmental centers. So, reducing those case loads, making sure that there are appropriate strong services and supports in the community to move those folks out. We certainly support that. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 70, 'end': 73, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bob Giovati: Good afternoon, Chair and members. Bob Giovati with the State Council on Developmental Disabilities. The State Council is the state agency that sort of rides herd from a 30,000 foot view, anything and everything related to the lives of individuals with intellectual and developmental disabilities. And just would like to attach ourselves to many of the comments that have been made all ready. And we're a member of the Lanterman Coalition as well. And speaking from that 30,000 foot view, and as a parent of an adult son with special needs, I can tell you that these are the most vulnerable citizens we have in California and they're extremely sensitive to change. And we need to have a professional level of support across the board for these individuals and that means people that are compassionate, caring, and skilled. As well as rates that support these programs and the availability of programs, because there's way too few out there right now. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barry Gherardini: good afternoon again, barry from the california disability services association. we represent providers across the full spectrum of services in the developmental disability system. and are proud members of the lanterman coalition, so we support the request of the lanterman coalition. and i'd just like to highlight, in particular, the unfunded mandates and the local minimum wage increases is really something that can cripple providers. particularly as we have so many local cities that are above the state minimum wage, these providers are never getting recognition of those costs, as the state has the mechanism. so certainly addressing those shortfalls in funding will stabilize the system and hopefully produce better services across the system. thanks so much.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Will Sanford: Will Sanford with Futures Explored. Two quick comments on the LAO's report. One is, [...] while the greatest outcome we'd like our folks to achieve sub minimum wage or what's called 14(c) certificates are still available, it's just much more difficult to use and operate. The other one is individuals under that are currently earning about $100 million a year who are California members. They pay taxes, they pay local dollars. Those monies could go away if we're not careful on how we approach that. The other one is that idea of compliance funding. I've raised this in multiple places. Compliance funding is a macro issue for providers. Compliance funding or compliance means that if I'm not in compliance, I'm about to get fined. So on a micro level, if I'm not in compliance, community licensing will fine me $250 a day to get it to compliance. So a lot of people may not say to you, we're not in compliance with the future. Which is where we are today. It's really transition funding, so I'd recommend maybe a change in language would be helpful for providers. I absolutely agree upon the closure issue. I closed a program, it impacted 40 folks who, if I could have gone through the normal transition from temporary to permanent rate, I would still be operating that program. It was frozen back in 2002, 3, 4. Somewhere back there. So anything that helps that would be helpful. Respite and Camp are key services for our families. They help keep families together. It's a much lower, more cost effective way for the state, especially through childhood into early adulthood, to maintain people in their homes. It's a very effective program. Allowing that to open up would be great. And case managers open case loads, negatively impacts our folks every day. They can't get the services, they can't get help, and if they're in crisis, it's really a problem. So making sure that we have the right number of case managers for our folks is very important. Thank you.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 12, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kevin Rath: Kevin Rath, Cal Respite Association. Thank you regional Senators for advocating for removing the cap for respite care cap. This costs the state money. When case managers are facing a family in crisis, and have a cap of 30 hours a month, what they do is they buy more expensive services. Second point I'd like to say is on the rate restructuring. We hope, we're at the Lanterman Coalition is putting together some operating principles that we hope the department will take into consideration as they look at the consultants' work. And we hope that the Committee that we're forming will have direct access to the consultants and to the department. And we invite this Committee and their staff to also be involved in that. Because it's, we'd like to see it a joint effort. And the third thing I'd like to do is tell you a story about the health and safety waivers. We serve Oakland. And we've gotten Oakland minimum wage increases easily for our respite program. But for our personal assistance program, which is under a different service code, and has to use the health and safety waiver, we've been trying to get, we've submitted the health and safety waiver over 15 times to our Regional Center for 50 clients. And we have not gotten a penny yet. We have not gotten a rate letter. We've gotten one rate letter that didn't work. So imagine these other larger agencies and Regional Centers that are dealing with thousands of these requests. It's just not going to work. So this is an emergency, and we hope that this can be addressed. And there's a bill out there that should fix some of it.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jacquie Dillard-Foss: I think he left it high enough, just so he wanted me to just know I'm taller than him. I'm late to state the obvious. Jacquie Dillard-Foss with the California Supported Living Network, and a member of the Lanterman Coalition. And we do support, because working together and that collaboration, it takes a lot of effort. And I'm sure Tim is very happy they've appointed a new Executive Director. Although Tony Anderson is here, and he should be hiding in the back because he did leave. The first is about the minimum wage for San Diego Regional Center. And I just want to target that, because there's providers there right now. It's 4,000 health and safety waivers that have to be submitted to DDS for per individual, just for them to try to get the minimum wage. The health and safety waiver is the only mechanism. So there is a mechanism to get to the regional minimum wages, it's just a bureaucratic nightmare. So I think, if anything, can we clear up the bureaucratic process to make the money that's going to go to this provider go through a process that's not so convoluted. Because it's not a health and safety waiver risk. The person's not at risk. The employer is at risk for going out of business, but the health and safety of that person. So it's a weird process to get to minimum wage and as these counties and cities do that. So I just think if we can look at how do you streamline that. And so I appreciate the LAO's recommendation. I am also the Executive Director of the STEP program here locally, I support 175 individuals in supported living services. I am assisting folks in supported living services to leave the developmental center, but at North Pay Regional Center, because my rate here is frozen. So I can't go to my Regional Center here that I've been providing services to for 22 years because I have a frozen rate. So I have to go down the street to a different Regional Center to get a rate that will sustain me to assist people to leave regional developmental centers. Although my Regional Center brought in new providers to help people leave developmental centers. That makes no sense. It's another bureaucratic glitch that can be fixed because they are paying those rates to those new providers. But here I am doing this for 22 years at my local Regional Center, I would have liked to just stay where I'm at. But I really am committed to seeing the developmental centers close, doing it right, doing it respectfully, and making sure that people get the services they need. And I think after 22 years I might know what I'm doing, sometimes I don't think so. But anyway, thank you very much.
[{'start': 118, 'end': 138, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 333, 'end': 336, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 404, 'end': 417, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dwight Hansen: mr. chair and members, hansen on behalf of the alliance, supporting people with intellectual and developmental disabilities. we're a statewide coalition of providers. i'd like to associate myself with the comments that have already been made. and i'll highlight just quickly a couple of things. we are a comprehensive system, which means that the individuals within the system have individual needs. and it's very hard to categorize these needs and suggest that one size fits all. so, as appreciative for example as we are of last year's money that went to wages. it addressed a wage crisis within our system. there are many more issues. any of you that have ever run a business know there are many more issues than just your wages. so by highlighting the wages, it solved one issue, but it didn't solve the real estate issues. it didn't solve utilities. it didn't solve all of the other kind of problems. so, again, we're appreciative of that. i'll call out what the lao just said, and in spades. if we can comply with this by certifying that we did it properly and then we're always open for audits, that would be a streamlined way of approaching this issue. we need a comprehensive rate model, we need to assemble a team of folks around that consultant that know what they're doing. right now we haven't seen that assembling of the right gathering of folks for this. and i think people that do this every day are the best people to advise. so we appreciate the legislature requiring this study to be done. we'd like to go to the next step now to make sure that the provider groups and others that are recommending to the consultant, include those folks that do this kind of stuff every day. thank you very much.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 968, 'end': 971, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Maria Garcia: mr. chair and members, maria with greenberg traurig, here today on behalf of the parent hospital association and the sonoma land trust. wanted to, of course, support comments already made as it relates to the increase in reimbursement rates and the streamlining process. i did want to specifically highlight rates as it relates to those state staff currently working in developmental centers and the possibility of encouraging those staff to move into the community programs. we've talked about it before and we are a broken record. we do believe these state staff currently working at the developmental centers are some of the most experienced and highly trained in addition to the relationship that they currently have with the residents there. and so getting rates to encourage and incentivize employers to take them and state staff to go is the priority for us. in addition, as it relates to the closures of developmental centers and i know we'll talk about this more later in the agenda, we do, a high priority for us as ensuring that that safety net is there for those individuals who do fail in their community placement settings. thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Doyle: thank you, mr. chair, members, doyle, developmental services. the agenda mentions the issue of transferring development center savings to the community services side and i think as director bardman pointed out initially in her testimony is that the department's budget is moving in the right direction. the population in our developmental centers is declining, and the community population is growing. if you look at our proposed budget for 2017-18, you'll see that the developmental center budget is dropping by $80 million and the community services budget, it's proposed to grow by 359 million. so we are seeing money going into the community side to the extent that there is a proposal to take savings from the developmental center side. it would be a policy decision that would need to be made about how those funds should be used. to say that there is savings doesn't provide a purpose for them. the legislature, the administration would have to agree on if those funds first of all should be transferred to the community services side, and then for what best purpose. so from our perspective, that's a decision that would have to be made by the legislator and the administration combined.
[{'start': 190, 'end': 197, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rick Rollens: Honorable Chair and Members of the Committee, Rick Rollens with ARCA. ARCA supports the proposed Trailer Bill Language that would enable DDS to issue policy directors in advance with emergency regulations, and to help the state to work towards compliance with the HCPS final rule. ARCA also appreciates the funds that were included in the current year budget, as well as the proposed 17-18 budget to fund some of the program modifications that service providers will need to make this process work, thank you.
[{'start': 46, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Evelyn Abouhassan: clearly i'm not that tall, evelyn, with the disability rights california, we support the department's request to provide authority. we are concerned that there may be changes at the federal level and that these regulations may be repealed with the new administration, so we strongly suggest that we certify. some of the good guidance that we got from the hcbs regulations. thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nancy Bargman: Good afternoon, I'm Nancy Bargman, the Director of the Department of Developmental Services. Thank you Chair, thank you members for allowing us to provide you an update on many of the issues that are before us today, in the proposed budget. I've been asked to provide you a little bit of an overview of our service delivery system. So, I'll go ahead and do that and then just jump right into issue one if that's okay. So, to give just an overview of our system, and we take a look at our very special system. It's something I think that we're all here to demonstrate, as far a very strong passion for what we do. But in California, we have a unique system. We have every individual who has a developmental disability in California's entitled to necessary services. I mean that's done through a number of different ways. So as far as the Department of Developmental Services, we move forward in providing the services to the individuals that we serve. We have over 300,000 individuals in our service delivery system today. We do so in two different ways. The first is through four state operated facilities, three of which are developmental centers. One is a community center, and then we also provide services through the 21 Regional Centers throughout the State of California. For our proposed budget for 17-18, we're proposing to update our budget to $6.9 billion. In this, it includes a projection that we're going to be serving about 317,000 individuals in California who have a developmental disability. Of which 42,000 are in our early start program. So that's for anybody who is under the age of three that's at risk for developmental disability. Regional Centers in California vary in size. We have our smallest Regional Centers that's serving approximately 3,700 individuals. Our largest Regional Center in this state is serving 32,000 individuals. We continue to see a significant amount of change in our service delivery system. To give you kind of way of background, the Lanterman Act is what we really operate under. The Lanterman Act is celebrated its 50 years of service this past year. Under the Lanterman Act, we're able to provide those services under the entitlement. Regional Centers contract and provide services directly to individuals in the community through their contract relationships with service providers. Currently, we have about 25,000 service providers in the state, well each individual provider may be providing a number difference services. So it doesn't represent the number of actual service delivery but the number of providers that are contracted with Regional Centers. Throughout the years, when we're taking a look at our service delivery system, it's important to look at how the services are changing. Because the trends in the services and the individuals that we're trying to meet their needs are also changing. When we take a look at our growth year-over-year over the last couple of years. We are seeing a growth in our service population, our consumer population, of about 12 to 13 thousand individuals per year. So when we take a look at the 21 Regional Centers, a midsize Regional Center is serving about 13 individuals. So we are growing as a system, almost a Regional Center a year. We're continuing to serve the individuals through the 21 Regional Centers without change. Over the past 10 years we've seen a 43% increase in the number of individuals that we're serving. We're also seeing that individuals are living longer and we're having a growing aging population. 10% of our population is over the age of 55. There's been a shift in the most populous ethnicity representation. 10 years ago, 41% of our consumer population was white. Today, 33% of our total consumer population is white. Where during the same time period, the change as far as our Hispanic consumer population has increased. It's increased from 33% to 38%, and has become our largest population of individuals that we serve through the Regional Center system today. We have also seen a significant increase with individuals who have autism diagnosis. In the last 10 years, we were seeing the change which was 18% 10 years ago. Today we're seeing 34% of our population are individuals with autism. We've also seen many changes but also challenges within our system. We are facing the closure of three developmental centers. Currently, we have Sonoma, Fairview and Porterville that are currently closing concurrently. We also have a requirement to be in compliance with the new federal guidelines that where we are been able to seek federal participation, home and community base services. You're going to here us references it as HCBS. So we have compliance requirements to achieve that by March to 2019. And so, you're going to hear more about that throughout your agenda today. We're also seeing challenges within our service delivery access to our underserved ethnic populations, to include inequity of funding. And we also see challenges in housing and employment. So, again, these are areas that we're going to be able to continue to discuss today and future discussions. Among those challenges we are also having many many opportunities. So we have seen with the approval of special session ABX21 funding, that we began to start addressing some of these challenges. Such as being able to more forward with the HCBS compliance, starting to address and try to move that needle forward to address the disparities in our inequity of funding. For our disparities in different ethnic groups. And also move forward initiatives with competitive integrated employment. We're also excited to continue to move forward within our federal application for Self-Determination Program. Self determination is California's only state that has a state law that we have to submit, which we did a couple years ago, an application for self determination. in which an individual can have management and responsibility of their own budget and make the choices that they choose to make. In the first three years, once we do receive approval of our application from the federal government. We'll be able to provide that opportunity for 2500 individuals in California. We also have seen significant amount of legislative support in our system. Currently, we have projected, in our community services budget. We're seeing that from 15-16 fiscal year to our proposed budget that we are proposing for 17-18, that there is an increase of $1.2 billion, if so approved. Because most of the drive within the growth in that 1.2 billion is really based on case load increases that I just references as far as our growth that we're seeing year over year. But also because of the funding was approved with ABX 21, we had nearly half a billion dollars that was approved to help our system. So if you don't mind, I'll go ahead and go into issue one and walk you through that.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nancy Chance: nancy tim chance, i'm a member of the california person centered advocacy partnership. i'm a family member, and i'm the executive director of choices person centered services. i'm in support of this proposal, especially when working with stake holders. and if it will provide clarity to the people receiving services, to their families, to the people providing services, on what is coming down the pipe with hcbs and what is to be expected for everyone so that we can be in compliance, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bob Giovati: i'm bob with the state council on developmental disabilities. once again, the compliance with the hcbs final rules extremely important to the council and i'd like to attach ourselves to the comments made by my colleague from drc and that would be a dandy idea to codify some of this into state law, thank you very much.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barry Jardini: Good afternoon again, Barry Jardini, from CDSA. While we understand the need for this trailer bill, we do have some concerns about it. First, we would like any sort of advanced directive to at least cite to the federal regulation that underlies the necessary modification, repeal or enactment of a new provision. And more fundamental point, we realize this can only speak to regulations in Title 17, which again, makes sense because DDS is the authority for Title 17. But the concern is that we have a lot of issues as well with Title 22. In terms of community care licensing for day programs and residential settings. And those are all going to be implicated by the HCBS requirments as well. So, I understand that DSS and Department of Social Services isn't subject to this at this point. But we'd love to see some Interagency agreement, or some agreement between DDS and DSS to work together to identify and eliminate any regulatory barriers that are going to exist in both Title 17 and Title 22. Thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sonja Petek: I guess I would just say, this is Sonja Petek from the LAO, we certainly appreciate where the department is coming from. And we're not suggesting that they tell the winning contractor what they have to provide in their recommendations. We're just merely suggesting that because so much of the complexity in the current system is due to a economic forces outside of DDS's controls but that would be something important to consider within the right maintenance process. Thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Will Sanford: will, futures explored. having done a rates study for the state, for the department of rehabilitation in the mid-90s,  one of the key things is this is as independent as possible from the community's prospective, because in that study we were directed to make sure certain things happen, which doesn't mean you get a great rates study. the other one is really to make sure, as you've heard throughout today that we're having a change in what our system looks like. our historic system started back in 1989, it's had changes and updates, it's been frozen, it's been added too, we've had special rate passes, etc. so the system in what it's going to look like really has to be what's our future service delivery look like? what are the outcomes that were expected, the state expects to fund, and knowing that some of those, especially as folks age, are maintenance. not everybody's going to improve, as i age, i'm probably not, my goal is to be healthy as i move forward. whereas employment may be the goal of someone who's younger. so i think we really have to have a rate study that's cognizant of looking at what the future is. not necessarily what we've done in the past, that may not actually be the best system.
[]
Marty Omoto: marty nancy omoto, california disability senior community action network, and the california person-centered advocacy partnership, i'm also a family member. i want to thank the department for moving forward on this rate study. i'm also a member of the developmental services task force, this has been a long time coming. one thing i want to emphasize, though, that the administration did say that there was no need to have to wait for efforts, where we can push forward a pilot to test out different ideas regarding reimbursements. and that is something we urge the administration, but also the subcommittee to really look at and also the oversight of how rate study is conducted to make sure that is done as quickly and as completely as possible. lastly just want to appreciate the fact that one of the requirements in the rate study, though it does not say specifically, but it does it was meant to address this issue of unmet need of our families and people with disabilities. especially in communities of color, but also those who are in rural geographic areas who are either under-served or not receiving services. and thank you very much.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nancy Chance: Nancy Chance, California Person-Centered Advocacy Partnership, and Executive Director of the Choice's Person-Centered Services. I just want to say that I support the move forward on the rates study and echo the sentiment that we want this to be done as quickly and as thoughtfully as possible. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Rath: Kevin Rath, Carl Respid, the DS task force has a bunch of issues that it considers, the last task force met a couple weeks ago. It spent 10 to 15 minutes on this rate study. We urge that there be a standing Subcommittee, service provider driven, so that the DDS can get adequate input from the providers regarding this DS task force. The general meetings are not a place where that can happen, just structurally.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 12, 'end': 23, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Pam Scerano: Hi, my name is Pam Scerano. I have a small business community vocational services in the Central Valley, I just want to echo what he just said which is provider input. One of the other things to consider when you're looking at this rate situation is that also for clients that participate in programs, they're only getting payment for when clients actually attended programs. So there's a very variable way of looking at the way day programs are funded, because there's no flat rate for services, so you have to provide maximum services, keep up with CMS compliancy, spend all this time building into it to meet these expectations. But then you have a varied income that's paid into you, so I would recommend looking at flat rates to pay for the services rendered that programs offer.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barry Jardini: just briefly again, jardini from cdsa. and i just want to reiterate some of the other speakers' comments on making sure that as we do the rates setting. we're looking at the comprehensive costs to deliver services, including unfunded mandates, and the transitions that are going to be coming in our system with new htbs rules and things like that.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nancy Bargman: yes, again, this is nancy marty bargman. there's two issues that are listed in item 6, which is on page 29 of your agenda. the first one is trailer bill language regarding community placement plan, which i had referenced briefly earlier. the second is regarding request for housing. and so i'll start with the trailer bill language on community placement plan. little bit of history just to give you some context to the purpose of community placement plan. many years ago, not that you want to know my entire background, but i started in the field many years ago and also working at a regional center. during that time, it was back in the 90s, we had what was available to us at the timed program development fund. we used the funds to be able to help with startup with service providers to start new services. could be residential, it could be day, it could be early intervention, it could be developing training, there's a number of items that was available to us. i don't recall all the history, but at some point, those funds were no longer available. we also had, in our system, the ability within the regional centers, up to 2005, 2006, i may be off by about a year, one way or the other. but it's right around that time in which the regional centers had the ability to use part of their purchase of service dollars. they could earmark funds specifically for startup for community resources. back in 05, 06, that was no longer available to them. during the time when they did have it, there was very specific startup protocols that they had to meet, that they had to submit to the department for review. so we would make sure that regional centers were in compliance with their startup protocols. so there's some assurance and accountability to the funds that were used for that purpose. 05, 06 was also about the time when community placement planned dollars were available. this is also in alignment with the closure of agnew's developmental center. so, as we were moving forward with the change in policies where folks were moving from developmental centers to the community, there's a need to start developing resources that were going to meet the very complex needs of individuals. so, kind of fast forwarding then to 2012, in 2012, we had a change in statute that put a moratorium of placements of anybody going into a developmental center. at that time, when we had the moratorium in place, we had approximately between 100 and 200 individuals that weren't being admitted into the developmental centers at the time. so immediately, we need to provide supports in the community. we needed to develop the supports to make sure that our service delivery system was moving with the change of the needs of the individuals, complex medical needs, complex needs as far as related to behavior needs. so we had to do some things that were very different. the community placement plan at the time was earmarked only for individuals moving from developmental centers. so with the change of statute in 2012, when no longer could people be admitted to the developmental centers, we had to make some modifications to our cpp language that allowed for the development of resources. for individuals not only moving from a developmental center, but also for individuals what's called with challenging services needs. so we had a modification of cpp at that time to also move with changes within our policies. so again, moving forward, as we are now, we had announcement of closure of all of the developmental centers. we will have the closures completed no longer than 2021, but as we have folks that are moving into the community, we still have the need to be able to take a look at how are we developing our resources. so within the community, when you take a look at other than for folks that are moving out of developmental centers, individuals with very challenging services needs, there have not been community resources or funding to be able to start up new services outside of those parameters, really, since prior to 05, 06. so, in order to move forward with the policies, making sure that we're able to be responsive to our ever changing needs, we talked earlier about that we have a population that is aging. so we have a need to be able to support folks that are aging. we are seeing individuals with down syndrome, with early onset of alzheimer's and dementia. we also are seeing one of the fastest growing areas that we have in our community is the early start age. are we developing the resources to meet the needs of the individuals? within the early start growth and our intakes, we are seeing a very different population. we are seeing definitely a difference in the ethnic mix in making sure that we're responsive to developing new resources that are also changing within the needs of our community. so with that in mind, we're putting forward the trailer bill language to adjust the language and statute to allow the department to move forward with community placement planned funds. so as we are facing the end of closing the developmental centers, as we're meeting the priority of needs to move folks from institutes for mental diseases, that we're also able to attend to some of the other needs within the community. our plan is to, because we have annual guidelines that outline what we do with our community placement planned funds, that within the guidelines, we would be very specific. again, we know we're releasing funds or if supporting development, we know how many people a regional center may have in a developmental center. that they need to develop, and they have that data element, we have the need that identifies it. the regional centers would need to, as part of their community, we have 21 very distinct regional centers, 21 very distinct communities that are very different. so each regional center would need to make sure, as they're requesting the funds for needs other than individuals with challenging services needs and individuals moving from developmental centers, that they need to support that based on the needs of their community. is that a population that's growing that's from school age, that they have a very high percentage of individuals that are growing in that area? they need to provide the data and then also what is it that the community is saying that they need to be able to meet the individual needs of the clients within their community. that is what's central around our trailer bill language. the second item within issue 6 is the budget change proposal. we're requesting in this proposal four permanent positions for the development and oversight of permanent community housing for individuals. we have, over the years, and it really did start again with agnews' closure, in developing housing for individuals with developmental disabilities. so there's two forms, and i kind of define them as one is sustainable and is under a buy it once model. so regional centers can work with their community to develop housing, where a service provider would lease the property. but the home would be owned by a nonprofit or a housing developer that is putting the home into perpetuity. there is actual restricted covenant that is identifying that that home is only for the sole use for the individual, who is a regional center consumer. so that is one avenue. we have doubled, because of the closure, we're doubling the development of the housing. so because of that development of housing and also the need to continue to advocate and support affordable housing. and when there are funds available, that we are also as a department put in a priority to see how we can help earmark funds for multi-family purposes, to support the affordable housing side as well. so to that end, we're looking for the positions to provide the oversight to make sure that the housing groups are in compliance with the requirements that we set forth to protect the investment of the state. and to have assurances that the homes will be in perpetuity for the individuals that we serve. and the four positions would be able to help us achieve the support of the growth that we're seeing.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sonja Petek: Sonja Petek, LAO. We just have a brief comment about the trailer bill language regarding community placement plan funding. We do not necessarily disagree that additional funding is needed to develop resources in the community for people who already live in the community. We do believe, however, that the Legislature may wish to consider the issue apart from CPP funding which was designed specifically to serve people moving out of the DC. And as of 2012, to serve people who may have otherwise been placed in a DC, if those admissions were allowed. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nancy Chance: thank you, nancy nancy chance, executive director of choices person centered services. a family member and also a member of the california person centered advocacy partnership. i am here to say that we advocated last year for broadening of the use of cpp, community placement plan funds to develop resources for people that are already living in the community that are in crisis. we think this is really important that there are more resources in the community for people that are facing crisis. and we feel that this is a step in the right direction, so thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rick Rollens: mr. chair and members. rollens, representing arca. we're very excited to be here today in strong support of this proposed trailer bill language. and like to thank the administration and the department for putting this forward, thinking proposal before you today. this measure, as you know, would allow cpp funds to be used more flexibly to encourage needed development of community services for our system. since 2003, regional centers have been unable to offer assistance with startup funds to providers, interested in developing new needed programs. since that time the populations supported by regional centers has shifted. our demographics are changing dramatically. for example, there are now more young adults with autism, like my son and others. and older adults with developmental disabilities who are outliving their caregivers. and new and different services need to be developed for these emerging and existing community populations. and really appreciate your consideration of this. and again, thank you to the department for putting it forward.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Evelyn Abouhassan: no, sorry, i'm causing problems. abouhassan with disability rights california. i'm in very strong support of this proposal to broaden the use of the cpp funds. we agree with many of the comments that have already been made, particularly around the need for new and innovative services for people in the community. and really looking at services for people that are in crisis, wrap around services keeping people in their own home, mobile crisis services, those kinds of services. so really in strong support of this and encourage a look in that direction to keep people in the community and in their own home, thank you. sorry, i'll go around.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marty Omoto: marty nancy omoto, california disability senior community action network, california person centered advocacy partnership. first, i want to thank you for this hearing too, for being patient with all of us, all the time, sometimes with the same people. but just wanted to say strong support to the administration and to the department for this, i believe, a very innovative proposal. it is something we advocated for last year. we believe that the process of cpp, the community placement planning process is a proven one and it has worked. and it has helped hundreds of people with developmental disabilities move out of the developmental centers and also deflect them. and it's a great way of testing out in a small way initially dealing and addressing the people who may be in crisis. initially under a certain definition and maybe, hopefully, it can be expanded if it works. and we don't think it needs to be a separate process. we think the process has worked, it means tweaking it. i think it needs to be properly funded. it needs, i think the details need to be really examined or worked on together with stakeholders in the final trailer bill. and of course with everything, oversight is crucial. one thing about cpp though, it's person-centered. it is based on the individual needs, it addresses people in crisis, potentially, so thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Will Sanford: will with futures explored, associate myself with most of the comments previously made. as the director said earlier we add 13,000 people a year. community placement plan funds has historically funded between 50 and 150 people to move from a developmental center. there's a slight gap there, we need those services. other things competing with placement plan funds already cover the gamut of services residential day employment. the only one that probably doesn't cover anymore as doyle said, we don't have kids in developmental centers anymore. so, we don't really have a mechanism for early intervention and child services. but, for all the other ones are included in that process, and i agree that it is one that works and we are actually very excited that the administration's coming forward with this proposal to start the process that we really lost. as the director said, and it's been a huge impact on creating new services in the community.
[{'start': 481, 'end': 486, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Carlene Holden: Carlene Holden with Easter Seal, clearly verify the need for this. It's been huge, we see it on a daily basis, in every community and so it is clearly needed. And for the first time as I was reading trailer bill language I was excited. So thank you for bringing it forward and thank you for considering it.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bob Giovati: giovati on behalf of the state council on developmental disabilities, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maria Garcia: maria marty garcia with greenberg taurig on behalf of the parent hospital association. while we haven't had a time to fully vet the proposal, i do envision our membership being supportive of providing the department the flexibility they need to respond to the community needs. i would assemblymen be remissed if i didn't say i do have to leave and i won't be able to be part of the hearing to talk about the enhanced behavioral homes as well as the see closure updates because i do have to make my ash wednesday evening service. but i look forward to continuing the conversation and discussions with the department. they've been extremely responsive and great to work with as well as members of the legislature and your staff so thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nancy Bargman: Nancy Bargman, on issue seven, which started on page 33 of your agenda. Very quickly, on the trailer bill language that we're proposing is in response to the ability with the paid internships. It's a little bit of clean up language in our trailer bill. So, the current statute limits the services for Regional Center consumers to receive services between the ages of 18 and 22. If they are still eligible for educational services. So, in order to make sure that we're in compliance moving forward is that we would need trailer bill language to allow individuals between the ages of 18 and 22 to be able to remain in school. And to access the paid internships program funded by the Regional Centers. We do not want to limit anybody who is in education and has an opportunity to participate in the Paid Internship Program. This language would clean that up.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rick Rollens: Rick Rollens on behalf of ARCA just in support of this measure, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Will Sanford: will maria sanford, futures explored, my only concern would be is to make sure that someone goes into the paid internship program is going to go into competitive integrated employment before they turn 22 and have not left the school system that they be allowed to receive supports from adult service providers who do employment as a regular course of business. so i just want to make sure that it's not just, although there is opportunity, and then we'll wait for another two or three years, and they come to the adult world, and we get them a job. so we really think it needs to be in conjunction with education is great, but their job is not employment. i've been in the employment world for a long time. and so, understand how that works. so we want to make sure that folks want to get a job, they have the opportunity to really proceed through the internship into a job. that'll be the way to go, thank you.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 18, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Evelyn Abouhassan: abouhassan with disabilities rights california. we are in strong support of this proposal. just a few comments. first, we strongly suggest maybe broadening the proposal to include other prohibited services under this section. in addition we strongly suggest that instead of using purchase of service savings for disallowed dc cost. to take some of that money, and use it to meet the requirements of the competitive integrated employment blue print and we owe federal rules. thank you so much.
[]
Carlene Holden: Carlene Holden with Easter Seal. Strongly support. We think that it's just getting started in lots of places, but we think it's going to be exciting as it moves forward. I think it's going to be a project that'll keep growing and developing over time. And we look forward to being a part of the conversation as it moves forward, but we think it's a great step in the right direction and encourage your support, thank you. Thank you all.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Will Sanford: Will Sanford Futures Explored, if I didn't support number eight, people would probably shoot me, because I've been at it for 30 years. So support implying that we should increase the rates, put them in the statute. Number 9, I really hope that they are measurable, real, employment outcomes. First, what we typically do is, in their individual program plan, they want to get a job, great. What we really want to know is, do we move the bar? How many people are employed today? How many employed next year? We've moved the bar, life is good. And it doesn't have to be something that says it's good, bad, or indifferent, but we at least know where we're going. We know it's not great. We know that. Okay, let's improve it. Thank you.
[]
Evelyn Abouhassan: I'm Evelyn Abouhassan with Disability Rights of California. And we support number eight. As to number nine, which I believe is about the measurable employment outcomes that Mr. Stanford just mentioned, we think that can be strengthened some. There is some confusion in the trailer bill language, because it ties it to the employment first policy rather than we owe and the state blueprint. So we need to kind of clear that up. And then in terms of measurable outcomes, we need to really look at whether the consumer has a goal in their individualized program plan, about obtaining integrated competitive employment. Whether the receiving integrated competitive employment. If they're age 24 or younger, in a job that they're earning sub-minimum wage or lower. Or if they are at an employment setting that does not meet the HCBS regulations. So those are some additional parameters, I think, that we need to look at as for measuring outcomes. As to the enhanced behavioral homes and secured perimeter, we think that language needs to be strengthened to meet the current statutory cap. Enhanced behavioral homes are six bed homes. Crisis homes, I believe, are eight bed homes. So, if we're going to change the trailer bill language to include crisis homes, we want to keep them to that six bed cap. Thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 177, 'end': 185, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Barry Jardini: barry will jardini from cdsa, just want to issue our support for item 8 here, and for item 9 as well i would like to reiterate what others have said, we'd like to see some more specific concrete data reporting on wages, and outcomes, and things like that as we go forward, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pam Scerano: Pam Scerano, Community Folk Services. Just wanted to comment about supported employment. One of the concerns that I have is from day program perspective, for clients that are attending day programs to develop to get into CIE. Their skill set development needs to be really addressed, in the time that it will take to make them prepared to get into competitive integrated employment. So there is a middle ground step that needs to be considered in the process. It's not just from programs straight on the CIE. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Justin Franess: justin barry franess, department of finance and i have this note, comment that if you have any questions i'd be happy to answer.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Newton: Yes, good afternoon, Mr. Chair and member Mark Newton with the LAO, here on behalf of my colleague Jenny Bella. Just a quick comment on the Governor's proposal, to reverse the augmentation made by the legislation last year. This really comes down to a matter of Legislative funding priorities. Legislative priority to improve the augmentation last year. It's a matter of legislative funding courts to decide where they made program reductions to service budget budget solutions, thank you.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 99, 'end': 110, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jimmy Sodo: This is something very personal to me, to my staff and to people with disabilities there in Kern. County. My name is Jimmy Sodo I am the Executive Director for the independent living center in Kern. county. And I wanted to talk about the budget request that Assembly Member Salos has given to you to restore the funding for three independent living centers for the 17, 18 fiscal year, my center is one of those. We've been talking and trying to address this issues for years and years, even beyond when I came on board six years ago. But I can tell you we've received the funding for 16, 17. And it was through the budget negotiations, we were under the impression that it would be for two years, and then we saw the Governor's Budget, and it was taken out. We got this money effective October 1st, and I can tell you that we've been making a lot of progress, just in this short amount of time. I've already hired employees. I've hired three employees, and of those three, two of them have disabilities. And this funding is for three Independent Living Centers, my center, the Independent Living Center in Modesto and the Independent Living Center in Auburn. And all three of us cover 10 counties. I talked to the Executive Director of the Modesto center last night, and he has told me that he's already hired three employees. And all three of those employees are people with disabilities. So, I bring that up because not only are we using the money to provide services to people with disabilities in those counties, but we're also getting people employed. And for me, personally, it's really important that this people are persons with disabilities. I know that Assembly Member Salas has brought to you the budget proposal to restore it. I was told that the budget staff has supported that. And I just wanted to let you know that this is really important funding for all three of the centers. And I'm here to ask the Committee to restore that funding for 17-18 fiscal year. Years ago, 22 years ago, I did receive centers from Independent Living Center, that was in Fresno. And I'm actually a former client of the Department of Rehab, too. So, I know that these types of programs, they work. And they help people with disabilities become more independent. Self-sufficient, self-sustaining, and not to be arrogant, but I'm success story. So I just wanted to give that type of testimony. And then, in closing, I would like to thank the Department of Rehab and give them some recognition because they actually met with us, Tuesday night, to talk about an even bigger issue. Which is the insufficient funding actually for all Independent Living Centers and I just wanted to give them some recognition for their time to talk with us, and discuss an even more bigger issue. But right now, this is a huge step forward. And that's my testimony, and thank you very much for your time.
[{'start': 117, 'end': 127, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 274, 'end': 279, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1679, 'end': 1684, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tadessa Pevotski: good evening. pevotski, representing 21 independent living centers throughout california. through the california foundation for independent living centers. and we strongly support the funding for the three ilcs. thank you very much.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anna Acton: Anna Acton, Executive Director at Freed Center for Independent Living, serving Nevada, Uba Center and Calusa Counties. I would like to also voice our support for the three centers getting the base funding and continuing to get it. What Jimmy just said, I think it is really close, it's the truth that there are other centers that get more money that also get the state-based fund. Also, I would like to thank the Department of Rehabilitation and for their efforts with working with us. And there's a traumatic brain injury program that's being proposed to be funded in the current budget proposal. And I want to encourage you to keep that funding whole. We're one of the seven traumatic brain injury sites and it's a critical program to, for a path out of poverty, and into inclusion, and out of segregation for people with traumatic brain injury. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 236, 'end': 241, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Evelyn Abouhassan: Evelyn Abouhassan with Disabilities Rights California, echoing the comments of my predecessors. I'm glad to see that the Committee has rejected this proposal. Just on a personal level, a people level. Less money means less services for people with disabilities. And less services for people with disabilities means less integration. Less success both in employment and in life, so while we're talking about equity amongst centers. That's one piece of the whole but the other piece of the whole is what does this mean for people with disabilities who aren't getting services if the ILCs aren't fully funded? Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Irene Walela: thank you, i'm irene justin walela, deputy director for independent living and community access at the department of rehabilitation. the traumatic brain injury budget item on the agenda is very well framed to give a good description of the services and the issue. i'd like to just point out that it does bring the 800,000 one time adjustment to the fund, which would allow the seven traumatic brain injury sides to continue the level of service that they have been providing to the survivors of traumatic brain injury. their unique services are very much necessary to a population that is not served in other areas. the penalty fund, as you know, is the usual source of income, and our percentage has resulted in decline, because the penalty fund itself has declined overtime. this budget allocation in the governor's budget would allow the program centers to continue their very much needed services, thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Newton: Yes, Mark Newton, LAO. Just to note, that this is one of a number of proposals in the budget that relate to the state penalty fund. The LAO is currently in the process of completing a report that takes a comprehensive look at all of these proposals. So we just concur with the staff's recommendations to hold this item open to allow for further discussion and consideration of the issue.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 18, 'end': 21, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 136, 'end': 139, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Irene Walela: Thank you, Irene Walela here, for Department of Rehabilitation. As, again, the agenda description gives a good summary of the issue for us on the supported employment rate request. The request is for 500,000 to allow the Department of Rehabilitation to align its job coaching provider rates with those that are provided by Department of Developmental Services. That would bring us into alignment with the Department of Developmental Services' current job coaching rate to their providers, which is $36.57 an hour. The funds that support the job coaching for individuals who receive supported employment services allow individuals with intellectual and developmental disabilities to learn and perform and retain those jobs that they've achieved in competitive integrated employment. Supported employment services, particularly job coaching, is very necessary to the success of these individuals, both learning and performing the job, and then maintaining it in their competitive and integrated employment setting.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Will Sanford: will irene sanford with futures explored. i'm rising in support of this obviously as to do with the developmental disability services side. i actually also wanted to say a very personal thank you to the director of the department, joe xavier, for being the lead job developer in the state internship program. sb644, which lonnie hancock built from several years ago, is finally going to be piloted in this, both in sacramento and in the bay area, with the hope of getting 15 folks into a paid internship to lead to state employment. he's been the lead person along with calhr, so i just want to recognize his efforts on that behalf. the other one is to understand that the department of rehab is the front door for anybody with a disability to go into employment. so folks with developmental disabilities follow that same path, but they also receive long-term support. so the department is really critical in that intensive support when someone needs maybe 100 or 110% support to get that job successfully, and then it fades. when it fades to below 20% support they transfer to department of developmental services funding, so that's the long term support. so this release of partnership that has worked, and we're really excited again for the leadership of the department for helping us out with this and i obviously support this proposal.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 18, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 231, 'end': 241, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 322, 'end': 336, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 570, 'end': 575, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Carlene Holden: Carlene Holden with Easterseal. Love following Will, I think he said it beautifully. Congratulations again to the department for their leadership, and thank you for considering it. Thank you all.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Irene Walela: thank you, walela for department of rehabilitation. issue four is the work-based learning grant. this was a grant that the department of rehabilitation successfully applied and was awarded to administer a federal grant of $8.5 million over five years. it is 100% federally funded, and the study will be to provide work-based learning experiences, as well as opportunities to prepare for employment, such as coaching and monitoring of academic performance for students with disabilities. the purpose of the study is to measure these specific interventions, and their negative and positive, positive is what we expect, impact on the students to become employed in competitive employment after secondary school is completed. the request is for one pui to administer the federal study. and as i mentioned, it is all federal funds for this study. we are very excited about the partnerships that we have put in place for regional educational agencies, and also working with the interwork institute to conduct the research portion of the grant.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Coby Pizzotti: Mr Chair and members, Coby Pizzotti with the California Association of Psychiatric Technicians. I'd like to echo many of the comments that Miss Walker made. This bargaining agreement is the culmination of nine months of very rigorous bargaining between the psych techs in CalHR. 28 bargaining sessions that culminated in a 20 hour marathon session to find and close out the deal. We are very proud of this agreement and we would ask that you support it.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 144, 'end': 150, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Giana Solden: Good morning, Chairman and Members of the Committee. My name is Giana Solden. And I'm with the International Union of Operating Engineers. We represent the nearly 12,000 members of state bargaining units 12 and 13 and we appreciate your support for our MIUs, thank you.
[{'start': 64, 'end': 76, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Esperanza Ross: ross, mr. chair, president, committee members. my name is ross, i'm the legislative advocate for the united farm workers. i'm also the daughter of a farm worker. i'm going to read my statement for the record. tom nassif, president of the western growers association based his published objections to the appointment of senator hall to the alrb, on what mr. nassif suggests is senator hall's lack of experience in agriculture. at the same time, mr. nassif asserts that his support for president trump continues to be quote, the right thing to do, end quote. we would suggest that senator hall brings more experience in making thoughtful, governance decisions than president trump, thank you. thank you very much. for the record, we're in support of ms. montgomery and senator hall, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 58, 'end': 62, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 209, 'end': 219, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 327, 'end': 331, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 357, 'end': 363, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 384, 'end': 388, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 448, 'end': 454, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 494, 'end': 499, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 587, 'end': 591, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 673, 'end': 678, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 752, 'end': 762, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 775, 'end': 779, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Guadalupe Estrada: My name is Guadalupe Estrada. And I work in the strawberry at farms, a strawberry place. And I come to support Hall and Montgomery.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ines Marines: My name is Ines Marines, and I come from Watsonville, Marin County.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ines Marines: ines.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Javier Blanco: my name is blanco. i work harvesting peaches in california, and i come to support senator isadore hall and julie montgomery.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 90, 'end': 102, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 107, 'end': 123, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Leticia Munoz: Good afternoon. My name is Leticia Munoz. And I come from Madeira, California. And I work in the Harvesting of mandarins.  And I come to support Senator Hall and Ms. Montgomery.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 152, 'end': 156, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 165, 'end': 175, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Leopoldo Rangel: good afternoon. my name is leopoldo, r-a-n-g-e-l. . i come from madera, california. i work harvesting grapes. . at the ufort company. and i'm here to support senator hall. . and mrs montgomery.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 166, 'end': 170, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 182, 'end': 192, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Francisco Naranjo: good afternoon, my name is francisco. i work for dole in the harvesting department. and we've come here to support mr. hall and miss montgomery.  for the new positions that they are positioning themselves for. gracias.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 119, 'end': 123, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 133, 'end': 143, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 209, 'end': 216, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Aaron Ramirez: My name is Aaron Ramirez and I came to support Aaron Ramirez. And I came to support the man that we're here for so that he can support us. Okay, and I'm coming from Salinas  On behalf of the Farm Workers Guild.  Thank you for everything that you said.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 47, 'end': 60, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alejandro Blanco: My name is Alejandro Blanco. I come from Madera, California. And I come to support Senator Hall and Julia Montgomery. Thank you. Muchas gracias.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 91, 'end': 95, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 100, 'end': 116, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 129, 'end': 143, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Raul Garcia: my name is raul. i come from salinas. i work picking raspberries. and i come here to support mr hall and mrs montgomery. thank you very much.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 96, 'end': 100, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 109, 'end': 119, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Juanita Hernandez: good afternoon. my name is juanita. i live in madeira, california. and i work in the field picking grapes. and today i'm here to support mrs. montgomery and senator hall. gracias. thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 142, 'end': 152, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 165, 'end': 169, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 171, 'end': 178, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Guadalupe Vasquez: very good afternoon. my name is guadalupe jonah vasquez. i work in the field. picking tomatoes. and i'm here to support mrs. montgomery and senator hall.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 125, 'end': 135, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 148, 'end': 152, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Achilles Hernandez: Good afternoon to everyone. My name is Achilles Hernandez. And I'm one of the organizers of the W. I'm from the California Farmers Workers. From Madero, California. And I'm here to fully support Mrs. Montgomery and Senator Hall.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 200, 'end': 210, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 223, 'end': 227, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Young: michael guadalupe young of after california labor federation. ms. montgomery, for over a decade, has represented farm workers and low wage workers as do her. excuse me, i apologize. ms. montgomery has represented farm workers and low wage workers for over a decade and senator hall in his years of public service has always been a strong advocate of working families, so the labor federation is in support of both appointments, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 66, 'end': 76, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 186, 'end': 196, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 277, 'end': 281, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
George Radanovich: thank you, mr. protem. my name is george michael radanovich, i'm the president of the california fresh fruit association and due to the hasty nature of the appointment, i come in opposition to the confirmation of senator hall. the association works closely with the alrb and has supported past appointments to the board including former chairman robert gould. unfortunately there have been no meetings with the senator to discuss issues of potential concern or understanding of the community. this is not common practice. in fact we have met with ms. montgomery prior to her appointment to discuss her interest in the position. we believe that a good employer is better than a union and we would like to see balanced representation on the board. we hoped that as we get to know mr. hall that he might contribute to that balance. we have concerns with the senator's voting record for the ufw sponsored legislation and what appears to be a bias towards this organization who regularly appears before the board and files actions against our association's membership. that being said, we look forward to getting to know the senator more, we can count the votes, and hope to build a good relationship, thank you very much.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 21, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 34, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 221, 'end': 225, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 346, 'end': 358, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 551, 'end': 561, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 782, 'end': 786, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Matthew Allen: redonovich, yeah, that's right, okay, good. excuse me, good afternoon. i said next was in opposition, i apologize good afternoon. matthew george allen with western growers association. we also unfortunately are here to oppose sara halls' appointment to the alrb. i would echo a lot of the similar comments that mr. redonovich made. i would highlight one additional factor which causes additional concern for our members. and it goes right to the heart of the ability for the alrb to be a fair and balanced adjudicatory body. there have been efforts legislatively over the last several years to tip the scales further against the employer when they're faced with enforcement actions either of contract disputes or election disputes. and we've actually seen those have measures vetoed by the governor because the governor himself has called for additional balanced and measured approaches when it comes to disputes at the lrb. so we unfortunately are opposed, but i'm sure we'll be talking to you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 130, 'end': 150, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 226, 'end': 237, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 315, 'end': 325, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Silvia Lopez: Good afternoon. My name is Silvia Lopez, Farm Workers in Central Valley, I'm here to oppose Senator Hall. because when we went seeking for help in City Council in LA, he didn't help us. He didn't listen to us. He just was supporting the UFW and that's totally wrong for us. Governor Brown is appointing him to be on the LRB, and we just think that is not just fair because we're losing the hope to get justice, so the ALRB can count our votes. We vote three years ago, and they haven't even tried to help us to count our votes. We're more than 3,000 farm workers. And also we lost 2,000 of job that we get paid $20 per hour and he didn't do nothing to help us in that time, 2014, and so I'm opposed of Senator Hall.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 100, 'end': 104, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 283, 'end': 288, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 710, 'end': 714, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Anthony Romando: good afternoon, my name is romando i'm a labor attorney from fresno, i'm sorry. my name is romando. i'm a labor attorney from fresno, california. i think i have a bit of a unique perspective here. i've known ms. montgomery as an adversary for most of my career, so i would like to comment on the two nominees separately. i've also been representing ms. lopez and the workers at ... farms for the last, almost, four years now in their dispute with the ufw. as to miss montgomery, in fact, although i've lined up now, i would actually support her nomination. as an adversary, i've known her to be an attorney of high integrity and professionalism and although we've certainly had our battles, i think that they're battles that have shown her to be a person of high character. and of note, in her year that she's been at the general council, she's done something that her predecessor refused to do. which is, she has investigated and initiated prosecution of the union for it's violation of the workers rights. this gentleman here, angle lopez, has a case that's about to go to trial for union violation of his rights and the rights of his fellow workers. our problem is as to mr. hall. i'm glad that you've acknowledged that this is essentially a judicial position, because in california we expect our judges to not only avoid bias but to avoid the appearance of bias. this is mr. hall injecting himself into the dispute at ... farms. taking a side, planting his flag, and waving it for the ufw, in direct opposition to these workers that i represent. can you assure them, that they should believe that cases such as mr. lopez's case is going to be heard impartially when it reaches mr. hall at the agricultural labor relations board? i don't know mr. hall personally like mr. canela does or some of you, of the others of you who have worked with him. but, as an attorney, i've come to expect that when i appear before a judge, that judge is not only going to be unbiased, but there will be even no appearance of bias so that my client and the public and, in this case, the farm worker population can be confident that their matters are being heard objectively and fairly and despite our long, adversarial history, i don't doubt that with ms. montgomery. she doesn't agree with me on a lot of things, but i've never felt treated unfairly before her. despite mr. hall's statements today, he's had no meeting with the workers that i represent, the 3,000 workers of ... farms. who want to have their voices heard about why they don't want union representation forced upon them. he took a side in that debate, and he took a side in that case, without ever hearing from all of the so-called stakeholders. and i would submit to you in that case, the most important stakeholders are the workers that you see here, the workers who have been fighting to have their votes counted and their voices heard. they deserve to have an alrb where they can have confidence not just in the reality but in the appearance of justice and nonbias.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 91, 'end': 98, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 212, 'end': 222, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 353, 'end': 358, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 467, 'end': 477, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1029, 'end': 1040, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1178, 'end': 1182, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1379, 'end': 1383, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1619, 'end': 1624, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1685, 'end': 1689, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1750, 'end': 1754, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1775, 'end': 1781, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2241, 'end': 2251, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2360, 'end': 2364, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Santos Cassada: ... My name is Santos Cassada. ... I'm here to not support Mr. Hall or Mrs. Montgomery. We do not support them.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 63, 'end': 67, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 76, 'end': 86, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rosilda Lopez: Yes, my name is Rosilda Lopez, I'm from Madera, California. Okay. You said earlier, last time you checked this was America. A point in Mr. Isadore Hall will not make this America, honestly, because as you heard from workers here obviously he has chosen a side. Even if you want to put me or if you want to put somebody from here on the board it will not be fair for those who support a union. Might as well call Arturo or Armando Helenez to sit on this board if you're going to elect Mr. Isadore Hall to be on this board, honestly. It'd be unfair for all these people, not only these people, for all those people that are against the union specifically the Cesar Chavez union, and basically these people are tired, they are sick of it. What's the word I'm looking for? They're not upset, they're disappointed in the job that the ALRB has done for them. The first time that I went to the ALRB office in Visalia, Silas Shawver was there. They greeted us and they took us into this room where there were children. I don't know, it looked like a daycare to me. Honestly, I'm not exaggerating.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 139, 'end': 151, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 412, 'end': 418, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 422, 'end': 437, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 488, 'end': 500, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 657, 'end': 669, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 887, 'end': 891, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 911, 'end': 924, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Angel Rincon: ...My name is Angel Rincon. Okay, ... over at ... And we've been fighting for the last four years for justice to be served. And we've been disappointed with the labor laws. They said that they were going to help us through voting.  And just like that man said they said that they were going to go visit us. And they did indeed go visit us. And they said that through our voting. We have the right to decide, to stay, whether, if we're going to win or lose through voting.  And then it turns out that at the end they said no, They just stepped on our rights.  And so we need something serious, somebody who is serious, who will make our rights be heard. And I'm against Mr. Hall because I don't think he's a serious person, and I feel that he won't be able to help us, the workers. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 670, 'end': 674, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Gerardo Echeveria: my name is gerardo, i'm a [unknown] employee. could you hear that? gerardo, okay. and i oppose mr. hawthorne, being appointed to the alrb. due to the fact with his previous relationship with the ufw when he was running for reelection or senate. he was endorsed by the ufw. he also went on marches with the ufw. they marched for us to not get our votes counted, and they also marched for us to get a contract forced upon us. and i believe that someone to get appointed, should be neutral on every case. and in this case i think he'll be biased and because he's already supported the ufw previous to this, that's it.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 67, 'end': 74, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 99, 'end': 108, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Isella Castro: my name is isella matthew castro. [foreign] and i come to request justice. [foreign]and for our votes to be counted. [foreign] we have been fighting for the last four years for our votes to be counted. [foreign] to this man who is sitting here, i would like to address myself to him. [foreign] i want you to help us. [foreign] because he has fought against us. [foreign] here i have a picture where you can see him. [foreign] right? [foreign] i want a person who is partial. [foreign]thank you very much.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Raphael Lizardo: [foreign] my name is raphael. [foreign] and i came here for justice to be served. [foreign] and for our votes to count. [foreign] because- [foreign] it's been, during the last four years, they really haven't paying attention to us. [foreign] and it's too long, it's too long. [foreign] and we want our votes to be counted. [foreign] thank you. thank you very much.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jose De La Rosa: [FOREIGN] My name is Jose De La Rosa. [FOREIGN] I come from Fresno, California. I work with Grava, and I am against Mr. Hall. Because he is showing that he is not going to help us. That he won't be partial towards workers, since they have discriminated about us with labor laws. When they voted for it, he asked us for our opinions and ideas. And we felt discriminated against at that point. [FOREIGN] And that's why he is showing that he will not help us, that he will not be partial with workers. Okay, gracias, thank you very much.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 120, 'end': 124, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 505, 'end': 512, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mariah Boringa: [FOREIGN] [FOREIGN] Yes, good afternoon. My name is Mariah Boringa. And I come to request Senator Cannella to help us in the District. We need help in the District of Madera.
[{'start': 52, 'end': 66, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 98, 'end': 106, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Fernando Hernandez: My name is Fernando Hernandez. [FOREIGN] I've worked theer for four years. [FOREIGN] I work well, I'm happy. [FOREIGN] I just want justice and if the Senator can help us. If they could please count our votes. That's what I want. [FOREIGN]
[{'start': 11, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roberto Angeles: good afternoon, my name is roberto isella angeles. [foreign] and i don't support senator hall.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 89, 'end': 93, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Moises Lopez: my name is lopez. [foreign] and i opposed senator hall. thank you very much, gracias.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 50, 'end': 54, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 77, 'end': 84, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: thank you mr. chairmembers. ignacio on behalf of chea. in light of the motion in the second, i'll keep my comments very brief. we do support this bill. we will continue to work with the author going forward, and legislature going forward to just clarify and make sure that it's a standard admission. that it's very clear what needs to be provided. two criminal defendants prior to that moment in which they make that decision in which to enter a plea. we think having standardized information about these potential collateral consequences is critical. and so we look forward to continue to work with the legislature to refine this bill and hopefully get this thing signed this year.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 49, 'end': 53, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Craig DeLuz: ladies and gentlemen, mr. chairman craig jonah deluz with firearm's policy coalition. it is our pleasure to support this measure. the firearms policy coalition first and foremost considers itself to be a civil rights organization. and that we understand that all of our civil rights are uniquely combined. in this particular case, we're talking about the due process rights. there was a time in which a jury trial was at the center, at the core of our criminal justice system. since then, we've gone to a point where, in most states, 94% of all court cases are adjudicated or felonies are adjudicated via a plea agreement. the challenge here is in the thing that we want to make sure of this that when someone is going into make a decision that they fully understand what they are agreeing to. and that is understanding the rights and the privileges that they are foregoing through this particular plea agreement. we believe that this measure takes a significant step in making sure that the due process rights of defendants are protected. in particular, because some of these, one in particular obviously that's important to us, the right to keep in bear arms, with a felony is a lifelong prohibition. the one thing that we would encourage the member to take a look at. is actually amending the bill to include certain felonies, which certain misdemeanors, which do come with prohibitions to own a firearm as well. but we've been working with the member's office, and we support the bill and like the bill as it is. but we would very much enjoy, like to see that, maybe that one amendment taken. but we believe this goes a long way in protecting the due process rights of californians and we encourage your aye vote.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tiffany Whiten : tiffany craig whiten with seiu california in support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kathy Sher: Kathy Sher for the ACLU of California in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Caliph Assagai: Caliph Assagai, California Public Defenders Association, also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Smith: good morning. thank you for hearing my story. be patient with me, as i do get emotional still. my life was a perfect life until friday, september 30th, 2016. 151 days ago today, a young man who had just turned 20 was driving under the influence of thc. he was driving a car at 80 to 90 miles per hour on a suspended license in an unregistered and uninsured vehicle on probation with two felony counts against him. this young man hit and killed my husband while he was working on the sidewalk beside the road, while he was just doing his job. my husband was a beautiful man, who never took life for granted, was happy, healthy, and lived life to the fullest. skip lived life well and with great diligence. he was just 56 years old. we had been married for 34 years. we have three wonderful hard working children, all married, and contributing to life themselves. because of a young man's horrible decision that friday morning, i no longer have my husband and my children no longer have their father. my name is karen, i'm a teacher in the antelope valley, the most northern part of los angeles county. and at 11:55 am, just before noon that friday, i was reading a book to my 30 first grade students when that accident happened and my husband was killed. my daughter, an hour and a half later, came to school to get me, to give me the news that her father had been killed on the side of the road. the next 30 years of my life will be nothing like my 34 with skipper. we talked about retiring together, taking care of each other as we grow old, making it to celebrating our 50th or even our 75th anniversary. it was all wiped out in just one second by a person who chose to drive under the influence of thc. gerald skip smith jr., my husband, worked for the electric company for 34 years, and he was a hardworking man. he had over two years of accumulated sick time, that's the type of man he was. he was a man who was respected by the police and the fire departments. he was known as a first responder for edison at the scene of accidents. during the trial process, i've had to push and beg for the toxicology to be completed so justice can be served for my husband. i have heard the words, "we are waiting to see what colorado is going to do". i've heard the statement, "it is common". i've been told, that in one the largest counties in this state, that the toxicology machine to test this man's blood has been broken for two years. and there was no rush to get it fixed because of the leniency with pot smoking. the toxicology in my husband's case had to be sent to another county's crime lab, orange county crime lab, to be tested. i live in la county, one of the largest counties in our nation. because of the passing of prop 24, i've watched this two young man's felonies, two of them, be dropped to misdemeanors, because of prop 64. i've seen this young man, on the weekend of february 19, 2017, just two weeks ago rapping a song and smoking a joint, a blunt, as he puts it, on facebook for his peers to see. this young man has no remorse for what he did. he has not learned a thing for what he has done. he has no respect for our loss. what has happened here is a disgrace and no other family should ever have to experience it. allowing this to happen again would be reprehensible and irresponsible. what would you do if it was one of your family members that died on a sidewalk while they were just doing their job on a beautiful friday morning? what would you want to see if it was your son or daughter that was killed by someone while under the influence of thc? proposition 64 was voted into law before the law could handle the negative consequences. we are all at risk of becoming the statistics in establishing the law to protect others from people who decide to smoke and drive. my husband had over 700 people at his funeral, and i have to say, i would have never had thought that in a moment's notice i'd have to see that many people there. i had grown men sobbing at my door for days to come after his death. the death caused by a 20-year-old man who decided to get in an unregistered and uninsured vehicle and drive recklessly while under the influence of drugs and kill my husband. that weekend, as all our weekends were, was planned to the fullest. that afternoon skip was supposed to meet our gardener at church to modify and update the sprinkler system. that friday evening, we were going out to dinner with our friends. saturday, we were going to celebrate our niece's 19th birthday with 20 other family members. my wonderful life, our wonderful lives have been changed forever because of this horrific tragedy. and i urge you today, i challenge you today to do what is right and protect the hardworking people of this country from those who make the decision to smoke, and then get in a car and turn that vehicle into a deadly weapon. let this be the first step in keeping people safe from preventable tragedies such as the one that this man has caused. let there be consequences for driving while impaired. send a message to everyone that driving high will not be tolerated. we need better testing, better education for drivers. we need preventative measures, so people know in advance and consequences for those who know the law and repeatedly break it. my friends, my family, and i support assemblyman lackey's bill 86, to begin the process of keeping our streets safe from those who drug and drive. i thank you for your time today, and for listening to my story.
[{'start': 658, 'end': 662, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1010, 'end': 1015, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1706, 'end': 1727, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5328, 'end': 5334, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Lovell: John Lovell, this bill is co sponsored by the California Narcotic Officers Association, the California Police Chief's Association, and supported, I'd like to just incorporate by reference all of the groups I listed in connection with AB41, they all support this bill, as well.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shaun Rundle: mr. chair and members, shaun tiffany rundle with the california peace officers association in support. thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melanie Cuevas: good morning, melanie of behalf of ccma, the california canvas manufacturers association. we thank the author and the chair for bringing the language to where it is today, and we're happy to offer our support as amended. thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sean Hoffman: Sean Hoffman of the California District Attorneys Association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ellen Komp: Hi, Ellen Komp from California NORML. We're very happy to see the changes in this bill. And the statements that Mr. Lackey, and also members of the CHP have made about testing for impairment, rather than chemical testing. It's something that NORML has been pushing for a long time. We do have some changes we'd like to see in this bill as far as the make up of the test course. There are four members of law enforcement, three government agencies, and only one seat for the medical marijuana industry. We would like to see added to this, defense attorneys with expertise in DUI law to protect people's rights, as well as the needs of the defense attorneys. We would like to see medical marijuana patients included, excuse me?
[{'start': 4, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 116, 'end': 122, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
 : Okay, thanks.>>Hopefully less than that.
[]
Sean Hoffman: hoffman with the california district attorney association i'll align my comments with those of district attorney o'malley. also point out that human trafficking is a problem not just in the urban world resources county but throughout the state. ab229 would give other counties the opportunity to prosecute human trafficking as effectively and aggressively as they do in alameda county and for those reasons i just ask for your high vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 113, 'end': 121, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Larry Doyle: yes, sir. good morning mr. chairman and members. larry, on behalf of the conference of california bar associations. we are the source of this particular proposal, and strongly support it, obviously. in the book les misrables, at the very beginning the eventual hero, jean valjean, steals a loaf of bread to feed himself and his family. and is sentenced, as a result, to five years in the galleys. and the whole idea of victor hugo in writing that, is to sort of shock the conscience. how can somebody trying to feed their family, get sentenced to a five years in prison for stealing a loaf of bread? this provision in prop 187 is actually kind of similar to that, when you compare it to, as mr. bocanegra pointed out in the analysis, the other statutes that were on the books regarding use of false documents. and this is not only something that really needs to be done, because the statute is grossly unfair, but, quite frankly, as i understand it, and i don't have all of the stats, but this statute is very infrequently used, because it is so far out of line that the prosecutors won't push for it, and, if it ever is pushed for, somebody who was obviously accused of this crime, under this statute, is going to fight forever. and so you're going to have something that wastes time, energy, and pretty much everybody's resources, and for no good effect. and so for all of those reasons, i think that this is a bill that really deserves the committee's support on both sides of the aisle, because it doesn't do anybody any good. it's not a good statute to have on the books, and it's not a good statute to have around, and so, ask for an aye vote.
[{'start': 49, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 267, 'end': 279, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 419, 'end': 430, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 695, 'end': 704, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: ignacio on behalf of the california attorneys for criminal justice, in support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tony Fosaguy: Tony Fosaguy, California Public Defenders Association also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Lovell: john on behalf of the association for los angeles county deputy sheriffs, the california association of code enforcement officers, the california college and university police chief's association, the california narcotics officers' association, los angeles county probation officers union as me local 685 los angeles country professional police officers association, los angeles police protective league, and the river side sheriff association all in support, we wish to command the author. pardon me. we wish to command the author for bringing the bill forward, and acknowledge district attorney o'malley some incredible leadership in this area.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 597, 'end': 605, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cory Salzillo: Good morning Mr. Chair and Member, Cory Salzillo on behalf of the California State Sherrif's Association, regrettably in opposition to AB41 as we have been to AB1488 and this bill's predecessors. Obviously, we share the author and the sponsors' intent to ensure that sex assaults are investigated, and that perpetrators not go unpunished. That said, requiring this reporting creates another unfunded mandate on top of the other data collection and reporting mandates, that are already in place on law enforcement. There are valid reasons a kit may not end up being tested, whether it's crime lab resources which are waning as we speak. The idea of the perpetrator may not be in question. We understand there are also good reasons to test the kits. But again, it's all a matter of what resources are available. And when and how kits are going to be tested. Existing law requires us to notify a victim, if the rape kit is going to be disposed of or not tested. We think that that's an appropriate balance and so, due to the fiscal and workload implications of the bill, we must respectfully oppose it, thank you.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sean Hoffman: morning, mr. chair, sean shaun hoffman with the california district attorney's association. many of you will recall last year, the committe considered assembly bill 2477 which is very similar to the bill in front of you today. although that bill contained no statute of limitations for the court retaining jurisdiction over the restitution. this bill has been narrowed to address the committee concerns that were raised last year. we believe it strikes an appropriate balance between insuring that victims have preserved their constitutional right to restitution and preserving the defendant's due process rights. assemblyman patterson explained how this would work, but let me give you an example of why this is important. let's say there's a case, a dui involving injury. the defendant receives a sentence of two years probation. the victim has serious injuries that may require surgeries beyond those two years. under existing law, the court would not have jurisdiction to modify the restitution in order to reflect the expenses incurred after the expiration of probation. if ab 194 were in place the court would retain jurisdiction for an additional three years for a total of five years post sentencing. to ensure that the victim is appropriately compensated for his or her injuries and the expenses incurred. this ensure three things. one that the victim with a valid claim diligently pursues that claim in a reasonable period time. the defendant does not lose any evidence that they could use to contest a false or stale claim. and that a long dormant claim doesn't do more cruelty than justice. so again, we think that this strikes an appropriate balance between preserving restitution and protecting those due process rights of the defendants. we appreciate the feedback and the work of the committee staff and we ask for your aye vote. thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 626, 'end': 635, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dawn Koepke: thank you, mr. chair and members, dawn sean koepke, mchugh, koepke and associates. on behalf of crime victims united of california, and also in strong support. we'd echo the comments made by mr. hoffman with the da's association. cvuc through its advisory board members have actually worked on a number of cases where this type of opportunity would have a significant difference in a victim's lives. so i have one case where a victim was actually in a coma, probation expired before they actually came out of that comma. and absent the ability to kind of revised that restitution order. there was no opportunity for them to do so to help cover the counseling medical costs thereafter. we do think this is a reasonable approach and end compromise and we request your aye vote.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 52, 'end': 58, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 60, 'end': 66, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 195, 'end': 202, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kathy Sher: good morning, kathy dawn sher on behalf of the aclu of california. we oppose ab 194, because it extends the period during which a person convicted of a crime remains under court control. in some cases, far beyond the period of supervision set by the court at sentencing. in many cases, ab 194 would subject a defendant to a period of uncertainty that would many times over the period of probation set by the court. a defendant sentenced to one year of probation, for example, would then have four more years during which he could be called back into court and ordered to pay additional restitution, even after the amount initially determined and ordered had been fully paid off. this undermines the determination of the court as to the appropriate sentence and lessens the incentive for the prosecution and victim to determine in a timely manner, the amount of restitution to be requested where that cannot be determined at the time of sentencing. existing law offers considerable flexibility. under penal code section 1203.3, the restitution order can be modified at any time while the defendant remains on probation in those cases where a defendant is sentenced to probation. that is a reasonable and workable limit that appropriately balances the victims interest in receiving full restitution with the interest of both sides in reaching a point of finality in a reasonable period of time. for these reasons, we respectfully ask for your no vote. thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: mr. chair and members, hernandez on behalf of the california attorneys for criminal justice statewide association of criminal defense attorneys both in private practice and also working in public defender offices. i think the prior writ in this accurately describes some of our concerns. so let me just add a very briefly, a couple of things. one is i think the practical effect of this bill is creating a blanket extension for just about everybody in california and extending the reach of the core, and extending beyond the statutory period for current crimes, and current offenses, and current probationary periods. that's essentially what this bill would allow in many instances and that's problematic. we have very certain maximum sentences. very certain maximum probationary periods for offenses and that's partly a promise of due process for individuals. it's also a promise for kind of constitutional protections. and at some point, once we say that's the end, then that's the end. this would go beyond that, not just in very unique, in the example that was presented earlier by mr. hoffman, but pretty much across the board for many offenses. so, it just goes way too far. there are opportunities to pursue restitution through civil means, which are not subject to the same time restrictions. so there must be other ways to do this, other than to extend the jurisdiction, the reach of the court and criminal court reach on individuals. at some point, we just have to say, there must be another way to do this. and we're happy to be a part of that conversation, but this is not the way to do it and we ask for your no vote.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1090, 'end': 1097, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jacqueline Danowski: hi, i'm jacqueline kathy danowski with disability rights california and we're in support of this bill.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: mr. chair, members, ignacio jacqueline hernandez on behalf of the california attorneys for criminal justice. we do not have a position on the bill. we have been in discussions with the author's office on some suggestions to make the bill a little bit tighter. in particular, to protect the privacy and confidentiality of individuals who are going through mental health treatment. so we look forward to continuing our conversation with the author's office going forward.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stephanie Clendenin: Good afternoon, Stephanie Clendenin, I'm Chief Deputy Director for the Department of State Hospitals. The Department of State Hospitals 2017-18 proposed budget includes a total of $1.6 billion, and 8,549.7 positions to serve a patient census of 6,369 patients. The budget is comprised primarily of $1.4 billion in general funds and $146 million is reimbursements from counties for the treatment of several million committed patients. The proposed budget reflects a decrease of $278 million and a reduction of 1,931.9 positions and 1,075 patients from the current year. These reductions are the net impact of several proposals for the budget year but primarily the reduction is related to the to transfer to CDCR the management and operation of the three psychiatric programs located within the CDCR prisons.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Margaret Johnson: hi, my name is margaret jonah johnson. i'm with disability rights california. and i wanted to just mention some of our concern. learns about the proposal. generally we're concerned that it only proposes increasing capacity at jail settings. we think there are more effective ways to increase competency restoration programs too address the capacity issues that we're talking about here today. some of those programs would include increase in community based competency programs. increasing community based programs for those who cannot be restored to competency. and expanding the use of conditional release programs. so, we would like to see more money put towards those kind of programs rather than jail based programs. and we think that, that could be very effective in terms of addressing some of the issues that are happening currently with the ist population. we think that generally california jails don't have the staffing resources, office treatment space, and kind of the therapeutic environment that would be necessary to deliver adequate mental health services and to facilitate desired restoration outcomes. other states have done a lot of community restoration programs, we did review of 35 states that has specific statutes allowing our patient community restoration. unfortunately, only about 16 of them actually have the programs, of them, three of them i picked out of my testimony which are florida, virginia, and wisconsin have pretty robust community based programs. wisconsin's program was very good, it restored about 75% of the individual's served during the period that was studied for their program and then in addition, folks may know that we've been making a lot of county jail monitoring visits. as a result of those visits, we really have concerns about jail-based competency treatment because we found improper and inadequate mental health treatments, including treatment in specially designed jail-based mental health units. the department of developmental services has the authority to actually develop small community based secure perimeter homes with 50 of the 150 beds for targeted regional center consumers who are placed and participating in forensic competency training. but we are not aware of any kind of similar development going on for people with mental health disabilities. so, it just seems to us that it might make sense to really look at trying to expand that for the mental health population so that there could be more community-based programs. and my testimony that i give you goes into more detail about increasing community based options for people, and increasing overall state hospital capacity by expanding the use of conrep programs. the other thing i just want to mention, that i know was in the agenda that the staff prepared for you, was that we really were interested in a judicial council recommendation to increase judicial discretion for competent restoration programs, and that would involve expanding the courts' discretion to included outpatient. placement program without the necessity of institutional confinement when the court determine the placement provides more appropriate mental health treatment and doesn't pose a danger to the health and safety of others. so. think that sums up my comments, thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Han Wang: Han Wang, Department of Finance, if I may add that the state hospital does have a plan with the current project that's underway for the Metro State Hospital to expand beds. If I'm correct that you're alluding to the bed capacity, and this one will expand the capacity roughly in the range of around 200 in the outyears. And so I know that's not quite 500, but it does put a bigger dent into that wait list.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Han Wang: han, department of finance, correct me if i'm wrong. i believe that for the sexually violent predators, once they've served their time and then deemed that they're not a harm to themselves or to the society. we don't really have a statutory way of holding them within the state hospital, that is correct.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sophie Cabrera: Good afternoon, Sophie Cabrera, Department of State Hospitals, Program Director for the Enhanced Treatment Program. Along with the provisions of 1340, there are very specific requirements. Under 1340, there's a distinct referral process. The ETP is going to be at two locations, Atascadero and at Patton, but will accept placements from all five hospitals around the state. The referral is made from the home hospital by the psychiatrist or psychologist and treatment team It's sent to the supervisor within clinical operations for review of the packet. It's assigned to a designated forensic evaluator who would do an initial assessment of that patient and make a recommendation to what is the forensic needs assessment panel which is comprised of a Psychiatrist, a Psychologist, and a Medical Director to determine the patient's appropriateness for the ETP. If what's called the FNAP certifies that patient for the ETP it is for up to one year. That referral is sent to a forensic needs assessment psychologist, who does an in-depth violence risk assessment, and then with the ETP treatment team, developes a treatment program. Those patients that are certified for the ETP are then transferred from their home hospital to either Atascadero or to Patton to receive ETP services. The statute also requires a multidisciplinary team for the ETP which is comprised of a Psychiatrist, a Psychologist, a Clinical Social Worker, a Rehab Therapist, a Registered Nurse and a Psychiatric Technician and hat comprises the ETP treatment team. The statute requires recertification of that patient every 90 days by the FNAP, and then also requires and independent evaluation if the patient is in for a year to determine if they are still appropriate for the ETP. As Stephanie mentioned, that also requires that we analyze the outcomes and report our recommendations to the Policy and Budget Legislative Committees annually, beginning January 10th, the first year after the ETP opens. Our implementation schedule, we have four units. Three in Atascadero, one in Patton. We expect to have the first unit at Atascadero open in April of '18. The second unit would open in August of 2018. The third unit at Atascadero in December of '18.  And the one unit at Patton also in December of '18. So, we expect to have 39 beds at Atascadero and 10 beds at Patton activated by the end of 2018.  Because it is an enhanced treatment program and these are the patients at risk of most dangerous behavior what ETP does that is different from the regular hospital, we have set up, it allows for the management of the patient's violence. We have three units that are comprised, at Atascadero, of 13 individual rooms. They're equipped with a combination sink and toilet. They have the ability to lock the doors for a patient when it's clinically indicated or at such a high risk of violence, they are not safe with other patients or with staff. Each unit will also have a treatment wing, which has group rooms, rehabilitation therapy rooms, a day dining area. Individual contact and non-contact rooms for those patients that are violent will still receive therapy in the non-contact rooms by their psychiatrist or their psychologist. There's a courtyard available in each of the units that allows for outdoor space, and there are treatment programs throughout the entire day. Because these are the most, the patients at risk of most violent behavior, we have asked for enhanced staffing. We did some studies at our current ETU that has treatment unit at Atascadero, and then based on our programming schedule, looked at what the actual nursing duties would be throughout the day. So we're asking for a one, a staffing ratio of 1-1.5 during AM and PM shifts, 1-3 in the night shift. We're also asking for an additional psychologist and rehabilitation therapist, so we can provide treatment throughout the program day, as well as on the weekends and two hospital police on shift every shift for all the units. The enhanced treatment program, that's the staffing. The DSH will bring staffing on board. We're asking for staff to come over two months prior to the activation of each unit. Because this is a new model, it's a new way of thinking about treatment. We want staff to be available two months ahead of time to learn not only hospital operations, but also learn the ETP model and all of the clinical interventions that we will expect them to use with our patient population. We have currently gone through preliminary plans. We are at 50% working drawings that we will be looking at in the beginning of March. We expect to start construction in December of 17 and have all the units open by December of 18. We have met with the Department of Public Health to take a look at what licensing and regulatory changes we may need. We have advised our unions, whoever are interested the project of our status, and we have also met with our patient's rights advocate in-house to go over our program planning. I'm happy to answer any questions.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1232, 'end': 1242, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1249, 'end': 1255, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1754, 'end': 1763, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jonathan Peterson: Thank you, Mr. Chair. Jonathan Peterson with the Legislative Analyst's office. As the administration noted, when the Legislature originally approved the programs through AB-1340, they were designated as pilot ETP units to operate for a limited amount of time, to test whether they were effective. Given that fact, we recommend the Legislature approve the requested funding and positions on a limited term basis, rather than on a permanent basis, as proposed by the Governor's Budget. In addition, we recommend the Legislature adopt budget trailer legislation to require, as part of the Annual Evaluation Report's information on key outcomes such as whether ETP patients, once released from these units, have future violent incidents or not.  We recommend that we include additional evaluation components in this trailer bill legislation. So as mentioned, that these units were originally designated to operate for four years. Throughout this period you would get an annual evaluation with some of this key information. And our recommendation is that, given that these are to test a new treatment model, decisions about ongoing funding would be more appropriate after the Legislature has had the opportunity to use the information they received, to assess whether they are effective, and warrant ongoing funding. Thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Margaret Johnson: Hi, Margaret Johnson, Disability Rights California again. We also want to reinforce the LAO's recommendation. This is only a four year pilot. And then I would like to call your attention to Welfare and Institutions Code, Section 4145, which lists at least 15 things that the department is to be looking at when it develops its report. And I think the addition of what the LAO is recommending, in terms of how effective it is, makes sense. So, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Adrian Mohammed: adrian margaret mohammed with the union of american physicians and dentists, also here to echo the comments of my colleagues. the etp program is something that we need. and it's imperative that they're funded to the level stated. that way, we can ensure that this is truly a program that is beneficial, not only to dsh, but to our members and the populations that they serve. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sophie Cabrera: good afternoon, sophie. the department is requesting to re-appropriate $11,467,000 in general funds for construction of the three etp units at atascadero and the one at patton. the funding was initially authorized in the budget act of 2015. during our preliminary plan phase, we identified the need to make some changes in the design and the location of the projects. that decision delayed the project's schedule. and so, we are now asking for the re-appropriation, as the construction will start after june of 2017. we are currently in working plan phase. expect that to be completed by the end of the fiscal year. but construction will be delayed. so we ask for that reappropriation.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sydney Tama: Sydney Tama, Department of Finance. We continue to support this proposal.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lupe Alonzo-Diaz: chair, dr. arambula, members, lupe adrian alonzo-diaz, the deputy director of administration for the department of state hospitals. for issue 11, dsh respectfully requests $3.916 million general fund to upgrade the existing fire alarm system for the patient occupied cte building at dsh metro. this funding would be for the basis of preliminary plans, working drawings as well as construction. the existing fire alarm system is not code compliant and cannot be serviced or expanded upon. the new system will be code compliant addressable, which means that we'll be able to pinpoint key locations and it will also be connected to the new central monitoring system.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 19, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 30, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sydney Tama: Sydney Tama, Department of Finance. This proposal was part of an existing project Metropolitan State Hospita, but was removed through a scope change on May 19, 2016 due to an increase in project cost estimate, before working drawings were completed. This scope change allowed the existing project to proceed on schedule and given the phased approach of the existing project, the Metropolitan's CTE building continues with no adverse action on schedule.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert David: i'm robert lupe david, the director of the office of statewide health planning and development. and i've been asked to provide a brief overview of oshpd's program and budget, if i may proceed. thank you, sir. the office of statewide health planning and development advances californians access to state, safe rather quality healthcare environments by focusing in three primary areas. healthcare workforce development, healthcare data collection and reporting and healthcare construction and financing. we have two areas of the department focusing on health care workforce development, the healthcare work development division and health professions education foundation. our health care workforce development program seek to increase access to health care for under served communities and populations. by incentivizing a diverse and culturally and linguistically competent health care workforce. we focus on recruiting and retaining various health professionals in areas of unmet need. we increase the geographic distribution of california's healthcare workforce, and we explore a new service delivery models. since fiscal year 2011-12, oshpd has provided more than 8,000 awards to individuals. and 650 institutional awards, totalling more than $204 million to support the education of health professionals in a variety of practices throughout the state. one of our primary health care workforce programs is the [unknown] program. [unknown] awards funding to healthcare training and residency programs to increase access to healthcare providers in underserved communities. this is done through the recruitment of underrepresented minorities. clinical training in areas of unmet need and graduate placement of health care professionals in those areas of unmet need. we have a health care information division which serves as a health care data collection and reporting hub. we collect health care data from nearly 6,000 health care facilities licensed by the department of public health. this data includes hospital patient records as well as public utilization, and financial data. we make much of our data available to the public, researchers, policy makers, the media, and others. we also produce measures, analyses, and reports on healthcare outcomes and quality, and other related health topics. since 2012 oshpd has release more than 600 data products about california health care quality, cost, utilization and outcomes on topics that included hospital and patient mortality. access to community based primary care and first time reports about ischemic stroke outcomes and hospital readmissions. we also coordinate and administer the california health and human services open data portal. more than 230 datasets have been published in open format from all 12 chhs departments since the open data initiative launched in the fall of 2014. oshpd is the building department for california's hospitals and skilled nursing facilities, and we're probably best known for this function. we administer the seismic safety program, focused on strengthening california's hospital buildings. so they can remain operational in the event of an earthquake or other disaster. in 2001, 40% of california's hospital building inventory over 1,000 buildings was classified as being potentially at risk of collapse in a major earthquake. today, i'm pleased to report that more than 92% of acute care hospital buildings in the state now comply with the seismic safety act. and we continue to work with the remaining hospitals to meet the 2020 deadline for buildings to withstand a major earthquake or be removed from service. we've also promulgated a new seismic performance category called spc4d. that will allow older hospital buildings to upgrade to a standard that will keep them seismically compliant past 2030. that's a great option, particularly for hospitals in areas of low seismicity, that would otherwise have to be replaced or removed from service. and this should really be a benefit to rural facilities. additionally, since 2012, oshpd has reduced hospital construction plan review time on remodel and renovation projects by more than 26%. in 2016, 98% of our project reviews were completed on schedule. we've increased face to face over the counter services and rapid review services. for smaller construction projects, and we've leveraged technology to provide real time plan review and a one stop electronic services portal. in 2016,90% of all project applications to oshpd were directly submitted electronically into our eservices portal. also last year, we launched a completely electronic and paperless construction project review process for smaller projects roughly under $500,000 in construction cost. these innovations have greatly improved our customers experience with oshpd. and contribute to improved health and safety for hospital patients, staff, and visitors. finally, mr. chair, our cal mortgage program provides health facility construction loan assistance for california's non-profit and public health facilities, they can gain access to low cost financing for the capital construction needs. and since 2012 cal mortgage has insured 45 loans totaling over $1.48 billion for these non-profit and public health facilities throughout the state. a brief overview of our budget. our 2017-18 proposed budget is a 131.5 million and 479.6 positions. our department is funded primarily by special funds, many of them are fee supported. and we have a small amount of federal funding, $1.4 million for our workforce programs. this concludes my overview and i'm happy to answer any questions you may have.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sergio Aguilar: Chair members Sergio Aguilar from Department of Finance. So given the lower than expected state revenue picture the Governor's budget is proposing to pull back from the one time committment that we made last year rather than making cuts to existing and ongoing programs. And this will help bring the state's budget back into balance for 2017, 18 and also future years based on our current projections.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stacie Walker: hello, i'm stacie robert walker, i'm the deputy director for the health care workforce development division in [unknown] and i've been asked today to provide you preliminary overview with the sonbram budget. i'll reiterate some of what bob said, the sonbram program awards funds to health care training and education programs that demonstrate an ability to provide primary care in areas of unmet need. to place graduates in areas of unmet need and then to attract under represented minorities into the program. based funding for the sonbram program comes from the california health data and planning fund. between fiscal years 2008, 09 and 2013, 14 annual funding for the program was approximately $7 million. in fiscal year 2014,15, sonbram received a one time $3.9 million augmentation to support new family medicine, internal medicine, obgyn, and pediatric residency programs. then beginning in fiscal year 2014, 15 and spread over three years sonbram received two additional augmentations. one was a $21 million grant from a california endowment and the other was an $8.5 million augmentation for residency program expansion. in fiscal year 2016, 17, so this current budget year, we have approximately $12.7 million to support the songram program. in addition, we had some roll over funds so we'll be able to add around $2 million to our rewards for this year. that money came from previous years that were unspent. for fiscal year 2017 2018, the governor's budget includes $7 million in data fund monies to support the sonbram program.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 236, 'end': 239, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jodi Hicks: Thank you, Jodi Hicks representing the California Academy of Family Physicians, and I'll start it off. Just want to support the Song-Brown Program, support the Committee's comments and recommendations. And just add in, and I know we've been talking about this for many years, but add in a couple of things on why that program is so important. And we have worked hard with the Legislature and with OSHPD to work out the funding stream, but also some of these details. But just as a reminder, when we take that money back, we're not only not helping with the access problem in California, and not continuing to grow a pipeline for more physicians to come to California, but we're educating them in our medical schools and then sending them out of state to do their training, which makes no fiscal sense for this state. So we're spending the money to educate them. Then we send them out of state because we don't have enough residency slots for them in the State of California. And we know that 70% of the time wherever they do their training, they put down roots, they start treating patients, and that's where they stay. So we know how to get physicians to go into those underserved areas. And it's, quite frankly, raising rates so that you pay them better. Or to give them student loan repayment programs to get them to stay, but usually that's temporary. Or to train them, that's what we know. And so we decided as a Legislature last year to invest in the pipeline and in workforce by way of training and we were really proud of that accomplishment, so we really hope that we take a second look at that, and not take it back this year before it even has us a chance to get started. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair and Members.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Megan Subers: Megan Subers on behalf of the California Primary Care Association. We represent about 1,150 clinics and health centers in California, and provide care to about 6.2 million patients per year. Just to add on to what Jodi just mentioned to you all, this funding is imperative to the primary care residency programs in California, and specifically the teaching health centers in California, of which there are six in California, and they are based in community health centers. They are in under-served areas of the state. And not withstanding the state funding that we stand to lose this year, unless Congress extends the funding on the federal level for the teaching health center piece specifically, then all of our funding goes away for these six sites in California. Of course, none of us in this room can guess what's going to happen on the federal level to that piece, and all we can say is we cannot wait for an action. We cannot sit around and wait for Congress to maybe do something, or possibly, probably, not do something. This money is imperative to these six sites, in addition to the other primary care residency programs in California. So we would ask that you please support staff's recommendation on this item and continue funding these programs. Thank you.
[{'start': 214, 'end': 218, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Randy Perry: mr. chair and members, randy with aaron read & associates on behalf of the california children's hospital association. we were part of the negotiations last year and the analysis correctly points out that $33 million we'd been relying on for the next three years doesn't even cover the shortfall we're going to hit with losing some of the funding we have. so we support the staff recommendation, thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 34, 'end': 44, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Snyder: jennifer stacie snyder, on behalf of the osteopathic physicians and surgeons of california. 60% of those that graduate from an osteopathic medical school do go into primary care. we are seeing a lot more of an increase in the number of students that are going to these medical schools, we have two in california, but it is a constant struggle to find residency programs. and we all know, i mean the staff did an excellent job of citing statistics in the analysis today, that three times more likely to stay in the area of which you have your residency program. so even now our dos are going out of state to do their residency programs. and we're seeing a lot of them not coming back. so it was crucial that we saw the funding last year. it back-filled what we were going to lose. and so now we're not only not seeing new monies, but we're losing what we had before, so extremely disappointed. i would like to say that we strongly support the staff recommendation to reject the governor's proposal, thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Baca: Good afternoon, Michelle Baca with the California Medical Association. We'd like thank the Committee for their work on this issue and agree with the recommendation to deny the Governor's proposal. There's a shortage of primary care physicians in California. And a portion of these dollars was supposed to go to fund additional residency slots and also residency slots in non-traditional programs. Both are critical to addressing the shortage of physicians in California, thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barbara Glaser: Barbara Glaser with the California Hospital Association, representing over 400 hospitals. I am here today in strong support of the Committee recommendation to restore these dollars. In California, about 31% of our physicians are 60 years or older. So we're looking at a group of physicians who are going to be retiring over the next decade or so. And then of course, at the same time, we have an aging population, so we need these residents and we need them to stay here in California. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
An-Chi Tsou: tsou with the cal capitol group on behalf of the california chapter of the american college of physicians. i'd like to echo comments of my colleagues before me and say that we would, are in strong support of the staff's recommendation. and thank you all for being champions on this really important issue.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amber King: king with the association of california healthcare districts. i would also like to echo the comments that have already been made in strong support of the staff recommendation. thank you. hello, thank you mr. chair and committee members.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marques Castrejon: and i'd also like to thank the department for being here. my name is marques jennifer castrejon, i'm with the california pan-ethnic health network. as a statewide health advocacy organization, we focus on advancing health equity. and we've been recently doing more around mental health workforce. so i appreciate the topic discussion of workforce development. and i want to touch on something else briefly mentioned in the analysis. there's a good amount of data that shows that workforce education and training development programs that oshpd run are providing a more diversified work force. and it's actually meeting its goals, in some respects, in that way. that means that there's a one-time funding that was allocated for those programs, that's set to expire in 2018. and with that, we want to know what the state's plan is to further diversifying and retaining the public mental health workforce. as we know, when there are not people there to service these constituents, they end up in the emergency rooms and that's a big cost to most of the state. so we do look forward to this item being agendized in future hearings so that we can discuss it. but we feel that it's definitely a topic that is worth discussion. thank you.
[{'start': 69, 'end': 95, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Krawczyk: thank you, good afternoon. dr. krawczyk, the deputy director for the healthcare information division at the office of statewide health planning and development. and i've been asked to speak about the elective percutaneous coronary intervention program. which is quite a mouthful, so if you don't mind, i'm going to say pci in reference to the program. senate bill 906, which was chaptered in 2014, established the elective pci program. prior to the elective pci program, hospitals that were offering pci were required to have on-site surgical backup. the elective pci program was established as a program administered by the california department of public health, that allows hospitals to get certified to provide pci without the on-site surgical backup. sb 906 also established the requirement for the office of statewide health planning and development to annually publish a report on outcomes of the program, specifically on mortality, post-operative stroke, and post-operative coronary artery bypass graft. the analyses will be risk-adjusted in order to ensure that the underlying patient risk is accounted for, to have a equal or like-to-like comparison of the participating facilities. for the risk-adjusted analysis, senate bill 906 required that we contract with the american college of cardiology and receive data from the national cardiovascular data registry for the analyses. currently, we have two limited term positions to fulfill the analysis and reporting mandates that were established by sb 906. to date, these positions have been meeting with stakeholders and clinicians to develop the evaluation protocol, the framework for the program and the evaluation, and the conceptual models for the analysis. they have developed and have received approval from the committee for the protection of human subjects to conduct these evaluations. they received approval to receive and link to other data sources. they've developed and executed the contract for the receipt of the data from the national cardiovascular data registry. and they've been working with academic partners to, or actually, have created a prototype data set in advance of the receipt of the actual data so that we can begin our work actually developing the analysis code and the risk adjusted model concepts further. and most importantly, they have been developing and have developed their own subject matter expertise of pci, of the underlying scientific literature to inform our analyses, and the data itself. for the first formal evaluation of outcomes, the very first hospitals for the program were certified by the california department of public health in the latter part of 2015. as data from these hospitals began to move into the national cardiovascular data registry, we began receiving quarterly files that are non-final from the data registry so that we can begin our analyses in the development for the risk adjusted model. and we have been doing so. we've been using these data to make revisions to the analyses as they've been coming in because from one quarter to the next, the underlying patient populations and the characteristics of those participating in the program could change. the final annual data is due to the national cardiovascular data registry on april 15th. they have informed us that it will take a few months for us to receive the final annual data file. at which point, we will rerun our analysis code and move towards the production of the initial results. we do anticipate that there will be some unknowns despite our preparatory work, once we do get the final data. and so factoring in those unknowns and the stakeholder engagement in the process, we plan to release the first report by the close of the calendar year. our goal is to then maintain that similar cycle, releasing a report each year as required by sb 906. the work is ongoing, and each report essentially requires us to start anew on the methodology because each year, there may be new hospital certified, the underlying patient population and the associated risk may change. and there are certainly evolution in clinical practices and standards, and the clinical decision making, that's occurring. so the bcp requests that the two limited term positions get converted to permanent, and that the authority for contract resources in order for us to receive the data and to have ongoing clinical consultation. and for this program currently, the healthcare data planning fund is being used to support the work that we're doing, and is also proposed as the resources in the bcp. thank you.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stacie Walker: Good afternoon. Stacie Walker again. I am the Deputy Director for the Healthcare Workforce Development Division at OSHPD. And I'm here to give you an overview of our request for additional resources to support the implementation of AB 2024 and 2048, which were signed into law during the last legislative session. AB 2024 allows, pardon me, allows rule hospitals known as critical access hospitals to directly hire physicians and surgeons suspending some provisions of the ban on the corporate practice of medicine. The bill requires OSHPD to access the impact of the change. It will require us to tell our researched protocol, work with the sites to identify relevant data, develop data systems, pull that data into OSHPD, warehouse the data, and analyze it, as well as taking a look at the data on a quarterly basis to make sure what we're getting is what we think we're getting and validate the information. And then produce a report January 1st, 2024, at the end of the life of this bill. OSHPD is requesting one and a half resources, and $200,000 to support the efforts in fiscal year 2017-18. And a half of a position, and $70,000 until fiscal year 23-24 to support this work. AB 2020 aid changes the process for the state loan repayment program, which OSHPD administers on behalf of the federal government. The program provides loan repayment to healthcare providers in exchange for those providers working in areas of unmet need throughout the state. The program requires the applicant to meet a two-pronged test before they can participate in the program. First of all, they need to be working for a facility that is a federal health special shortage area and then second, the facility must agree to match the federal level of loan repayment, dollar for dollar. Historically, a facility needed to meet both criteria before we placed them on this site, sort of by eligible list. AB 2028 requires OSHPD to include all of the 2,500 federally qualified health centers on the site eligibility list regardless of their willingness to match the federal funds. There were 1,415 sites on the list, with the inclusion of the federally qualified health centers it increased the number on the list sixfold, so it added another 2,500 to the list. OSHPD anticipates that this change is going to increase the number of applicants as well, so with the increased number of applicants and sites, we are anticipating an increase in the amount of technical assistance as well as the number of applicants. OSHPD currently receives 3,500 technical assistance inquiries a year for this program. And we evaluate more than 100 applicants. We are requesting two limited term resources and $200,000 for fiscal year 2017-2018 to support this change. And then two limited term resources and $180,000 beyond this year to fiscal year 19-20. During this period, we'll go ahead and fully assess the impact to our workload and adjust our request accordingly in the future years. So that's all I have to share.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amber King: Amber King with the Association of California Health Care Districts, we represent 20 of the state's 34 critical access hospitals in strong support of the funding for this program. We believe that the data gathered from this program will be very beneficial in the success of the program and any future programs going forward. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barbara Glaser: Barbara Glaser with the California Hospital Association also in support of these positions being funded for 2024.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Monica Flowers: Good afternoon members, my name is Monica Flowers, and I'm the Administrative Deputy for the Office of Statewide Health Planning and Development. I'll just give you a little brief overview. The California Public Employees Retirement System provided OSHPD notification that it would not renew its lease for Sacramento downtown headquarters. In addition, the location in the LA office, which is the Metropolitan Water District, also provided OSHPD with notification that it would not renew its lease as well. Fortunately we have secured two locations for Sacramento and one for LA. And we plan to move in the Sacramento location in the spring of 2017. The LA relocation will hopefully happen towards the end of 2017 as well. OSHPD requests increased expenditure authority in the amount of 1.2 million special funds to support the increased rent costs for the new Sacramento headquarters, and the Los Angeles location as well. That's pretty much it.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert David: robert marques david, ... director.  we were strongly recommended when we got our notice of non-renewal of our lease by the state's real estate department of general services to move sooner rather than later. and the reason for that is the tight rental market in the downtown area. and you're right, the rent is going to be more, fortunately we have the resources to pay that and in terms of the architecture revolving fund, and that's a very good question. we did have some additional funds from some fees that had been owed to us for some time, but the bigger part of that is we actually, like a lot of special funds did during the lean years of the state during the recession, we loaned significant sums to the general fund, and so the hospital building fund had some loan repayments. and so rather than have to go out and spend any general fund for these moves which we have to do, we were able to take special fund money that we had kind of a bolus of an additional fund balance and to pay for these moves that we really don't have a choice. we have to move. our rent is going to go up. even if we stay in our current building there's a rent escalator up to 2020. but again, it was the strong recommendation that we move sooner than later, so that's what we chose to do, sir.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Janice Bailey: Janice Bailey with the California Senior Legislature. Our joint Rules Committee chair, John Pointer's flight was delayed this morning. So he may be here momentarily. He was at the airport. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 87, 'end': 99, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Will Lightbourne: good morning, chair pan, members of the committee. i'm will with the california department of social services. and i'm joined for this part of our adult programs presentation by pete cervinka, chief deputy. and also debbie thomson, who is the deputy director over the adult program division.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 23, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 178, 'end': 191, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 216, 'end': 230, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Iliana Ramos: Iliana Ramos, Department of Finance.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Yang Lee: Yang Lee, Department of Finance.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carol Sewell: Carol Sewell from the California Commission on Aging and also representing the California Elder Justice Coalition. Both organizations were very involved in working with the Department of Social Services in Creating both lawyers position and obtaining the funding last year for this additional training money, and we are really grateful to the Committee for reviewing this again, it's been a very meaningful effort. I think the training will bring much more of the state into compliance with standards and efforts that are much needed, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Margot Kushel: Senate Chair Pan and other Members of the Committee, thanks for inviting me to come and speak with you today. My name is Margot Kushel and I'm a physician and a Professor of medicine at UCSF. I'm a practicing general internist at our public safety net hospital, Zuckerberg San Francisco General. And I'm also an IH funded researcher who has spent many years studying homelessness and health. The County Welfare Director's Association asked me to come and present to you today on issues of elder homelessness, to help explain the importance of the home safe budget proposal. I come before you today to share what I've Learned in my 20 years as a researcher and a practicing clinician. About the toll of homelessness in older adults. And also about the urgent need to prevent homelessness among vulnerable elders. We have found that over half of single homeless adults are aged 50 and older. In our work in Oakland, we found that among those who are age 50 and older and homeless, almost half, or 44%, had never been homeless before the age of 50. Many of these individuals left vulnerable by an illness, a job loss, a loss of a family member, became a victim of elder abuse. And it was that abuse, either physical abuse or financial exploitation, that led directly to their becoming homeless. Being victimized this way can precipitate their homelessness. And as you know, homelessness leads to devastating consequences for health and safety. Adult protective services workers interact with vulnerable elders at a moment of crisis. And this crisis, if acted on, presents a really a golden opportunity to prevent homelessness. I want to tell you about one of our study participants who I'll call Jay, who moved in with his daughter in Oakland when his kidneys began to fail. His daughter took his money, but then kicked him out. And so he had no place to stay and became homeless. Three days a week he went to dialysis. Every night, he slept on an AC transit bus. After months of sleeping on the bus, he obtained emergency shelter, eventually moved to transitional housing, but died before he regained housing. His situation unfortunately, it was not unique. We found the story repeated over and over. There are well known and severe consequences to homelessness among older adults. Our older adults 50 and older, look more like adults in their 70s and 80s. So when I say someone is 52, I want you to envision an 80-year old living on the street, and frankly, some of them were in their 80s. Homelessness ages people. When they become homeless, they lose the ability to access regular health care, to get good nutrition, and to stay safe. And as a result, they wind up in the hospital, and emergency departments, and nursing homes. 50% of our participants have been in the ED, Emergency Department, in the past six months, which is an astronomical number. And 11% had been hospitalized in the past six months. Homelessness, as you know, is catastrophic to health and well-being. As a physician, I can say to you that the single most important step I can take for patients, is saving their housing. There is no medicine that I have access to, that is nearly as important or as potent as housing. And there's no threat to health as bad as homelessness. APS workers come into contact with older adults at a time when they're highly vulnerable. A recent study done in the Midwest showed that relatively modest assistance, on the order of $1,000, at a time when people were at a high risk of homelessness, had lasting impacts on reductions in homelessness. 76% reduction six months later, compared to those who are eligible but didn't receive it. APS workers are well-positioned to intervene to prevent the onset of homelessness, and the devastating health consequences that follow.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 16, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 121, 'end': 134, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1693, 'end': 1696, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Diane Calgen: Good morning, my name is Diane Calgen, and I am the Assistant Director of the Human Services Department in Sonoma County. And for many years, I was the Director of the Adult and Aging Division in Sonoma County. I'm here today, on behalf of the County Welfare Director's Association, to request your support, to establish the Adult Protective Services Home Safe Program, as a demonstration program aimed at eviction and homelessness prevention among victims of elder abuse and neglect. As you've just heard, the consequences of homelessness among older adults are dire, and that is particularly true when they are victims of elder abuse and neglect. Sonoma county has just started a very small pilot program to prevent senior homelessness. We've just opened the door a crack to serve this population of people, and already have a waiting list of seniors who are in desperate circumstances that need support, and case management to remain in their homes. Just a few months ago, we had a report on our APS hotline of an older woman who we'll call Annie. She was living outside on a porch. She had inherited her parents' home, but she had lost it due to financial scams. When the social worker visited her and tried to connect her with money management services and mental health services, it just was not sufficient for her to not end up losing her home, and now lives in a homeless shelter. What she really needed was more intensive care management to address her housing concerns, access legal services, and really be able to stabilize. Annie's story is quite heartbreaking. We think that there are a number of other people like her, and that this program could help to prevent her circumstance. Thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1044, 'end': 1049, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1536, 'end': 1541, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Iliana Ramos: iliana jonah ramos, department of finance. notwithstanding the merits of the proposal, finance is stridently opposed to any new general fund cost spending outside of the governor's proposal. we also would like to note that with the exception of statewide training, all of the components of the aps program were realigned counties in 2011. as such, any new aps component would be the county's fiscal responsibility.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Frank Mecca: Thank you Mr. Chair Frank Mecca Executive Director of the County Welfare Directors Association and we appreciate your consideration and the request. It's been constructed as a demonstration project with one time money so that we can ascertain the questions that you've addressed right now because skilled nursing cost, Costs, inpatient hospitalization costs really are born on the state level. And so a partnership approach to avoiding homelessness we think is the way to go. And we think this will give us the opportunity to really evaluate that.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicole Wordelman: nicole iliana wordelman on behalf of the ventura county board of supervisors in, closer. all right, welcome. nicole waterman, on behalf of the ventura county board of supervisors, in support. this type of program is actually what our elderly population needs to get out of a situation that they would not normally be in.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 109, 'end': 124, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rosanna Carvacho: dr pan and senators, carvacho on behalf of the alameda county board of supervisors, also in strong support of the aps proposal, thank you.
[{'start': 3, 'end': 6, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 21, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gerald Kelch: Yes Gerald Kelch with the California Association of hairy agency on aging. We are in strong support of the proposal.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Beverly Yu: Good morning Mr. Chair, Members Beverly Yu with UDW ask me local 3930 we are in strong support of the APS proposal as well, thank you.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert Copeland: hi, my name is copeland and i know darrel steinberg, our new mayor is putting a lot of support about affordable housing in sacramento. i'd like to see more, a partnership between the state, city, and county to get that done, because our homeless are out dying on the streets, thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 35, 'end': 51, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Diana Madoshi: diana nicole madoshi representative of cara, california alliance for retired americans, representing over a million grassroot advocates for seniors. we are in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Adam Green: yeah, my name is green i'm here with the udw. and i'm also in support of this. not only from what i heard earlier, and everything with what she said, and how dead on she is, i really am greatly support. thank you.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Pointer: Hello, my name is John Pointer. I'm the Executive Director and the Chair of the Joint Rules Committee for the California Senior Legislature. I just wanted to express our support for this legislation, thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Janice Bailey: Janice Bailey, Staff Services Manager with the California Senior Legislature.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Justin Pranis: Justin Pranis, Department of Finance.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Yang Lee: yang diana lee, department of finance.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pat Leary: Good morning, Mr. Chair and members. Pat Leary, Chief Deputy Director.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pam Dickfoss: Thank you. Good morning. My name is Pam Dickfoss, Deputy Director for Community Care Licensing.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Yang Lee: Yang Lee with the Department of Finance.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Will Lightbourne: will yang lightbourne, department of social services.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pete Cervinka: pete will cervinka, department of social services.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debbie Thompson: debbie, department of social services.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Iliana Ramos: Iliana Ramos, Department of Finance.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Yang Lee: And Yang Lee, Department of Finance.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joseph Barry: hello, i'm joseph. i've been coming here for the better half of those eight years since the cuts. i can't iterate enough how important it is. i kind of am saying that the state of california has dragged its feet on this issue for so long. it's turned my hair gray personally and literally and it's ironic this is on the 2nd. the 1st was yesterday. i paid my mortgage. i paid not all of my gas but the 200 of 250, or whatever it was, there was still a balance left on that. i paid the same thing, most on my electricity. money gone, that's it, and i paid some of my water bill, there you go, and that was it, no more. so i'm a single father, i've got two kids, i'm getting squeezed harder than ever. i'm trying to work really hard to make something of myself right now. it's difficult just because i don't want to live the rest of my life on this program. so most people that are on this program and arguably me are people that are unable to work. it's not that people are on here and it's sad california has us constantly sticking our hand out and it puts back that old ain't no presidential handicap type tone where we're always at the table with our hand out, with our hand out, but you guys aren't handling what you're supposed to, so. please step up as politicians and do your best to help us out.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrew Shane: Thank you, Chair, and members. Andrew Shane from the California Association of Food Banks. We represent all the food banks in California including the Sacramento Food Band and Family Services. Dr. Pandy made an astute point about the costs that we bear because the grants are so low. I would just say that Dr. Sullivan from UCSF finds that hospitalizations spike the fourth week of every month for low income populations because of the tradeoffs, right? People are not able to eat, can't take their medicine, etc. So, we'd love to work with you on the kind of study that you talked about, because right now, the cost of living born on the food banks and other institutions to fill that gap, thank you.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 197, 'end': 202, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 310, 'end': 318, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Shanti Prasad: thank you, hi, my name is shanti pete prasad, i'm the senior policy advocate at alameda county community food bank in oakland. i just want to quickly share a story of a food bank volunteer, a castro valley resident, about his sister. neither he nor his sister could be here today. his sister lives on ssi. in san diego and she lives with her parents and i'll share just a brief piece of her story in the interest of time. she is developmentally disabled, but she goes to school part time one class a semester. she lives with her parents and i asked what what an increase in ssi mean for her. she's 27 years old and she said that she maybe last year she was able to live in kind of a group situation with her peers who are like her and that really gave her autonomy and pride and who at age 27 wants to live with their parents, right, and there were services in this program. however, she is no longer able to do that because there was an increase in that rent and she's lost that opportunity. so that's what it would mean for her.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Jenson: mr. chair, members, my name is chris shanti jenson, i'm the director of advocacy services for resources for independent living, providing services to people with disabilities and low income in sacramento and yellow counties this is something that i track a lot because it, most of our folks are living on ssi and there was no federal or state polo last year. when the governor proposed his budget last year, he put forward a very small call for ssp and assumed that there would be a call coming from the federal government, there would be a total of around $17. that didn't materialize, it's a much smaller call. if it only ended being $6 in change, which is less than half than what he assumed. this year he's not proposing any money for ssp at all, and is assuming a $20 federal cola for singles and 26 for couples. there's no way to know that at this point because they do that by quarters and we won't know until near the end of the cycle what that's going to look like, depends on the consumer price index and all that stuff. so i think that that assumption is erroneous, and that in planning for whatever you want to do, to take that into consideration. thank you very much.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Gonzales: rebecca chris gonzales, national association of social workers, california chapter. we represent over 10,000 professional social workers in the state of california. social workers see their clients trying to survive on these grants and the money doesn't go as far as it used to. we fully support the restoration of the grants, to be something that folks could live on, and also restoring the cola. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert Kolpin: I am back. My name is Robert Kolpin, Shock Member Homes Organizing Committee. Why are people homeless and why are people that can't pay their rent? Because of lack of SSI increase. You show me a place in San Francisco where you can pay up with that SSDI out or in that rental districts?
[{'start': 22, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Fred Mayne: mr. chairman, members, fred rebecca mayne on behalf. similar to the meals on wheels program for frail seniors to be able to live in the community, they have to have some assets to pay for those costs. we support both the restoration and the provisions to allow them to do that. thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Becky Gershon: Hi, my name is Becky Gershon. I do policy advocacy for the San Francisco and Marin Food Bank. Our food bank serves about 40,000 families a week in the two county service area and a significant portion of the folks that come to our food pantries to pick up groceries every week are people on SSI and SSP. Clearly an indication that even the most basic thing as food is not something that these folks can afford. It's a huge problem. I also want to point out that folks on SSI can't qualify for CalFresh and so really the only source of food security for people on this low income level are the non-profit organizations in the many counties that provide that food. The state should be tripping in as well I really support any effort to increase benefit levels this year and look forward to that progress being made.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dan Jordan: hi, my name is dan fred jordan. i work with the central city collaborative also in san fransisco. i'm a housing peer counselor. i also get ssi and ssdi. low income housing in san fransisco is about 2,500 per month for a studio starting. in order to get that though, you need to be making 40,000 a year. ssi doesn't quite get it. also with our medication copays, if you're on hiv drugs, you have a huge copays. my one hiv drug is 800 a month copay. luckily, i have part d insurance that'll cover that. other than that you have no money left after you pay your bills and your copays. thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gleeta Montana: hi, my name us gleeta dan montana and i'm with senior and action in san francisco. i'm here because our members a lot of them they relied on ssi for survival, and that's not enough and i know that some of you already get this, but i was wondering what can you guys do, maybe that is too informal, but what can you guys do to pressure the governor? because last year, this almost, almost, we almost got it, right? and the governor made it impossible for this to happen. so, is there a strategy that you can, you know implement because apparently, you guys get it, but he doesn't. thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Lyons: Michael Lyons, Sr. in Disability Action, San Francisco. Linda Ware was a neighbor for Decades that held the neighborhood together. If anybody in the neighborhood had any kind of problem, she was there to help them and solve that problem. She was a valuable member of the community. She struggled on SSI for many, many years and finally succumbed and had to move. We lost a good neighbor. I lost a good friend. This kind of cuts are tearing communities apart.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 56, 'end': 66, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Maria Spitall: Hello, my name is Maria Spitall. I belong to HDA and I support SSI. Thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rosco Raul: Rosco Raul, I listen to learn and I learn to listen and as a result of that I practise two principles, patience and tolerance. I want to thank those who share before me. I listen for the similarities and not their differences and as a result of that, I practice two principles, patience and tolerance. The bottom line is, don't turn your back on me now. We need you. You cut us. I'm a senior citizen. Don't turn your back on me.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jared McCreary: hi, jared gleeta mccreary with californians for ssi. everyone's coming up here and they're saying all these things, and we hear a lot of people talking about how impossible it is to afford rent in the bay area on ssi, but the reality is that you can't afford rent in merced, rent in fresno on ssi, $800 a month after you pay for your $600 a month apartment, you're paying cellphone bill, if you got medical expenses, you got food, you got clothing. that just doesn't add up it's just simple math. we all have had to learn how to balance our own budgets. people aren't asking for a lot. they're asking for the means to live a life of dignity and respect. it's great we have areas like los angeles and alameda county that have these huge networks of food banks that are able to alleviate some of that burden, but the rest of the state doesn't have that. this is a huge issue and i really would really implore the subcommittee to consider the real effect on people's lives. thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sid Ipsy: My name is Sid Ipsy member of Senior Disability Action, California, American. We support SSI enhancement to suffering senior people, disability and low income groups. Why not act now so that it can be enhanced?
[{'start': 11, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Diana Madoshi: Diana Madoshi, California Alliance for Retired Americans. Of the 1 million members, we support the restoration of the grant and the COLA. On a personal note, I live in Plaster County, supposedly a rich county. Our church, we feed a number of people that have, lack resources that are on SSI. It's very heart breaking to see that and with the housing, situation is even more heartbreaking. So I hope you can finally do something about this, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Adam Green: my name is adam jared green. i'm a fduw. i'm also a veteran of the gottfried services and i also support our ssi and our programs. unfortunately, for me, i'm looking because of my disabilities, to get on these programs. i have fought for years, not only to get on them, still fighting to get on them. i am still fighting to get my rights and every day, it's a fight, and so, i really support the fact of these opportunities and the fact that you take care of us and myself. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 67, 'end': 76, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Steva Gamelli: My name is Steva Gamelli and I don't even know where to start. I have a son who is 40 years old. He will be on SSI until the day he dies. He had a severe auto accident when he was 21 and damaged himself. He will never be able to live alone. My 40 year old son and I live and share a house together and the expenses and if it weren't for the fact that I am a widow and collect $1400 a month from my husband's money that died. We would be on the street. Our rent is $900 a month. I get $1,400 from my Social Security, my son gets $889 from his SSI, and I worked my tail off every day for 21 years as an IHSS provider. Folks, we save you money by taking care of these people in their homes and do you know how long it took me to get to $10.50? 21 years, I'm going to get a 50 cent raise next year, and I'm supposed to live at $900 a month rent with that money. It's not possible.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Advan: Kevin Advan, Coalition of California Welfare Rights Organizations, and we have a high poverty rate in California and the primary anecdotes to the poverty is the SSI program and the CalWORKS program and the food stamp program and we've neglected both CalWORKS and SSI programs and we should bring them up to date to help people overcome poverty. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kirk Child: kirk adam child, disability rights california. we're the california's protection and advocacy program. ssi grant level, ssi ssp grant levels have been a priority for the organization, continue to be a priority for the organization, and we support the ssi coalition's efforts to get the ssi grants to the federal poverty level, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Beverly Yu: Beverly Yu with UDW, Local 3930. I would just like to echo the comments made before me, increasing the SSI would greatly benefit all our members in the low income families of California.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rob White: yes, hello again. this is rob kirk white. i'm speaking to you as a person, just a regular citizen who has done work with rotary clubs in fair oaks and also done work with the odd fellows raising money for different organizations throughout the community. so i have a regional view of the elderly population and how they are suffering and people are trying to live on ssi. as discussed, there are people who are living well below the average and they're trying to make ends meet. i understand that your job and your case loads are just incredibly. i've grown to have a great respect for what you do. instead of like sitting at home and always complaining, i've learned that it is a very hard job. but i think some of these benefits are based on old incomes that people have when they get their 40 units and based on that income, it isn't commensurate with what is happening today and that needs to be handled at washington and i think it needs to be carried there by some of our great senators here and assembly people. thank you very much.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Herald: forgot how to do this. mike with the western center on law and poverty and we are one of the presenters. i'm also here joined today by alissa de vogel of bay legal in the bay area who can tell the story about her, one of her clients that benefited from a similar program in alameda county that we think is worth hearing. do you want to hear from all the witnesses names, or
[{'start': 23, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 135, 'end': 150, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Trent Rhorer: good afternoon trent rob rhorer, executive director of the human services agency in san francisco.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Herald: thank you mister chair, as i said mike trent herald with the western center on law and poverty. and this is a proposal that we're very excited about when it was included as part of the 1617 budget act last year. we think this is smart government at its best. this is us as a government taking proactive steps to make sure that people don't end up on the street that we get them a higher income level that we provide them interim housing. and then by recouping the cost of that higher benefit level for housing from the retroactive ssi check, we're able to use the money again to help another person. this is really smart approach. and i must say, that we're very disappointed when we saw in the january budget that the governor was not going to move forward i mean the reality of that decision is that rather than being able to help hundreds even potentially thousands of people that process has been delayed. and so those folks are not getting an expedited ssi application. they're not being housed. and they're not getting the chance to get that money recouped and used again for another person. so i'm hoping that the committee will take an action today to deny the governor's proposal to not fund the money in this year's budget. and with that i'll give the remainder of my time to mrs. vogel.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 44, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1291, 'end': 1296, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alyssa DeVogel: My name is Alyssa. My name is Alyssa DeVogel. I work with Bay Area Legal Aid in Alameda County, and I represent claimants in SSI and SSDI applications. I'm going to share a portion of a letter that I received from one of my clients thanking me after she got on SSDI. Which just kind of highlights the importance of the program and the work that we do. By my father's hand, I suffered years of sexual and physical abuse. But perhaps worse than that was the verbal abuse. I grew up being yelled at every day, being told I was an idiot that I couldn't do anything right. I grew up not understanding why people smiled. So it was no surprise that I was diagnosed with bipolar disorder when I was 30. I put myself through school receiving my BA and BFA in Art History. My health began to fail me as the stress of full-time work and bipolar disorder mounted. After 13 years of teaching high school art, I was fired by my school after admitting that I was suicidal. Since being fired from my last job I've struggled greatly with my identity. I was terrified of losing my mental health altogether losing my home and losing everything I'd worked so hard for. I inherently trusted you as my SSI attorney and always knew that you were fighting for me. You stood up for me when I couldn't stand up for myself and when I was at my weakest. You fought for me so that I could have a decent life. So that I could buy groceries, pay my bills, and pay for my housing. He fought for my dignity because of your hard work I can safely stay in my home. I have time to paint now, time for my spiritual practice, and time to rest and recuperate from decades of overworking, severe stress, and debilitating depression. In the public comment Mr. Green mentioned that it took him three years to get on his SSI benefits. And I think that just really highlights the importance of the program and having advocates working to get people on benefits.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 17, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 30, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1719, 'end': 1724, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Leepi Shimkhada: hi, good afternoon again. my name is leepi mike shimkhada. i'm with the department of health services in los angeles county. so you know, in los angeles county, we have a pretty significant homeless issue. we have about 47,000 people on the streets on any given night. and in response to that, our la county board of supervisors have created a plan to prevent and end homelessness. we are seeing a lot of much needed local support from our cities and our county government. we have a tax on the ballot next week to also try to increase some additional support and funding. but the hdap we are really excited about it. we really were able to look at that and be able to create additional services for people who are going to need ssi and ssdi. often times our homeless individuals on the streets have significant disabilities. they cannot build a case for themselves. they don't have the ability to get to their doctors appointments and things like that. so we really need a concerted effort to do ssi advocacy. in the past we've had success with a program run specifically by the department of health services. in 2009 we did fund a pilot project where we were able to get almost 1,600 people on ssi benefits with a 95% approval rate on initial application. so we have a model and we know it works, right? we have national best practices, we have our own best practices and we have the funding available, we can recreate that into a county wide. we also have our own housing program, which is called housing for help. so, we've helped almost 2,500 people. they're the medically complex individuals, many of whom would call for ssi if we have the ability to have an advocacy team to be able to do that work. it's very complicated work, it's also very time consuming. you have to be able to collect medical records and really be able to assist people in making sure that they can get all of their documentation in order. the application is probably about that thick. i couldn't fill out an application for myself in some cases, so you really need the expertise. so having somebody like a lawyer is really important to get this work done. so we really, really would like to see this be reconsidered for funding again, so that counties like ours can really apply and make sure that that funding gets back out on the streets to the advocates.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Adam Green: adam leepi green, udw gym and i want to thank you guys for really paying attention and listening to this. i love what she had just said, i'm in the same exact boat. i'm still right now trying to fight for my disabilities again through the military and through the state in anyway i can. i finally recently just got on one of our state programs, the calfresh program, which i'm grateful and thankful for. but i still have to fight for my other disabilities, and so i really strongly support what has been said, what is going on. and again, i want to thank everybody up there for how you said it, because it really paints a picture for all of us who are in similar boats. and the fact that it's high time to do something. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Steve Weiss: hi, steve adam weiss from bay area legal aid again. so around 2012 alameda county greatly increased their investment in an hdap type program. and it was modeled after what had been done before in san francisco and la. and health consumer best practices that are in your agenda. and we've seen the kind of success you would expect, a high percentage of people approved. i can answer the question about what percentage might be disabled of the ga case load i think it's safe to say over 50% of alameda. before they implemented time limits they estimated that 30% of the da case load had disability. but in implementing a time limit for employable people, they actually had to make that decision. and evaluate people and what they found now is that 70% of the people on ga are unemployable, and then referred for ssi. and over 80% of those, we get on ssi. and i do want to mention that the housing subsidy which was part of this. basically is increased interim assistance that brings people's grants up while their application is pending. so they don't have to wait the year or more to get on ssi. they get a higher ga grant from calfresh while it's pending. and we find those folks also are easier to get housed. they become more stable, less likely to be homeless, less likely to be hospitalized, lower recidivism. so all of the cost savings that you're thinking, so it's wrong to think of this as a one time investment, it's not.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrew Shane: shane from the california association of food banks in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Frank Mecca: mecca with the county welfare director's association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shanti Prasad: shanti steve prasad, alameda county community food bank in full support of hdap.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Emily Wilson: Emily Wilson with the Alameda County Community Food Bank and Alameda County Social Services, and I support funding the HDAP, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lilia Montano: Lilia Montano from Senior and Disability Action in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Herald: Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mike Herald again with the Western Center on Law and Poverty. This is actually the issue that was discussed earlier on the agenda relating to the SSI grant amounts. And we've heard all the public testimony already. People got up during that time, so I don't suspect they'll get up again unless you give them a second bite at the apple. A couple of additional points that I did not make in my earlier testimony. One is that in addition to the eight years that have gone on, there has been somewhere in the range of 8 to $10 billion that has been taken from SSI recipients during this time period, not counting the cost of living adjustments that were eliminated in 2010 and '11. So the cuts that have been taken by some of the poorest people in our society had been really profound indeed. And in fact, when you compare it to the size of our rainy day fund, they are remarkably similar in their size. And so in a sense, many of the benefits that the state has gained in the ability to fund future budgets, has come at least in part from SSI recipients who continue to give up that grant amount every month. We know that this is not something that's going to be easy to do in one step. And so in recent years what we have proposed, is that the Legislature consider doing this in a two to three step process. So that we would initially move grants from their current level of 89% to approximately 96%. And then the second year of the budget we would move them from 96% to 100%. And this would be for single individuals, we want to make sure that every person on SSI is at least at the federal poverty level of 100% of that. The couples are, right now, I believe at 112%. We would hope that they would be able to start getting costs of living adjustments. So the first two steps would essentially be to restore the grants back to $77 back to 100% of the federal poverty level. And then implement a cost of living adjustment so that we would know that they would never drop below 100% again. And so that is essentially a three-step process that we would recommend to the Legislature to consider. Again, acknowledging that it would be difficult. We would love to have this done in one step, but facing the fiscal realities of the state and acknowledging that we have a little bit of uncertainty in our budget we would propose that action going forward.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Will Lightbourne: will shanti lightbourne, director of the department of social services.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debbie Thompson: Debbie Thompson, Department of Social Services.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pete Cervinka: Pete Cervinka, Department of Social Services.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Iliana Ramos: iliana will ramos, department of finance.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debbie Thompson: hello, thompson, department of social services. and i'm going to talk just a bit about ihss and the implementation of the fair labor standard act activities that the state implemented last february 2016. so over the next few slides starting with slide 11, you're going to see a number of charts with data around activities that were involved with this implementation. and i'm just going to point out a few items of potential interest. on the first slide, slide 11, you'll see that an average of about 100,000 providers, each month, are paid overtime, which is about 24% of the providers paid in a month. and those providers that are paid overtime were receiving an average about 61 hours of overtime pay. on page 12, it speaks to travel time, and we'll see that approximately 7,000 providers are paid over travel time per month. and an average of about 15 hours of travel time, for the month. the next slide is looking at the wait time and showing 2 different periods the period of july, through december of 15 and then july through december of 16. the authorized time for medical accompaniment and alternative resource accompaniment. and that comparison is related to wait time because that is the service where wait time is incorporated. so to see the difference in hours between those 2 periods, the 2.3 average in medical accompaniment to 2.6, is showing that increase in relationship to wait time. that's when the period when it began being assessed for the wait time to be included. the same thing with alternative resources. you'll see the 6.1 to 6.6. the next slide is addressing exemptions. as a part of this implementation, with caps to providers in the number of hours that they could work in a work week. we did also create some exceptions for those individuals who might potentially be put at risk if their provider couldn't provide additional hours than the 66, the 66 arrives at about a 283, the maximum number of hours per month. the exemption allows the provider to work up to 360 hours instead. so those providers are either serving multiple ihss recipients or a recipient who's also receiving wpcs benefit through the department of health care services in addition to ihss. so the first exemption, exemption one was the exemption that allowed for grandfathering in providers who were in a specific relationship with the recipients they served, of parent, grandparent type relationship, and they served multiple recipients in the home. and they were in that relationship prior to end of january 2016. as of december of this year we have a little over 1,300 individuals that were receiving that exemption. the exemption too is an exemption available ongoingly to people who qualify. it's looking at individuals who are in situations that, again, could potentially put them at risk if their current provider couldn't provide the additional hours. again, these providers are serving multiple recipients. and all of the recipients would be in this type of a situation, where they were either lliving remotely enough that getting another provider would be difficult. they had a language issue that they spoke a language that they couldn't find another provider that they could effectively direct their services, or their was a medical or behavioral complex situation that required a particular provider and for that provider to live in the home. as of the end of december we had 52 providers that were receiving that type of an exemption. and the last exemption was the one for individuals who are receiving both and ihss and wpcs benefit, most of whom are severely impaired and there was 753 in that exemption. the next page addresses violations and providers who got violations for working outside of these caps. and you'll see that in the top half of the page, i'd average of about 1,900 providers who serve multiple recipients, received a violation in a month, which is about 2% of providers who serve multiple recipients. and the bottom half shows about 2,200 a month providers, who are serving a single recipient which is about 1% of providers serving a single individual. the next chart shows providers that have received multiple violations, so you'll see that's a month by month. so about a thousand in december received a violation, their second violation. we had providers reach their third violation in primarily the november timeframe, about 119 that month. and then in december, 196. so that's kind of where we're at with the violation piece. fairly low percent that we're seeing, but certainly people being impacted. that kind of moves us out of the data around flsa. if there's any questions? otherwise i can go on to the next item? okay. the electronic time sheets. so we are in the process of implementing electronic timesheets, for our providers. we believe this will be a great benefit in a number of ways. cutting down the amount of time for them to receive payment by eliminating the mail time for time sheets on the front end. and also allowing for getting notifications of information on the timesheet processing on a regular basis. and we will be beginning the pirate for this in three counties in may. the counties who will be pirating are riverside, yellow and sacramento. everyone is very excited and we've gotten a lot of positive feedback on the prototype. and be, just be aware this is a voluntarily activity for providers. so there is no requirements for them to switch to this it's something, a new thing being offered to them. the next page gives you the fuller timeline of the electronic timesheets and the activities that have been done thus far and our upcoming. then the final page is addressing electronic, is it verification which was part of the federal 21st century cures act that was. signed december of 2016. this impacts theihs program and then it requires some additional elements to be collected that providers have to report as a part of their time reporting, including their start and stop times daily. and the type of service being provided, and it would be some type of immediate electronic communication of them arriving and leaving, and what services were provided each day. so we, obviously this is very new and the department is still in the process of evaluating its implications to the program and how it could potentially be looked at for implementation. it will involve an extant of stake holder process to work this through.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : Sure and maybe just backing up for a second, we did try to do quite a lot of engaging of stakeholders as well as recipients and providers, as a part of developing the prototype, so we could have hopefully something that will Be working well at the time of pilot so we anticipate if it does go well with pilot we would be able to open it up state wide in July. Again, this isn't a requirement You wouldn't anticipate that all of a sudden, 100% of people are having to use it. That making it available. Obviously, if we find in pilot that there are issues or adjustments that need to be made, that full Statewide implementation could be moved up.
[]
Frank Mecca: frank iliana mecca, executive director of cwda.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matt Cate: Matt Cate, I'm the Executive Director of the California Association of Counties.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kirk Stembar: kirk frank stembar i'm the executive director of the county of behavioral health directors association.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tia Orr: hi, tia the legislative director for service employees of the international union.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matt Cate: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Matt Cate, the Association of Counties, CSAC, we represent all 58 counties in California. Using the Department of Finance's numbers, we estimate that cost shift is 623 million in the first year. Growing to well over a billion. Individual county impacts, again these are yet to be proved by the department. But Sacramento county we estimate at 30 million, Santa Clara at 30 million, Monte Ray at 5 million, Santa Cruz at 3,4 million. Moreover while the state's general fund revenues have increased to the tune of $36 billion since IHSS went into effect. 72% of counties have seen a decrease in their primary revenues. Including Sacramento, down 25% in revenues, Yolo 8%, Monterey down 11%, San Luis Obispo 5% Santa Cruz, 8%. Riverside, 29%. And so as a result This brings us to the problem at hand. We also believe the coordinated care initiative was a smart idea. To make sure that the recipients were able to coordinate their care with a managed care provider, with their home health provider, we think is smart. Although the program was slow on the uptake. We had to wait for federal regulations and for state approval. It's now saving upwards of $250 million a year. It was a smart thing to do. Unfortunately, it's saving $42 million a year less than it needs to under 2013 law that was passed. And so as a result of that 2013 law, because we're 42 short, the 623 million shifts from the state to counties. we think it's a bad idea and you should change the law. We believe the CCI should be given more time particularly in Southern California and in Los Angels where we've seen a slower uptake in this program. If not, the counties will begin to make cuts in other places. As you know counties are actually, we employed the people who actually do the work. State doesn't employ the people who does the work. And so this just flows down to mental health and health to our ability to provide rehabilitation in jails or our ability to provide for public health. It's a difficult cut at the worst time and I'll with this, we have worked very closely with our partners in labor, and these kinds of cuts are very kinds of things that can strain those relationships locally. We need to stay together by the best care for our in home supportive services providers. Our partners with the welfare directors and behavior health directors, and so we ask for your consideration, thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Frank Mecca: Thank you, Mr. Chair. Frank Mecca with the County Welfare Director's Association. Just a couple of quick points. The first, while the statute does set forth the conditions under which the Governor could reverse the CCI. It doesn't specify the manner in which that occurs. So it's not, the manner and the mechanism is not automatic. And one of the reasons this proposal is so problematic, is that the manner in which the Governor chose to unwind the CCI, is the most deleterious possible option for the counties. And that's the case for a couple of reasons. First, as the LAO pointed out, the budget proposal, the governor's action, expects the counties to absorb about five years worth of IHHS growth with one year's funding. That's a $623 million figure which I would point out is in the Governor's Budget so some analysis has been done compared to about $125 million in realignment growth revenue. So there's no debate, there's no new more analysis that needs to be done to know that we are a half $1 billion short out of the starting gate. So that's the first reason that the particular manner in which the unwinding on the CCI was so problematic. The second is that the way the Governor proposes to restructure the relationship or to the return to the state county sharing ratio requires the counties pick up the lion's share of cost caused by actions that were beyond our control, including the lion's share of minimum wage costs, particularly because the interaction with the wage gap that's been discussed earlier. I think that's important to point out that when the state realigned programs to the counties, the legal basis for realignment was that in the aggregate, the amount of costs imposed on the counties would be more or less covered by the revenue source that was provided. The reason case load driven programs were given first priority is because in the absence of covering those costs there would be a mandate. And so it was the counties knew under realignment that in some years maybe the revenues wouldn't be quite enough. And in some years maybe there'd be a little more. But over time this is largely expected to be a fiscally neutral transaction. And so what the action that the Governor took does is take that legal principle, and sends it sort of way out of whack. Because the cost that we would bear under our estimate is about a half $1 billion, growing to over $1 billion of unreimbursed cost, which subverts the original legal basis for realignment. Finally on the programmatic impact, as Mr. Lightborn pointed out accurately, the proposal doesn't change the nature of the IHHS entitlement. It just requires billions of dollars of cuts to other vital programs and programs that'll be in the crosshairs. The other major program that's in 91 realignment caseload growth is child welfare. And the governor's continuum of care reform effort would be in serious jeopardy if counties have to absorb cuts of this magnitude. Eligibility services to get people to CalFresh and CalWORKS benefits they need to avoid homelessness, not to mention cuts in other service sectors that you're going to hear from other witnesses. And so we'd absolutely urge the Legislature to help us get to a point in working with the administration so that we don't have a harm of this magnitude imposed on the counties. Good afternoon again.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2522, 'end': 2531, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kirsten Barlow: i'm kirsten kirk barlow with the county behavioral health directors association. i appreciate the opportunity to share with you what we think will be the very real impacts at the local level that the complexities of this, given that you'd needed a whole page chart just to talk about how the money flows. so i wanted to talk about the fact that not only will social services and health programs be impacted by this major ihss cost shift to counties, but so would mental health. and specifically, the kinds of services that the mental health departments around the state provide are the kinds of things that 91 realignment is the only source of funding for. because of federal exclusions or because the in-patient and involuntary nature of some of those services the counties are unable to use other funding sources such as prop 63 to backfill the kinds of things that would have to be cut under this proposal. so the things that are already really difficult to access would, at best, be stagnant and still be difficult to access. at worst, be even harder to access for families, for hospital emergency rooms and for law enforcement. so because of the federal imd exclusion, and the demands for mental health outpatient services, as i said, 1991 realignment is the only source of funding for the following kinds of services even if an individual has medicaid benefits and is enrolled in medi-cal. specifically, psychiatric inpatient services, including care that's provided in nursing homes that are larger than 16 beds and care for individuals who primarily have a mental illness. i talked on my way over here to the sacramento county director of behavioral health. and she had reminded me that sacramento county is one of those in which, unfortunately, no psychiatrist inpatient bed for a medi-cal enrollee is available that is not considered an imd. that means that the counties have to pay every daily cost of that individual to be hospitalized, only out of 1991 realignment. and again, even if that's a medi-cal enrollee there is no federal funding available to help the county bear those costs. additionally counties use this 91 realignment mental health to pay for their lanterman-petra short act or 5150 responsibilities in which case a person might be considered to potentially be a danger to themself or other people. and are often brought to the hospital emergency rooms for an evaluation to determine if they need treatment. those are the kinds of responsibilities that counties were realigned in 1991. additionally, if the aca goes away, or is limited, indigent mental health care will really be completely inaccessible again because of the shift from the mental health account and from sales tax going to pay for ihss, there will really be no indigent mental health care in our counties. counties already, as probably in your districts receive frequent complaints about bottlenecks in our hospital emergency rooms. or the lack of sufficient alternatives to ers in jail for people in mental health crisis. initiatives that are good things to do, try to divert people away from jails or that phenomenon we're seeing increasing numbers of people who are incompetent to stand trial seemed to be further increasing. counties needs for the services that i just outlined around in patient care or 24/7 care in a loft offsetting an imd. and with that i thought i'd very quickly give you a consumer example that came from sonoma county. time out? okay, well, with that i will just urge you to really remember that people with mental illness are entitled to the same array of mental healthcare under our federal parity laws, and to make inpatient hospitalization not accessible to them. where others with medical care needs, when they need to be hospitalized, is really contrary to i think a lot of our goals in california. i have some anecdotal stories that supplement our own memo that i'd be happy to share.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Department of Finance: as stated earlier, again, with the department kirsten of finance, again, with the budget it's a matter of priority. so given that that's the case, our decision was not to continue to include. continue collective bargaining at the state level. like executive director cate just stated. i think a lot of that bargaining should be handled at the local level instead. given that they also have risks in the costs of the program.
[{'start': 46, 'end': 53, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 267, 'end': 271, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Pete Trovinka: I just, Pete Trovinka with the department again, I'd make two really brief remarks. Two things just for the Committee to know. In the FLSA statute when it was implemented, there were reports required to be delivered to the Legislature. Those are due in April of this year and April of 2018. We are doing our best to try to get that report out next week. So we're on track, and in fact, some of the statistics today in your PowerPoint came out of that report. So we wanted you to know that report is on track and coming, trying to make it early if not late. The other and maybe I should have mentioned it with issues, Aid. As you may be aware, the Joint Legislative Audit Committee asked for an audit of the IHSS payroll process. That audit is largely complete. And, it's our understanding, as of this morning that, that will be released on March 16. So, we wanted to share that information, and timing with you.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kurt Child: Thank you, Senator. Kurt Child, disability rights on behalf of the IHSS coalition. And I want to thank the department and acknowledge the work that they've done over the course of the past year, particularly through their all county letters and reaching out to try and identify as many as possible that would be appropriate for exemptions. The coalition actually has a couple of proposals that we want to put forward to deal with, I think, what you're identifying is the low numbers that we're seeing, certainly in the exemption two category. While the department was, we're certainly not holding them to the 5,000 number that they were ultimately budgeting on, but the actual numbers been about 56. And so there's a large variance between that kind of number. And we believe that's because the consumers, the recipients, are not aware of the exception. And what is important for them is to be able to get some notice of those exceptions being available and then creating what we would hope would be a summary procedure for notice and a hearing if either the consumers or the recipients are getting denied on those benefits. So we, not to take any more time, we have been working on a proposal in the coalition. I think we've pretty well got our language worked out on that. And we'll have to send to your staff in the next day or two that language. And we've worked with the department in looking at what potential cause of that may be and then come back to the Committee with that.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Deanne Baker: Mr. Chair, Senator Monning, Deanne Baker with the California State Association of Counties. I know you heard from the panel earlier today and certainly based on all the reasons that you've heard, we just wanted to reiterate our opposition to the cost shift Mr. [UNKNOWN] indicated that truly the CCI was not given its full three years to make sure it would work really. We feel like it's only been given a couple of years so we would like to see somehow this decision reversed by the administration we, as mentioned by the LAO, we don't have fiscal or programmatic controls over the HHS program and you know what those are. But there have been significant costs added to it since the MOE was put in place back in 2012 that has now resulted in the significant shift of $625 million to counties across the state and I know we continue to focus on first year cost but we will be here to provide you with this, basically a spreadsheet that shows you how fast and quickly this grows to $1 billion in just five years. So you may be hearing from your counties who are working on their budgets now about what kind of cuts they're going to have to make, not just to some of the programs you talked about here in the health and human services area but public safety, homelessness, massive issue across the state are parks, libraries you name it. We don't have the general fund discretionary revenue. I know that the case with the state as well but we just don't have it to absorb this massive of cuts especially considering the 625 million would be effective this July and we're working on our budgets now. I think Los Angeles basically prepared their department heads for a 7% cut across the board in all departments. And I think. Think the Santa Clara number, I know it was stated at $30 million, but it's actually closer to $60 million. So we're still, unfortunately, trying to work with Department of Finance and CWGA on trying to reconcile numbers. We can't even get to the point where we can all agree on numbers. So it's very problematic for counties working on their budgets as we speak in this hearing today. So for all of those reasons, we just really hope that the Senate will make this a priority in budget negotiations. And figure out a way we don't have to make these drastic cuts across California. So, thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 26, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 28, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Yoder: Mr Chairman and Senator Monning, thank you, Paul Yoder, Å . Our firm already has four counties officially opposed, Kern, San Francisco, San Luis Obispo, and Fresno. Appreciate what Finance said about maybe having a different kind of dialogue. We desperately need to do that, to use Fresno as an example. The additional estimated cost is $25 million, their estimated general fund growth is $10 million. If this proposal goes forward as is, you will create a deficit in counties outside of realigned programs where one does not currently exist. We touched on, just barely, Miss Baker touched on effects on public safety. I can guarantee you this proposal, if not changed, will result in counties having to lay off deputy sheriffs. And contemplate other cuts, outside, or even realignment programs that they do not want to contemplate. So, appreciate your time today and hopefully we can change this dialogue a little bit, thanks.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 31, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 44, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 576, 'end': 581, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Teresa Cooke: thank you, good afternoon chair members. teresa department cooke on behalf of the county of alameda. i do want to share the county's opposition to the governor's proposed cut of the coordinated care initiative, thank you.
[{'start': 59, 'end': 64, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nicole Wordelman: nicole teresa wordelman on behalf of the orange county board of supervisors, ventura count board of supervisors, and san bernardino county board of supervisors in opposition to the discontinuation of the cci as well as the ihss moe. in orange county for example, the hit is going to be 38 million in the budget year. they have already asked their departments to go through and make 6% cut across the board to see how they would work out dealing with this cut. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Donna Sites: thank you. donna nicole sites representing the los angeles county board of supervisors. we are strongly opposed to this cost shift of $623 million to the counties. in los angeles country that equates to a $220 million hit to our general fund effective july 1. that grows to over $500 million by 2020 as the number of consumers grow, as well as the minimum wage increase. the cost is unsustainable, now and in the future. and we look forward to working with you on a solution. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jolina Voris: Mr Chair and Members, I'm Jolina Voris on behalf of the Urban Counties of California. We represent the 12 most populous counties in the state. We are opposed to the cost shift that was identified by the Governor. The seven CCI counties are all urban counties. We've had a lot of successes in the CCI counties. While there have been issues, we still think there could be more time to work this out. The significant costship is especially acute in urban counties, because preliminary, I know we're still talking to finance about the numbers, the numbers I've gotten from my urban counties and total is about 565 million of the 623, so you can see that's where get, urbans have the most of the population, we have the most of the probably increases and, and services. So, we would just continue to work with our county partners and with the Governor to hope that we think this idea and pull it back. We still think there's more time and more effort that we could put into make it success. And we just cannot sustain the significant cost shift. Thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rob White: Yes, again, Rob White, the Arp Capital Response Team. We've had our analysts look over the proposed change and we cannot support that post change. We have to go ahead and continue to support the CCI Yolo County, tax revenues are down 8%. How are we going to pay for the increased expected costs? I don't know. I mean, we are a mixed County of of commercial and rural, but we need help on this. We don't need the CCI to be augmented in this way, where its going to basically destroy it and put that cost on the small Yolo county. Thank you very much
[{'start': 12, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Devon Anderson: Devon Anderson on behalf of San Mateo country. We of course are one of the seven CCI pilot counties. We respectfully request that the pilot be allowed to continue so we can continue to bear positive results. We are also opposed to the accompanying IHHS cost shift . Thank you.
[]
Michelle Gibbons: welcome.>>good afternoon, michelle with the county health executives of california. we represent local health departments throughout the state. and we also are opposed to this cost shift from the state over to the counties, and $623 million and ongoing and increasing. you've heard from our colleagues to underscore the impacts, the adverse impacts on social services programs and mental health programs, and i'm here to share with you a little bit about the health programs that would be impacted. so, health realignment funding funds two things. it funds our public health services and it also funds indigent care. on the public health side, that includes things like infectious disease control, chronic disease prevention, and so forth. and just to give you a real picture, the infectious disease control, it funds our public health laboratory systems, the staff to do the investigations and the outreach, the immunizations that are needed to contain the viruses that are coming forward, as you know. on the indigent care side, we have the obligation to provide services to the indigent population under the threats that are happening at the federal level. should the affordable care act be repealed, we would see an influx of indigent individuals in california once again and because of that, those funds and resources are needed to sustain that impact. and then lastly, i'll end with the public health and prevention funds through the affordable care act, and how it would impact the cdc's budget, which then flows down to the locals.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tracy Ryan: Good afternoon. Tracy Ryan, rural counties representative of California, also in opposition to the IHSS cost shift. I will just align my comments with those that testified from our county partners here today. We would like to add that though the monetary estimates for this costship to [UNKNOWN] counties is smaller. We also have a smaller capacity to absorb those increased costs. And these are populations that already have access to care issues. Thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Jensen: jensen. resources for independent living. independent living centers are mandated to provide certain core services and one of those core services is transitioning from institutionalized or nursing home living. the own-staying act says that people with disabilities have a right to live in the community if the system are in place for them to successfully do so. ihss is one of those systems. we need a functional, sustainable program and a functional, sustainable funding source. so the people can continue and achieve. they're right to live independently in the community if they so choose. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Adam Green: Welcome.>>Adam Green, UDW. Gentleman before me, couldn't have even said anything better. I myself am very lucky to take care of a fellow veteran as well. Without the founding that rightfully is needed And the care, she would not be able to exist in her community where she rightfully deserves and has earned. So, I strongly oppose this and I thank you very much. And it's quite been an honor today. Thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 20, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sheraine Stevenson: sheraine donna stevenson from ted gaines, senator gaines' district in redding. and i want to let you know that i am opposed to the shift to the counties. i think it's a burden that the counties can't really afford. and the shift of collective bargaining from state to county would mean that we would never get a pay raise. so, i am opposed to the collective bargaining being moved back to the local level.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 30, 'end': 40, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 50, 'end': 56, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sharon Duchessi: Hi Dr. Pan and everybody else, sorry don't know your names. My name is Sharon Duchessi, I'm from Placer County. I am for statewide collective bargaining and I oppose moving the CCIs to the local level and need to keep it to the state level for the reasons that have already been said and that are going to be said.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 10, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 71, 'end': 86, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Corie Crimson: Hello Chairman and Members of the Committee. My name is Corie Crimson and I'm from Merced County, I'm a home care provider in Anthony Cannella's district, I just want to say that I agree with what everyone has said so far, and I just want to add that I would like to impress upon you not to let the Governor bankrupt our counties. Thank you.
[{'start': 56, 'end': 69, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 126, 'end': 144, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Phyllis Hoffman: hi excuse me. jimminy, i'm a toast master and i get tongue tied. anyway, my name is phyllis sheraine hoffman, i'm member of seiu local 2015 and i oppose. the senate committee with governor brown's cutting all the counties and all that. and i'm all tongue tied, just don't do it, don't cut it out. keep us one, we need to be one together, united, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 21, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 84, 'end': 108, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 189, 'end': 194, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ron Ivory: welcome.>>good afternoon, my name is ron i'm a behavior management specialist with ihss 2015. i want to share with you a little bit about the care. i work with a young lady that's bipolar. i've been with her since 2004. without my services and my extended services, i do total care for her as well as behavior management. without that care, she would be in and out of the hospital. okay, she's not been in the hospital with her mental health issues since 2004. so i just want to emphasize that the work that i do, and that we all do, is very important. and if we can grow further into getting together on better pay, more skills for everybody to learn. and to have the skills and education to advance even more, like myself. that would be much appreciated. and i do oppose the shift in the county, thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Keith Riley: Hello, my name is Keith Riley, 10 year worker for IHSS from San Francisco. I oppose the shift of $600 million to the counties, and I support the state bargaining, thanks. Thank you, thanks very much, welcome. Good afternoon, Dr. Pan and Senator Monning, thank you for hearing us. I'm an IHHS worker from San Francisco. Our county budget determined 6 months in advance that a $50 million hit to that county, including CalWORKS. The counties can't do this in 5 months, it shouldn't be required. As Senator Stone said, we need some kind of phasing at the very least. So I'm opposed to this governor's proposal for the budget. And I believe that we do need statewide bargaining. It's very important that we have a coordinated statewide approach and that it be done that way. Also, don't make home care the blame for these cuts in the counties. I'm not saying, but we all sort of get that stigma that we're responsible for all of these incredibly important things being cut. And we don't want that, because we do our job in keeping seniors and disabled at home, where it saves money, and helps release money for all the great programs that the counties are carrying out, thank you. Thank you, welcome. Hi to all that is on the panel, and to the Chairman of the board today.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 229, 'end': 232, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 245, 'end': 252, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 504, 'end': 509, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Terry Walker: my name is terry phyllis walker danpierre. i'm from modesto, california, stanislaus county. i'm a proud home care provider and i have been for 26 years. and i just rise today to just be in agreement with all of my brothers and sisters. and i'm from senator galgiani's district. and i just want to let you know that my access for collecting bargain to stay statewide and for the opposition for the money to be shifted from counties to counties. and thank you for this opportunity.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 41, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 257, 'end': 265, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Diana Madoshi: hello again, i'm diana terry madoshi. cara had supported a statewide senior strong grassroot group, and we have been very much in support of the ihss program. and we support the collecting bargaining. and on a personal note, i'm not a provider, i'm a retired nurse, but in december, my brother, his cancer had turned terminal. and he wanted to die at home. and i am thankful for the in-home support care that he had, and that i was able to be there for him with the comfort. we're living in dangerous times, very concerned times in how we want to divvy up things. please don't pit one group against the other. the value of this program, let's be creative, is very important. let's do it state wide and thank you very much.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 38, 'end': 42, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Wanda Raymond: Thank you, my name is Wanda Raymond, I'm a member of SEIU Local 2015, I also am a caregiver. I was fortunate to care for my husband before he passed away. And I am for togetherness and being on a state level, it will bring forth togetherness. And really that's what we are in need of. These times right now we're in need of them. I had a whole speech prepared, and as I got closer to the mic it all went away. So I speak to you from my heart right now. And I'm asking each and every one of you just to take a moment. I know this is your job and we're not looking at you as God because you cannot be do all that we all need done. We're all here collectively and we all speak from the heart. And so I'm asking you to please search your heart this day and really consider the opportunities that we need to take care of our loved ones and to come together as a people in this time, thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Wanda Jackson: Thank you, my name is Wanda Jackson. I'm an in-home care provider as well as a member of the SEIU Local 2015. And I stand here united with my sister Wanda who just spoke. I had the pleasure on February the 19th of watching my mother have her 87th birthday. To see the joy on her face just to still be here with us. This program is amazing, it takes the elderly and it gives life back to them. So we offer them life everyday. And I want to say that I do stand here and I'm asking the bargaining that we do, do that on a state level. That we do make it equal, for everyone. And I'm also standing here stating that I do oppose the Governor's decision to move that $600 million back to the counties, thank you. Thank you, welcome.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 149, 'end': 154, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alan Merriman: thank you, my name is alan diana merriman, i'm a california vietnam era veteran. and i'm so glad that i found this home healthcare program and i hope that nothing is cut from it, because it's found me a new home. in the apartment i'm living in now, i'm diagnosed with parkinson's disease and i'm also 78 years old. and i'm glad that i found a home with a bunch of fellow veterans and people, my provider's here, caregiver's here, and she is the best, thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Siva Girmelli: i'm siva. i live in lucerne, which is in lake county. not only have we just been in 2015, devastated with fires and losses of many of our low income rentals. but we also now have been hit by the floods as well. believe it or not, in lake county, our ihss program is the largest workforce. we have 1800 providers in our county that are working to survive and they bring and they put their money back into the county. and we have worked like i told you earlier 21 years to get me to $10 in hour and $0.50 and now you're talking about putting me back again. please, please reconsider and do not approve governor browns cuts because they will severely hurt the rural counties. and those are the places where we need it most because those are the places that get very little funding as it is. and i don't even want to think about what's going to happen to us if it goes through. thank you, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Angela Gomez: good afternoon, my name is angela. and i am a member of seiu 521 in monterey county, and i'm also a child welfare social worker in monterey county. and again, i just want to further impress the $623 million that will be shifted to the county our representative from the cwda said it, it's going to cut into calworks, which is such a vital program to our reunification efforts to reunify foster children back with their birth parents. furthermore, i was also prior to being a child welfare social worker, i was also an in-home support services social worker. and i'm so amazed by the amount of caregivers and the clients that came to represent themselves and everything that they need is the right thing to do.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Leticia Sanchez: Hi Leticia Sanchez from Tahema County. I come from a long line of home care workers. And my daughter is a 19 years old and she's a home care worker and I come for the future. They say down the road there's not going to be money for the counties for three years, I think you guys said, so I really think this is a bad idea. I stand in agreement with my brothers and sisters here in the SEIU, Local 2015, that this is a bad idea, thank you.
[{'start': 3, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lora Connolly: yes, good morning. i'm lora alan connolly, the director of the california department of aging.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeannine Fenton: I'm Jeannine Fenton, with the California Department of Aging.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joe Rodriguez: Good morning, I'm Joe Rodriguez, the California State Long Term Care Ombudsman.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dean Fujimoto: good morning, i'm dean of california department of aging.
[]
Justin Pranis: Justin Pranis, Department of Finance.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joe Rodriguez: Thank you. Joe Rodriguez, California State Long-Term Care Ombudsman. The Ombudsman program is charged in both Federal and State law to identify, investigate, and resolve complaints made by or on behalf of residents of long-term care facilities that affect their health, their safety, their welfare and their rights. Also in state law we're mandated to receive reports of suspected elder independent adult abuse and neglect that occurs in long term care facilities. All general fund local assistants funding for the Ombudsman program was eliminated in fiscal year 08/09. The agenda details the state one time only appropriations to partially backfill the lost general funds using a variety of sources. We receive funding from the state citation penalties account. That's managed by the Department of Public Health. We receive funding from the Skilled Nursing Facility Quality and Accountability fund. That is managed by the Department of Health Care Services. The Legislature restored $1 million in general fund support for the program in fiscal year 15/16 which continues this year. The Legislature also appropriated $400,000 from the Department of Public Health's Licensing and Certification fund. So local assistance funding for the Ombudsman program currently totals $8 million. 1 million of that is one time only money that the Legislature gave us last year which will end at the end of this fiscal year. These funds have been used to increase staff, hours and limited term appointments to fill local staff positions in the 35 local programs throughout the state. We've also been able to support our volunteers we have about 740 volunteers and 150 paid staff throughout the state that operates and has a regular presence in about 1,250 skilled nursing facilities and 7,500 residential care facilities for the elderly. With this additional funding, we've seen some increases in our capacity to serve residents. We've seen a 9% increase in information consultation to individuals. We've seen a 24% increase in the number of consultations provided to facility staff on various issues. We've seen and 18% increase in our ability to get out to residential care facilities for the elderly, assisted living warden care homes. We've seen a 10% ability to get out to skilled nursing facilities once a quarter. We'd seen a increase in the number of complains by 3% last year and a 13% increase in paid staff that are able to respond to these reports of abuse and neglect and exploitation and other complaints affecting the health and safety of residents.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dean Fujimoto: Yes, good morning, I'm Dean Fujimoto with CDA. Currently, there are 38 MSSP sites statewide, that provide social and health care management to frail elderly individuals, who are certified for placement in nursing homes. And under a federal mitigated home and community-based waiver. MSSP provides a comprehensive care management service to assist these frail, elderly individuals to remain in their homes. It must be noted though, the importance of this program is the prevention of early placement into more costly nursing facilities. Now, through an inter-agency agreement with the Department of Healthcare Services, CDA oversees the operations of the MSSP program, and we contract with the local entities, who actually provide the direct services. As it pertains to the community care initiative, the budget does propose to extend core elements of the CCI, such as CalMedi-Connect, mandatory enrollment of dual eligibles, and the integration of long term services and supports, except for IHSS into managed care. The proposal also proposes to extend these core elements for two additional years. With this in mind, what this means for MSSP is that the MSSP sites within the CalMedi-Connect counties, will continue to contract directly with managed care. And in addition, in coordination with the Department of Healthcare Services, CDA will work closely on a transition plan, and we anticipate that to begin early 2018.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeffrey Tardigia: good morning, mr. pan, chairman. you have my contact information. my name is jeffrey. i am a consumer of the meals on wheels program. what i would suggest to you in advise to you perhaps in your overview function, examine further what the meals on wheels program i participate in the conventional meals part, but i also recognize the part of the home delivery that it is doing more than just delivering meals. it's providing in some ways for the senior adults the transportation and other aspects. as being a sacramento consumer, i also would tell you is recognizing in transportation this year caused probably a 10% reduction in the conjunctual meals programs. because transportation became a cost element to needing seniors going to those meal centers. but also safe for the 58 counties that perhaps you need to further understand how the program is broken down in the reasons why people don't participate as well as what else is occurring and going on. i hope that's concise enough, if you need further information, i believe you know how to get a hold of me.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 21, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 77, 'end': 84, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nancy Volpert: Good morning. I'm Nancy Volpert, Director of Public Policy and Strategic Initiative at Jewish Family Service of Los Angeles. First, thank you to the Committee for their attention. And our deepest thanks to the Department of Aging, who has been a really incredible partner. We are both an Older Americans Act provider and an MSSP provider. And we wanted to appreciate what you're doing but ask you to please maintain a close watch on the MSSP transition. The experience over the last couple of years, we are a provider in a coordinated care initiative country, and it has been challenging and somewhat chaotic for our extremely medically fragile clients. Many of whom have cognitive impairment. Many of whom are non-English speakers. We in fact serve a high population of Holocaust survivors who, if they are unnecessarily institutionalized will be retraumatized in a way that we are deeply aware of and hoping to avoid. So, thank you for raising this issue and following it, we look forward to participating in several conversations and making sure that we do see transport and take of all of our seniors from those who are active to those who are fragile.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert Coelho: hi, my name is robert lora coelho. i'm a meals on wheels volunteer here in sacramento. and we need more services that get the word out to more seniors that meals on wheels is available in the state of california. because a lot of people are suffering because of lack of food. thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rob White: i couldn't agree more. my name is white. i'm just a nobody, a veteran of the cold war and a california correctional peace officer, retired now. and also, i'm here today to represent 3.5 million people and aarp and its wish that the meals on wheels program does get this $12.5 million that needs to be allocated. assemblyman pan i was in your office. this and i spoke to you about what's going on in west sacramento with some of our residents from the grounds point of view. there, i've been doing meals on wheels there for three years so that i can get a real good idea what's going on. i spoke with the director of the yolo county elderly nutrition program. kristie skivens is her name, and she said her main concern is that, what to do about the indigent people who are just totally indigent? and i ran across more than a few of those, and i hope that we can address that issue to alleviate a lot of the suffering that is going on in west sacramento. if it's going on in west sacramento, it's probably going on and that small community is probably going on in larger numbers in our larger communities. i want to thank you very much there, distinguished panel, assemblyman pan.
[{'start': 324, 'end': 329, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 659, 'end': 674, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1174, 'end': 1177, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Clay Kempf: Thank you. Clay Kempf, I'm Executive Director of the Area Agency on Aging of Santa Cruz and San Benito Counties. And I'm actually here as California Association of Area Agencies on Aging Legislative Co-Chair, so I'm really representing all the triple A's of the state. First of all, I really want to thank the Committee for the comments and questions you asked of the department. You guys were spot on on so many things. Just to follow up a little bit of that. We do have some statistics about the growth and the need of the nutrition program, and the positive impact that meals have. So we will share those details with all of you. Also, I think I'd be remiss if I didn't talk about Older Californians Act, just briefly. Because I think that truly holds the possibility for addressing the growth in the population that we're facing. So I just love that Senator Stone brought that up. It's also important to note that the older California Act was defunded about eight years ago so there's actually no funding for those programs currently and that's another one of these emerging needs and gaps in services we have. But what I'm really here to talk about is the issue of the senior nutrition program, and we know that between 35 and 40% of the seniors in California don't have enough to meet their basic needs. They're choosing each month, or each week, or each day, between paying for medications, getting rides to their doctors, paying their rent, or buying food. And food typically is where the hit comes. Costs of providing these services go up every year by about a quarter per meal. That's less than inflation, but it's just the reality of milk costing more, vegetables costing more, of delivery services costing more. And one concern that we have is even if the funds of the federal and state levels stay flat, we're going to lose almost half a million meals this next year and that includes the one time only funds that we received last year which are going to be renewed. So with flat funding alone we're looking at half a million meals being taken away from at risk seniors, so anything we can do to put that in place is really critical. Also, one way or another we know that this state is going to incur costs for the care of seniors. There's kind of two choice in this. One, we can do nothing and hope that everything goes well. When we do that we know that healthcare costs go up. That seniors with poor nutrition are twice as likely to end up in the hospital or end up in institutionalized care, or end up with some chronic or traumatic illnesses, heart attack, etc. So we can do nothing and let that happen and incur really large costs. Or we can invest some dollars in effective programs and I don't think anything is more effective or basic than feeding somebody, keep them healthy, and lower those costs in the future. And I think that's really my message today. In the past, when I've come up here I've really focused on statistics and numbers and the cost benefit of this, but time's limited, you guys are going to be here a long time, but really the bottom line is that, one way or another, you're going to pay for the needs of seniors. You can do it cost effectively by providing food now. And the other this is it's the right thing. No senior should have to go hungry in this community. So not only is it morally the preferred approach. It's also the fiscally sound approach. It's the way that will cost the state money. So our ask is for 12.5 million to augment the nutrition program, that will address the 25 cent rise in meal cost and allow us to serve some of this growing population that currently aren't being served.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 862, 'end': 867, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Fred Mayne: mr. chairman, members of the committee, fred robert mayne on behalf of calpace, the state trade association representing the programs for the all-inclusive care for the elderly that serve frail seniors 55 years and older and allow them to stay living in their homes. meals on wheels and senior nutrition is a vital part of that. the capitation payment that pace provides for the long term supports and services and medical care does not cover food. and so, the ability of the seniors to remain in their house, these low income seniors is based on their ability to access services like meals on wheels, senior nutrition and we support the augmentation, thank you.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Janine Thorpe: Hi, good morning. My name's Janine Thorpe, and I'm a program manager for the Area Four Agency on Aging, and I've worked quite closely with the Meals on Wheels program in Yellow County. And I think what's astounding are the amount of frail and isolated seniors, who this would help to address. It's a critical and urgent need, and I definitely support it. Thank you.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nancy Volpert: Good morning. Nancy Volpert from Jewish Family Services of Los Angeles, again. We provide about 1,000 meals a day to seniors both homebound and in nutrition sites. We fully support this. We in addition to the nutrition, the isolation and the interaction with someone it's incredible important on the home deliver side. Our meal delivery, staff and volunteers may be the only person someone sees. And we know that we have people who wait each morning for their delivery driver to show up and if that isn't there those people would starve and end up, and all of the other pieces you've heard. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nancy Murrish: nancy fred murrish with the congress of california seniors. and we, too, support this budget as for all of the reasons listed that we need to seriously reduce the number of seniors who are need of sound nutrition. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carol Sewell: Carol Sewell from the California Commission on Aging. We also support the nutrition funding increase, for all the reasons that have been stated. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rob White: thank you, again, rob nancy white, capital response team, aarp. again, there are many seniors who are suffering, as you hear. i see it firsthand and this augmentation is supported not only by aarp, but by many senior care organizations that care about seniors in california. we have a full list. i can email that to your office, senator pan. and like i said, also i would like to invite any of the senators to come over and take a tour of the yolo county facilities there that we have in west sacramento. i will be contacting your offices and speaking with your staff about seeing your availability. thank you very much.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 337, 'end': 340, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Robert Coelho: My name's Robert Coelho and I'm one that volunteers over at the Meals on Wheels site over at the Comstock apartment complex in Sacramento. We're seeing people that are homeless, are on SSI, and they need help right now, so I support this, and I wish we would increase the amounts put into Meals on Wheels.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Lopez: okay, good afternoon, madame chair. i was ready to say members, but i'll just stop at madame chair. thank you, jasmine. jason, deputy director of fiscal services for the department. as you mentioned, we're going to start with a departmental overview first. we have our secretary here today to provide that overview. your staff has asked that in providing the overview that we focus, broadly, of course, but more specifically, on a couple of areas of interest to the committee. so in providing the update, we'll be sure that we hit our out-of-state population projections and our djj ward populations. but i'm going to let the secretary take it away.
[{'start': 111, 'end': 118, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 120, 'end': 125, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Scott Kernan: Madam Chair, thank you, Scott Kernan, Secretary for the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation. I'm going to just provide a very brief overview of the department. And I'd like you to know that we are a system undergoing significant positive change. Admittedly imperfect, difficult challenges, but consistent, positive, incremental progress. We have a decades-old system that just hasn't worked as we've all wanted it to in the past. Throughout my 30-plus years in the department, it's been fraught with overcrowding, violence. And we have got what we sowed, bad results, bad public safety, and more victims. We are changing how we incarcerate people in the state. We're emphasizing positive programming and motivating individuals to want to change. I'm very proud of this organization and what we stand for. And I'd like to give you some very specific examples. In our juvenile justice system, we have got out of a decade-old federal lawsuit, we have created a sustainable, humane system for our most troubled youth. In parole, we changed from a system that, at its height, incarcerated over 100,000 inmates a year, placing them in triple bunks in gyms and day rooms throughout our prisons. And we've created a system that actively seeks to make the parolee successful. In our Division of Rehabilitative Programs, we are building an infrastructure of evidence-based and best practices in rehabilitative programming, academic, vocational, college, substance abuse, cognitive behavior, reentry, innovative grants, the arts, PIA, long-term offender programs, and our community programs. We have over 10,000 volunteers that come into our prisons on a regular basis to help with our self-help programs. Under our gang management, we changed from a system of identification and isolation to a behavior-based system. Over 3,000 inmates have been removed from our security housing units and placed in our general population setting. In medical, we're making significant process. We have 10 prisons delegated to CDCR authority. And we're working better with the receiver to provide a constitutional level of healthcare. In fact, we're making progress in all of our class action lawsuits. Under staff development, with the help of this Legislature, we're implementing programs lost to harder economic times. We're providing first and second-line custody and non-custody training. We're doing executive development programs. We're involved in a partnership with Chico and Sac State to provide higher level leadership programming to our executives. We're doing employee wellness and working with CCPOA and the administration to recognize the significant challenges our staff face in the prisons every day. And we're doing succession planning to try to keep our executives in these positions of leadership for longer periods of time. We've made significant changes to our classification system to expand program opportunities to our offenders, and recognizing the sustained positive behavior of the individual. We're moving inmates to the lowest possible level in our prisons to give them higher access to programming and to better serve their needs. And let me conclude by saying that Prop 57 builds upon the previous reforms of the past. It puts responsibility on the inmate to participate in positive programming and earn time off their sentence or to parole suitability hearing. It delegates to the correctional professionals to determine when an inmate progressed to a point that they no longer pose a threat to public safety. Prop 57 has a number of components, including the expansion of a nonviolent parole process, credits, modest credit changes for our offenders, milestone programs that recognize completion of academic programs, significant educational achievements, the attainment of a high school diploma or an AA degree, and others. And then taking a nontraditional approach, I think, to recognize the hundreds of self-help programs that we have throughout the institutions, and awarding inmates credits for participating in those very positive programs. We expect the regulations to be completed very soon, and anticipate implementing in phases in the coming months. As a result of Prop 57, we will be able to address and bring back our inmates that are currently housed in Mississippi, and reduce that out-of-state facility. And we believe, in fact, we'll be able, excuse me, to get out of the out-of-state program altogether by 2020. So I hope you will agree with me that this is a department that's on the move and making some very positive steps. And I'd like to take any questions that you might have.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erica Webster: good afternoon. my name is erica jonah webster, i'm at the center on juvenile and criminal justice. cjcj provides sentencing services for youth and juvenile court to find alternatives to djj and as part of this role we have consistent contact with youth clients in the facility and also try to monitor djj data as best we can. we have consistent concerns about the ability of djj to provide a safe environment and adequate programming for youth. youth talk about frequent violence, gang tolerance, staff retaliation and chronic under staffing. and thus far djj has not been able to prove the effectiveness of its programs through evaluation or investigation. the last djj report of recidivism that we know of was published in 2012, and as of that date 60% of youth who exited from djj were with back and in state custody within three years, and 80% were rest in within three years. there's documentation of at least the couple of cases of youth with acute mental illness issues, having to be transferred to adult facilities to receive adequate services. the fact is while the fair lawsuit was dismissed a lot of the issues that plagued djj prior to the lawsuit still effect youth on a daily basis. and without evaluation of the programs that djj provides, it's very hard to see further investment in this agency. without more information about they're positively impacting youth. thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maureen Washburn: thank you. hi, good afternoon. i'm washburn with the center on juvenile and criminal justice as well. and i'm here today to express our strong opposition to the proposed budget increase for djj for 2017-18. so in addition to issues of safety and services, i'd like to raise the issue of necessity. so cjcj just recently released a report looking at felony arrests by each cohort. and found that violent felony arrests of 12 to 17 year-olds are expected to decline precipitously through 2020. which presumably will impact the youth, the pool of youth eligible ultimately for commitment to djj facilities. so i would urge this sub-committee to undertake an inquiry into the ways in which those $270,000 per year are being spend. how djj is being evaluated and the impact it's having on youth in its care. thank you. good afternoon. buenos tardes. my name is juan gomez. i work out of meatbind salinas. i spent seven years in djj myself i, along with a lot of other comrades, we spent years upon years trying to get class action grievances out, and the staff would rip them up, so we actually smuggled them out in preston and in chad. i was in all those places. $270,000, that's a big grant for me. i have an organization, we come back with folks who were formerly incarcerated.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 830, 'end': 844, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 856, 'end': 866, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Daniel Mendoza: Good afternoon, my name is Daniel Mendoza. And just kind of going along with what he was saying, I spent four and a half years incarcerated. And luckily for me, I was kept in a local facility, juvenile hall. And so I was able to have family, community support. To help me out and kind of got me through and so, when I hear about the money that has been spent to build the plains of this new beds is kind of this investment or use. Why do we want to keep building more facility and spaces that have given them opportunity to engage in education and rehabilitative services. And so I would just ask that we consider what we're really asking for when we're talking about spending all this money on more beds. Thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Charles Earl: good afternoon. my name is charles erica earl. i'm with an organization out of salinas, milpa i'm here today to address in opposition of the budget increase to be. i too have been formerly incarcerated from the age of 13 to 16 i was incarcerated and then from 17 to 27 i was incarcerated. i recently graduated from cal state university of monterey bay and i am a strong believer. i couldn't have done that without my community support and just being close to my family. a lot of these funds that's being diverted to djj, if it was allocated to the community, you'd see much greater results. yeah, thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 88, 'end': 93, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Reniqa Moore: good afternoon. my name is reniqa charles moore i'm a mother also. my son is here, he has not made it to juvenile correction facility. he's still here in juvenile hall sacramento county. however, it's a possibility he will be there and i see just having my nephew, there and having my son in juvenile hall. i see the state wasted a lot of money on youth being locked up and not rehabilitating them, not giving them the services to redirect staff don't redirect. the services there is not set up for them to be of any thing other than what they cane in as, or if not worse. it will be vital to waste money to continue the services without holding these departments, the department of correction for adults, for juveniles, they need to show proof of the services they're claiming that's working, that's not working. there's millions of dollars being wasted and we need proof if they're asking for more money or more buildings, more beds. or where's the proof that what you're doing is working? that's all i ask, show proof and we know it's not working. so let's find a different solution. let's make it work. it's workable if you work it.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kalinda Jones: Good afternoon. My name is Dr. Kalinda Jones. I am a faculty member at Folsom Lake College. And part of my teaching load is at Mule Creek State Prison. So I can speak in solidarity, well I'm going to call you all my sisters and brothers even though I just met you. My students went through the juvenile, many of them went to the juvenile system. And I would urge you to, I appreciate my partnership with CDCR so I want to be very clear on that. But I would also urge you, to really look at that money and how it's been spent for rehabilitation. So, saying that there's a robust funding for rehabilitation, I'm not really sure that the numbers support that. So, I would urge you to please look at those numbers. Thank you. Thank you.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Lopez: Okay, again Jason Lopez, CDCR issue number two. Variations on standardized staffing. So with this request the department is looking for $5.9 million in 44 positions to activate custody posts at three of our institutions including DBI, CHCF, and CIW. Just a little bit of detail on that, for our DBI proposal, its about five COs and $680,000. And what we're looking to accomplish there is the activation of a second yard to serve specifically our reception center population at that institution. Second is at CIW, we're looking for 32.5 CS and four sergeants for about $4.9 million. And we're looking to increase inmate supervision in an effort to reduce the incidents that we're having there, comply with corp mandates, and more effectively respond to medical and psychiatric emergencies at that facility. And then lastly at our stocking facility in CHCF we are in the process of activating a second visiting center at that facility. So in order to activate that facility we're looking for 2.5 COs and $327,000. I am joined by Miss Jan Baretto, who is our Assistant Deputy Director within the Division of Adult Institutions at CDCR, and we'd be happy to answer any questions you might have. Okay. Anyone have any questions on that? Okay, all right thank you. We can move on. Is there any public comments on that? We'll move on to item three. Information security operation center. Okay, issue number three. The Department requests $2.6 million and 8 information technology positions to support our efforts to establish a security operations center within our enterprise information services division. I'm joined by director, Russ Nichols of that EIS division, and he's going to provide you just a little more detail behind the proposal.
[{'start': 12, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1032, 'end': 1043, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1625, 'end': 1637, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Caitlin O'Neil: Yes, yes, Caitlin O'Neil, Legislative Analyst's Office, good afternoon, Madam Chair and members. We don't raise concerns specific to CDCR's information security proposal, however our office did take a cross-department look at information security proposals, which I'd be happy to Summarize the recommendations for you right now. So the Governor's Budget includes $14 million and 58 new positions across 12 departments to strengthen information security in the state. And we found that the state's current approach to strengthening information security relies on individual departments to come forward with proposals and lacks a strategic leadership. As such, it's unclear whether the 12 proposals that are included in the Governor's Budget collectively represent the state's most critical security risks. So in light of these concerns we make two recommendations; first we recommend that the Legislature direct the administration to prioritize high vulnerability and high sensitivity security risks for future budget requests. Specifically we think that the Department of Technology should take a strategic leadership role to ensure that future budget proposals that come before the Legislature are focused on the state's most significant. And pressing information security needs However, we recognize that the Department of Technology will not likely to have time in this budget process to do such a comprehensive analysis. So, our second recommendation is that the Legislature direct the department to report at budget hearings on whether the current proposals address reasonable information security vulnerabilities that also involve sensitive data.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kia Cha: Kia Cha--Department of Finance, we just wanted to add that cities here had contracted for an independent security assessment on 1415, which identify gaps that we believe this proposal will address. Additionally, this proposal was reviewed and vetted through the California information security office within the Department of technology. And it was found to be in line with the state security strategy of departments being subjected assessments and audits, and then those findings being mitigated based on the department's unique and specific needs.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Lopez: okay, it's been a while since i've spoke, so just as a reminder, jason- is here. okay, with this proposal, the department requests permanent full time position authority, for two limited term positions within our board of parole hearings, these positions were brought up about two years ago, a little over two years ago, tied to the non violent second striker work load, just to address what may be misleading about the title of this proposal. while these two positions would be devoted to seeing through the non-violent second striker process as it exists today, the intent, and how we built it in, was that these positions would then transfer over and cover part of the workload on the impact of prop 57, so that was taken into account when we were putting the prop 57 proposal together as well. i'm joined by jennifer shaffer, who is our executive officer at bph, and we're happy to answer any questions you might have.
[{'start': 812, 'end': 828, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dean Borg: Good afternoon, Madam Chair and Members, Dean Borg, Deputy Director of Facility Planning Construction and Management Division. I was asked to start with a very short description on how we prioritize our capital outlay projects that come forward each year. Annually our division sends out what we call a call letter to the adult and juvenile institutions, and the headquarters programs, asking them to submit any new capital outlay concepts they may have and also to reconfirm that capital outlay concepts from prior years are still needed by those institutions. Those concepts are then reviewed and analyzed by the design and construction experts within our division, and will meet with our headquarter's programs to go over the institution's requests. One focus of that is to make sure that what one institution has requested is consistent with state wide direction, that our division of rehabilitative programs might be rolling out, or that DAI wants to roll out, we want to make sure what the institution want to do is consistent with our statewide priorities. We will, as part of those meetings begin prioritizing, both internally and then work up the chain with meetings with our division directors and then our under secretaries and secretaries. The prioritizing, we utilized the budget letter that's submitted by the Department of Finance each summer, that as far as capital outlay projects, they want to focus on new fire, life, and safety capital outlay projects, and also any court ordered projects. In addition to those priorities, the Department will also have a prioritization for anything that will improve inmate and staff safety, improve the ability to provide programming to inmates, and then also projects that address regulatory requirements, since we operate utilities, water and waste water systems. So, as I mentioned, we'll have prioritization meetings that will go all the way through the secretary and the other secretary's level, and then our proposals, just like on the support side, we end up submitting them to the Department of Finance in the late summer, early fall of each year, and then they're worked through the prioritization with the Department of Finance and the Governor's office, and if they meet those requirements, they end up in the January budget that comes to the Legislature.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jonathan Peterson: thank you madam chair jonathan reniqa peterson with the legislative analysts office. we recommend rejecting the proposals to construct this mental health crisis bed facilities. given that they're varies factors which could reduce the need for this beds by the time they're completed in 2021. specifically we identify 2 factors, the first is the implementation of proposition 57. as you're aware of the implementation of this measure it's expected to decrease the ma population. part of this decrease could be patients in the mental health side of the cdcr population. if that number is reduced the need for mental health crisis beds maybe reduced as well. the second factor is the governor's proposal to convert 74 outpatient mental health beds into inpatient psychiatric program beds this is at the california medical facility in vacaville. if the legislature approved the conversion of these beds, the amount of time inmates spend in the mental health crisis beds waiting for a space to become available in one of these inpatient psychiatric beds would be reduced, which in turn, could also reduce the need for mental health crisis beds in the future. once the department has more information on these factors, and if that information shows a continued need for these facilities, the department could make a new request at that time. as the department reviews its ongoing need for these beds, we would recommend that it review, particularly, the project proposal at the california institution for men down in chino to determine if building that project with an electric fence, as opposed to manned guard towers, which is what's in the current proposal, would be a more cost-effective approach to building this facility. if it determines that the electric fence would be more cost-effective, the department could adjust its proposal accordingly, thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Phil Osborn: Madam Chair, Madam Chair and members, Phil Osborn with the Department of Finance. We concur with the Department's statement that they provided the staff for the agenda in that the fence, this fencing project is needed to correct a safety issue, and that it will allow the fence to conform with the current CDCR design criteria guidelines.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Smith: good afternoon. okay, mr. chair, members, i'm dr. karen jonah smith. i'm the director of the california department of public health and the state public health officer. it's my pleasure to provide you with an overview of the department and its budget, at which point i'll defer to my colleagues to provide additional detail. throughout our testimony, we'll endeavor to answer the committee's questions fully. the department of public health is dedicated to optimizing the health and well-being of the people of california, primarily through population-based programs, strategies, and initiatives. the department's goals are to eliminate health disparities and achieve health equity. eliminate preventable disease, disability, injury, and premature death. promote social and physical environments that support good health for all. prepare for, respond to, and recover from emerging public health threats and emergencies. and improve the quality of the workforce and workplace, as well as promoting and maintaining an effective organization. the governor's proposed budget for 2017-18 includes approximately $3.3 billion for the department overall, representing 289.3 million in total funds, or 8.8%, from the current budget year. this primarily reflects the infusion of proposition 56, the 2016 tobacco tax funding. general fund dollars of 132.2 million make up approximately 4% of the department's total budget. federal funds make up approximately 52%, or 1.7 billion, of the total department budget. the remainder of the department's funding comes from approximately 50 special funds. the committee asked what our higher priorities are this time. and in addition to maintaining our core public health funding, our core public health activities, some of the priorities for us this year are the dramatic rise in opioid use, misuse, and abuse. as well as overdoses in california, which have become a significant public health issue. in response, the cdph convened a work group in 2014 that includes, by now, over 25 agencies and partners as part of a multifaceted approach to address the epidemic. we're leveraging this unusual multi-agency partnership to apply for and have received grants. not only cdph, but also the department of justice, who is a key partner with us. with a grant that we received from the cdc, we will be allocating additional funding to eight to 10 local opioid abuse prevention coalitions who work together at the local level to reduce the number of opioid overdose incidents, deaths, and unsafe prescribing, in a way that is specific to their individual communities. similarly, the governor's budget allocated a total of $3 million to us, to be spent by june 30th, 2019, on a one-time basis, to support a new naloxone grant program. our goal is to distribute naloxone to high-risk communities as quickly and efficiently as possible. a brief rfa process will be used and will be directed to all 61 local health jurisdictions, who will then, in turn, distribute that funding out to organizations throughout their communities that are prepared to and deal with populations or prepared to get it out quickly to the populations that will be able to use it most expeditiously. another way that we're expanding our impact in an environment with limited funding is in the case of zika virus. with additional resources provided by the cdc zika funding, we have successfully met our primary objective of enhancing surveillance in california for cases of microcephaly and other birth defects resulting from zika virus infections. the annual birth population now being monitored in california is approximately 370,000, which represents 74% of all annual births. surveillance of all births in 19 counties, including babies whose mothers were not suspected of having zika infection during their pregnancy, is helping us identify additional cases of zika-associated birth defects. this information is also helping the department and local health departments with planning and providing follow-up services for affected families. supplemental federal funding is also being used for mosquito surveillance, providing us with better on-the-ground assessment of areas of the state that may be at risk for transmission of zika virus in the future. and finally, another example is the partnership that we've developed between cdph's women, infants, and children program and the department of social services' calfresh program. where the two departments are sharing data that allow us to identify areas of need and opportunity, where either one of the other program has low penetration into the area where we know there are eligible persons. we're then geomapping those areas and allowing smaller teams of individuals to go in and work proactively with those local jurisdictions, both social services and public health, to expand their outreach into the communities at greatest risk. we think this is increasing our efficiency at getting to increase the number of persons who are enrolled, who qualify for these programs. in the upcoming weeks, the programs will be visiting sites in sacramento and the central valley, both, this month to gather qualitative data, which will then help them to identify strategies to mitigate barriers from individuals. the barriers for both of these programs are different in different areas. and therefore, our responses to those barriers also need to differ. i'm going to ask brandon nunes, our chief deputy for administration, to respond to some of your additional questions.
[{'start': 50, 'end': 67, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 5411, 'end': 5424, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark Starr: good afternoon, mr. chair. i'm dr. mark karen starr. i'm the acting deputy director for the center for chronic disease prevention and health promotion. and i also have with me mr. greg oliva, who is the assistant deputy. i'll give you a quick overview of what our center does and then we'll talk a little bit about each division of our center. we really appreciate the subcommittee's interest in our center. but there's a lot of good material in your agenda writeup. and we'll try not to repeat too much of that, just give you a few highlights. so the center for chronic disease prevention and health promotion includes the division of chronic disease and injury control, the division of environmental and occupational disease control, and the office of problem gambling. our programs are located here in sacramento as well as in richmond. and our center works to prevent and control chronic diseases, many of the things that you just heard about from dr. smith, which is cancer, cardiovascular disease, asthma, and diabetes. and we work to reduce injuries due to accidents or violence. we're really trying  to upstream inventions. we try to address behavioral, environmental and occupational factors that can contribute to disease or injury with a strong focus on reducing risks such as reducing obesity and reducing tobacco use. and we work on preventing and treating problem gambling. so with that, i'll turn over to mr. oliva who will describe the chronic disease and injury control division and then i'll come back and describe our other division.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 180, 'end': 190, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 956, 'end': 961, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1423, 'end': 1428, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Claudia Crist: Good afternoon. As Dr. Starr mentioned, my name is Claudia Crist. I'm Chief Deputy Director for Policy and Programs at the California Department of Public Health. I wanted to help address some of the specific questions that you asked, good questions that you asked, regarding the diabetes epidemic. And your first question asked about the department's approach to diabetes and, our overarching, we have kind of three overarching roles in that particular area and one of them is as Dr Smith mentioned earlier, as a convener and collaborator, and that is with like minded individuals and stakeholders and local communities. Second overarching role is also for us to identify and pursue grants, provide funding to local counties and health jurisdictions, to address diabetes prevention and management. And then a third highly overarching area is to promote the use and increased access to national models in diabetes prevention. Then within that lie very specific activities that the Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion do including promoting healthy eating, increased physical activity, tobacco cessation, prevention and control of obesity and overweight, and secondary prevention activities, focused on evidence based strategies to prevent the delay of onset of complications among Californians diagnosed with type 2 diabetes or pre-diabetes as well. As far as what we're recommending on what the state should do to address diabetes, we believe that it is of course important to continue the work that we've embarked on thus far, and it's not just Including the Department of Public Health. As well as focus on some of the broader upstream efforts that Doctor Smith mentioned earlier when she talked about the health equity and some of the social determinants of health aspects. So, overall, I think we just wanted to point out that we feel it's important to recognize that unhealthy behavior and lifestyles alone, do not solely explain poor health outcomes among lower socioeconomic groups, which are exactly the groups at highest risk for diabetes. Social and environmental risk factors play a crucial role in health outcomes, including in diabetes. And factors such as diabetes related health costs, family and other social support, housing, availability of healthy foods and transportation, all effect health outcomes for persons with diabetes. If those social environmental factors aren't addressed, improvements in health outcomes are likely to be short-lived. So it really needs to be a combination of efforts. There was a specific question about the value of the Diabetes Prevention Program, and wanted to share high-level, and then we can certainly answer more specific questions. The Diabetes Prevention Program secures funding to not only those to develop state capacity, but also provides funding for 10 local health departments to conduct their own local efforts. Significant value of the program is a convener role, again, as noted by the California Prevent Diabetes STAT program, or PDSTAT program, as well as in the California Wellness Plan. Another opportunity that presents itself in that area, is the area of electronic health records. In this area of the electronic health records, we see significant opportunity and are exploring ways to work with health care providers to gather electronic health record data to conduct more analyses of diabetes hot spots. And geographic hot spots and geographic distribution as well, and that will then, again, better inform more targeted intervention as well. So the Diabetes Prevention Program will help to reduce the burden of type 2 diabetes in California, and will reduce the financial burden of the disease in California as a result. There was also specific question about the work that's done specifically to prevent diabetes in children, Latino children. And there was a question specific to the Central Valley as well. CDPH has worked to prevent diabetes in children, includes the Nutrition Education and Obesity Prevention Branch, or NEOP, which implements the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program Education,or SNAP-Ed. Developed the Power Play campaign to provide nutrition education in schools, after school, and community youth organizations, including promotion of water over sugary drinks, fruits and vegetables, and physical activity. Those materials are available both in English and Spanish. Additionally, we have the Rethink Your Drink Campaign, which targets youth, provides education about sugary drinks and options for healthy beverages. Again, those materials are also available in both languages. All Central Valley counties participant in SNAP-Ed as well as Power Play. In the Prevention First Grant, two school districts from San Joaquin and Fresno, receive additional support services to promote physical activity and safe routes to school. As well as training and technical assistance to approve nutrition services through school wellness policies, and implementation of smarter lunchroom techniques, for example. That's one of the grants. Another grant, The Lifetime of Wellness Grant, and that one is available to people 18 and up, is for local diabetes prevention efforts as well, where CDPH provides funding to the local health jurisdictions in Fresno, Tulare, Merced, San Joaquin, as well as other counties. And for activities that include implementing systems, partnerships, and evidence-based engagement strategies to support lifestyle changes. Linkages between health systems and community resources, and that one specifically, I believe, targets adults with hypertension and pre diabetes or those that are at high risk for type 2 diabetes, is that correct? So that was fairly high-level, but we have specific examples, if you would like, in any of the areas.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 28, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 51, 'end': 64, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 484, 'end': 489, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1682, 'end': 1687, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jim Garosa: good afternoon, jim mark garosa department of finance. i would like to note that the governor's proposed budget for proposition 56 aligns with the requirement and the mandates from prop 56 and the lao also agreed with the governor's budget proposal for the department of public health for prop 56. i thought i heard that there was a disagreement there.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Newton: yes members, mr. chair and members, newton with the legislative analyst's office. maybe just to clarify this issue and your raising very good points. our office recently released a report on the governor;s proposals for proposition 56, which cut across various departments, and i think the issue that you're raising, which is a very legitimate issue, concerns the proposals for medi-cal. medi-cal receives the bulk of proposition 56 funding, and proposition 56 has what's called a non-supplantation clause, which essentially, for medi-cal, which states that the funding is not to sort of supplant existing funding for medi-cal, existing general fund funding. and we've raised issues that the administration's interpretation, it's one of many interpretations. there are alternative viewpoints on the issue, we're as an office, there's very little case law on this issue, and it's arguable that the administration position is correct, but there are different points of view. our office is currently seeking the legislative council in this issue and we'll be briefing the subcommittees later on the issue.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Valdez: good afternoon, members, mary jim valdez with health access. we are the statewide healthcare consumer advocacy coalition advocating for quality affordable health care for all californians. health access strongly supported prop 56 as an, is in strong support of the department's proposal to use $178.5 million in prop 56 funding for tobacco prevention and control and we are in strong support for funding to continue to be used for grants targeted towards achieving tobacco related health equity among california's diverse populations including african american, hispanic, api communities, low income communities, people with limited education, and the homeless. veterans, lgbt people, people with disabilities and the formerly justice involved. we would be strongly concerned if the tax revenues directed towards addressing disparities among these communities were to be used or allocated elsewhere, given that these populations are among the most impacted by tobacco use, and we also do look forward to the health equity report card which will check the state's progress in reducing tobacco use among vulnerable populations. thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brianna Pittman: good afternoon, brianna mary pittman with the california dental association here to speak on the 30 million that is going to the oral health program. we are first thing very excited we have all this money that is now going to the office of oral health and we are members of the state oral health plan advisory council, and so are working on the implementation with dph. the one concern that has been raised at some of our meetings is whether the department has the flexibility necessary to actually get the money out into the community. so some principles that were discussed at the meeting were to ensure that the department can enter into multi-year contracts and work directly with the local agencies to get the money into those communities. we do know that this is a significant amount of money, has the ability to do some really great, meaningful work. so we'll be working with your office, department, and public health and finance to make sure that happens.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katie Andrew: not quite as tall. katie, children now. i'm here to speak in regards to the california children's dental disease prevention program and in august of 2016, governor brown approved restoration of funding for ccddpp, which exists in statute, and that was in the amount of 3 million. however, the department of public health's budget change proposal suggests that that money be returned to the general fund under the expectation that these general fund monies would be supplanted with anticipated fund from the tobacco tax revenue. we believe that if the state reverses this funding by returning the money to the general fund that this would set a dangerous precedent for the funding at the state office of oral health is planning to make available via prop 56 to local health jurisdictions. thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 164, 'end': 169, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Scott Vivona: Hi, my name is Scott Vivona. I'm the Acting Deputy Director for the Center for Healthcare Quality. I'm going to give you a brief overview about the center, and then I'm going to turn over to my colleague, Mr. Howard. He'll walk you through the estimate methodology and the current year estimate. So the Center for Healthcare Quality has three programs, the largest of which is the licensing certification program. This is a program that is responsible for ensuring regulatory compliance with all of our healthcare facilities in the State of California. We do that by way of recertification service and licensing service, as well as complaint investigations throughout our buildings. We have a contract with the Center for Medicare and Medicaid services. With that contract we on behalf of CMS, we certify those healthcare facilities that are accepting Medicare or Medicaid patients and payments to ensure that they are in compliance with federal regulations. In addition, we have a program that certifies nursing home assistants, hemodialysis technicians, as well as license nursing home administrators. So these are the individuals that work at some of our facilities. We provide that licensure certification to ensure that they're in compliance with their licensure authorities. And then finally we have a Healthcare Acquired Infection program. These individuals gather, amass, collect, interpret data from hospitals with regard to healthcare associate infections of 392 hospitals statewide. They produce an annual report. They also assist us in helping to analyze some outbreaks or unusual occurences of diseases. They also have some infection provisionists who go into hospitals and other settings to do some analysis, to help those facilities become better in terms of reducing HAI incidents. So with that I'm going to turn over to CJ Howard and he will walk you through the estimate.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 209, 'end': 215, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1837, 'end': 1846, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cj Howard: good afternoon mr. chair, members of the committee. my name is cj brianna howard, i'm the chief of policy and planning for the center of healthcare quality. i'm going to give you a quick overview of the estimate, its purpose, its methodology, and then some of the major changes for the current fiscal year and next school year. so the purpose of the safe secure estimate is to project all the workload associated with doing all of our regulatory activities. the way that we do that, we estimate the total number of survey or hours required to conduct those activities. the key drivers in our estimate are the facility counts of the number of facilities that we license and or certify the activity counts or the number the activities, and then the average amount time that it takes to do each one of those activities. essentially you take the number of activities and multiply it by the average amount of time that gives us a total survey or hours and that we can translate that into the number of surveyors required to perform all those activities. we then add onto that all of the administrative and support staff by way of ratios. so it's actually, it's pretty simple even though it seems very complex. so for 16 17, the senator projects revised fiscal year expenditure authority of $263.2 million, which is no change compared with the 2016 budget act. for 17, 18, we estimate that expenditures will total 262.7 million, which is a decrease of 528,000, or 0.2%. so the primary driver and the decrease is associated with a reduction of roughly $6.7 million in reimbursement authority. this has to do with the way that we receive funds no longer has to pass, has to pass through from dhcs but directly to the cbph, so just a budgetary adjustment. and then there's also offsetting and increase of $991,000, this is for one of our budget change proposals that we'll discuss more in one of the next items. for the preventing healthcare associated infections and facilities budget change proposal, and an increase of $1.1 million for budget change proposal los angeles county contract, and then there's other various standard budgetary adjustments. of note, the senator's workload analysis, so that would be the total number of positions required to do 100% of the projected workload indicated an increase of 79 health facility evaluator nurse positions or 79 positions to conduct 100% of the workload. so 18% of those 79 positions is standard changes that we would expect to see from year to year, just in terms of the average amount of time that takes to do something or mile changes in the number of new activity counts, new complaints, new facilities to be licensed and or certified. the balance, the remaining 61 surveyor positions that reflect the staff needed to conduct 100% of the workload in la county as the contract that we negotiated with the la county that became effective in 15 16 did not include 100% of all of the licensure certification activities and all of the complaints that are received in la county. right now, the state is attempting to accomplish 100% of that workload with existing staff resources by using state staff to conduct some of the workload that la counties not contractually obligated to complete, and so, we're not requesting those positions at this time.
[{'start': 63, 'end': 80, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cynthia Harding: thank you so much for inviting me to be here, assembly members and i apologize assembly member harper to have my back to you. my name is cynthia cj harding, and i'm the chief deputy director for the los angeles county department of public health and i want to first state that the county is extremely appreciative of the governor's proposal for an additional 1.1 million in the staffs and the administrations works on this and our requested today is that, that funding be increase by 1.5 million for a total request of 2.6 million. two years ago i stood before this assembly, and i worked with your colleagues in the administration to resize. and reset the program in the right direction. at the time we were dealing with a number of serious allegations, problems in the program and frankly, not only in la county, but throughout the state and at the heart of the poor performance in la county we determined, was a severe under resourcing of this program. we received 33% of the workload and less than 15% of the funding needed to deliver the services and it resulted in a chronic, the chronic under funding resulted in the back log of complaints, other kinds of issues and poor performance, but we were so severely under resource. since we've had this program, we've had a contract with the state since the 1960's, and in fact the program that the state now has was originally designed after program that las angeles county designed to inspect nursing homes, and it's been a tremendous asset for us to have both the health facility's inspection program because we're leveraging other resources in our department. for example, it allows us to do a better job addressing outbreaks in hospitals and emergency situations, and our epidemiologists are able to work alongside our inspectors to quickly determine the source of an outbreak in a hospital to prevent and mitigate problems. and in a fire or severe weather conditions or other kinds of emergencies our emergency response team reaches out to our health facilities inspectors. so, we can quickly insure the appropriate care for our most vulnerable residents, and in view this unique vulnerability these residents and healthcare efforts, we worked really hard to return this program around in 2015, and to get the contract, which rightsize the funding and, as was alleged earlier, tied it to a work plan. so rather than having 33% of the workload in less than 50% of the funding, we got funding and then we tied it to the amount of workload that could be done with that. and we increase the number of positions in the program in this current contract from 151 to 224 positions and i'm very happy to report to you today, that those additional investments have resulted in really important and outstanding results. in this first year of the new contract, we met and in some cases, we exceed our contractual obligations and we're on track to achieve the commitments in year two. including complying with senate bill 75, which require that we complete immediate jeopardy complains within 90 days. in year one alone, we responded to over 1500 complains, 1100 reported incidences and we contacted 525 surveys. we initiated 100% of all new investigations of immediate jeopardy complains within 24 hours, which in compliance with the state and federal regulations. we hired 75 new staff in year one which is a huge lift and i want to remind you that staff that are hired in this program have to undergo training for a year and the cost of that training we estimate is between $75,000. so before and they have to go through this training and they have to pass a qualifications test before they can work independently in the field. so, 100% of our staff that took that qualifications test have passed it. we currently have a vacancy rate of less than 9% and a staff turn over rate of under 6%. and in comparison the rest of the state has a vacancy rate of almost 17% and staff turnover rates of almost 20%. so given the high cost of training, the investment in los angeles county is providing return on investment. we estimate that if we had the same vacancy and staff turn over rates that the state experiencing, it would cost us almost an additional $1.5 to $2 million annually, and we've continually invested in quality improvements which include routine training, improved policy and procedures. we're looking for efficiencies in every single aspect of the program without sacrificing quality. and these efforts have resulted in our ability to do more thorough inspections, which then result in a higher deficiencies being found in this facilities, and an increased incitations being able to be issued. so i think what we learned prior to this current contract, is that under resourcing is program results in poor performance and bad outcomes for those that cannot afford it, our most vulnerable residents, and we're committed to developing a highly effective regulatory program in partnership with the state that ensures safety and well being of our residents in the healthcare facilities, and for us to complete all of the work load that's given to us in our contracts. our vulnerable residents deserve no less and so, we're requesting a contract augmentation for fiscal year 17-18 to cover increases in the program costs resulting from cost of living adjustments, increased lease costs. we brought on 70 new staff, we have to have a place for them to sit, and changes in the indirect and fringe benefit rates, which happened in december of this year, so they weren't able to be incorporated into the budget change proposal, which was submitted last june. so our regional request for this budget change proposal was $5 million, but in view of all the state budgetary constraints, we looked at everything we could do to decrease that to the absolute minimum. and even with these actions, there remains a shortfall of 1.5 million, and as a result, we're requesting that additional 1.5 for a total of 2.6 for fiscal year 17-18, and i thank you for hearing our presentation, the proposal, and i'm happy to answer any questions.
[{'start': 95, 'end': 101, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 137, 'end': 155, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Angelo Bellomo: good afternoon, angelo cynthia bellomo, deputy director for health protection for la county public health. this program has been assigned to my bureau for the last two years and in addition to this division, i also have the environmental health division and the emergency preparedness and response division within la county. as ms. harding said, this program has really undergone a lot of reform in the last two years and we have met, and in many cases, exceeded our contractual requirements. and i think what ms. harding has been saying is that what we really need to do is make sure that we are sufficiently funded because we want to ensure that this program continues to provide the care and to ensure the care that these very vulnerable residents deserve. the contract change in 15-16 did address the severe underfunding and what we're really talking about are just some additional costs that were unanticipated at the time that contract was signed, but meeting our contractual requirements is really only the first goal that we look at within la county. as ms. harding indicated, the health inspectors within la county in the 1950s, these are people who inspect restaurants, landfills, housing. they saw that there was a gap with regard to the care and the regulatory program within the hospitals and so, they developed a hospital program that then became a model for the changes that were made statewide and our professional workforce and the entire leadership team within the public health department are committed to ensuring that the residents in these health care facilities receive the high quality care they deserve and their families expect. and lastly, let me just say that, our health facility surveyors and our environmental health staff and our emergency response staff, as ms. harding say, do get together when we have incidents, infections, or natural disasters, flooding, storms, loss of power, and they do quickly mitigate the risk to these residents. we appreciate your consideration of our request to augment the funding, as ms harding said, from 1.6 or an additional 1.5 for a total of 2.6 million in fy 17-18. we look forward to sharing our continued progress in making this local program the most effective in the nation. thank you very much.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 332, 'end': 339, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 514, 'end': 521, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1066, 'end': 1073, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1795, 'end': 1802, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2051, 'end': 2058, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Amachael Rinesy: Good afternoon. I'm Amachael Rinesy Acting Chief of Los Angeles County, Department of Public Health, Health Facilities and Inspection Division. We are thankful for the continued support of our program. Although the Governor's proposed budget for 2017-18 included an increase of 1.1 million for program cost increases, we are requesting it further, augment that increases by 1.5 million. This ensures that our program is adequately funded, providing us the resources necessary to respond timely to complaints, and perform work under the terms of our contract with the state. Our highly skilled workforce is dedicated to assuring the quality of care provided to the residents of healthcare facilities within LA County. Continuous improvement in the quality of LAC's work have been achieved through the use of a full Quality Assessment and Assurance Committee which continuously reviews our program processes to identify ways to strengthen and improve them. Providing routine supervisor and staff training to ensure all staff are knowledgeable and up-to-date with applicable laws, regulations, and standard operating procedures, monitoring performance and conducting assessments to track the achievement of work plan objectives. These quality improvement efforts have resulted in more thorough inspections, a higher number of deficiencies detected, and an increase in citations issued. Thank you, we appreciate the opportunity to provide input as you continue your deliberation on the budget.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melanie Boston: good afternoon. my name is melanie angelo boston. and i'm a health facilities inspection evaluator nurse for the county of los angeles and a member of the seiu 721. firs, i'd like to thank the committee for taking the time to hear the county's proposal. prior to becoming an evaluator, i was a trauma surgical nurse, and i worked in the county hospital to provide in-care for patients there. as an evaluator, i now provide character residence in the skilled nursing facilities by ensuring the facilities meet standard set by the state and federal government. if facilities provide sub-standard quality care, put the patients lives at risk or cause them harm, i, and my department, hold them accountable by writing deficiencies and their citations, so they can deliver a change in the way it provide care. two years ago, los angeles county was severely under funded for the work we performed and it cost their delays in the work that we did, because of the under staffing. but, additional funding that we received, la was able to hire more staff, allowing us to conduct surveys and inspect and investigate the complaints quicker. this lead us to issuing our deficiencies and our citations in a more timely manner. for the residents in the scale of nursing homes, their families and especially for those residents who have no one to speak for them, this meant that they felt more secure knowing they were more experienced nurses ensuring that they were cared for and safe by us thoroughly inspecting the facilities that are their homes. for the skilled nursing facilities and the industry, it means the facilities can receive feedback from us on how they can improve the care they provide in a more reasonable time frame. this holds them accountable for providing the care and safety of the residents. for the general public, it means when families make the decision to place their loved ones in a skilled nursing facility, they can feel assured their family members will be cared for and protected, because we are out there looking out for the residents who use the skilled nursing facility services. we respectfully ask the legislature and administration to approve the los angeles county's proposal, so that we may continue to improve our program, and provide the needed services to the most vulnerable members in our communities. thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 165, 'end': 169, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michelle Cabrera: mr. chair and members, cabrera with the service employees international union. we represent the state's public health nurses, and nurses who do the health facilities evaluations, as well as the la county nurses. and we are in strong support of the la county budget proposal, and i think the administration for its proposal to increase funding by 1.1 million, we've of course agree that there needs to be more added to this investment. yes, our union in la county did negotiate salary increases for nurses county wide across a variety of different programs. and that has contributed some to the increase and funding here. i do want to underscore however that the problems that led to this situations, were statewide, they applied to the entire program, they had to do with a variety of different factors. and the issue with la county is that because they had been so severely underfunded respective to the rest of the state, the gap that they had to bridge was much, much wider then the rest of the state. and so we are in the process of transformation. we are in the process of writing the course, here. and it's very important work for individuals, not just the nursing homes but hospitals, etc., it's going to take time. i think i'm proud to say that la county has made good on the directive of the legislature in trying to bring the program up to where it needs to be and with lightning speed i might add. their outcomes are impressive. and they do have much better staff retention and lower turnover. they have a lower vacancy rate than the state does. i believe all of these things are because la county has done a better job of investing in its workforce, which is really the core of this program, and so i respectfully request your support for this item. thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barbara Glaser: glaser with the california hospital association we are supportive of the request from the department of public health to use $2 million for each year over the next three years for quality improvement purposes. thank you.
[]
Connie Mitchell: Hello, my name is Connie Mitchell. I'm the Deputy Director of the Center for Family Health and I've been asked to give you a brief overview of the Center for Family Health. And then we have a couple of questions under issue number 10 that are related to Zika. And so I have asked my colleague Dr. James Watt to join us here from the Center for Infectious Disease because we weren't very closely on this issue together. I thought you'd like to see how we've collaborated on this. So my Center's complex in that, I have three divisions, each work very differently. The Genetic Disease Screening Program is 100% fee supported. With fees paid by health insurers including MediCAL and a very small percentage of private payers. Maternal Child Adolescent Health is funded through a variety of strategies. That is both federal funds, Title V through the Office of Adolescent Health, State General Funds and Title XIX, Medicaid reimbursement. So it's a complex funding structure. And WIC is 100% federal funded through the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Looking at highlights for MCH, I thought you'd like to start off with some good news, and that is, we've experienced lowered rates of maternal mortality. So, maternal deaths should be very rare and uncommon. California saw that its maternal mortality rates rose dramatically from eight deaths per 100,000 live births in 1999, to almost double that, 16.9 deaths per 100 births in 2006. It prompted us to initiate several strategies, say pregnancy associated mortality review and in-depth study of every maternal death. Some quality improvement toolkits that we distributed throughout California and several statewide communications campaign. One working with the March Dimes we have seen a non-medically indicated elected deliveries. Since 2006, California has experienced a gradual decline in maternal mortality. We now have a new low of 7.2 deaths per 100,000 live births. And this is in stark contrast to the rest of the nation, where maternal mortality continues to rise. We've also been very successful in lowering our rates of infant mortality Since 2000, where we had a rate of 5.4 deaths per 1,000 live births, we are now at 4.7. This translates to about 500 fewer infants dying each year in California. Our preach and birth rate is also lowered. And then we're very proud of our lowered rates of adolescent births, California's birth rate among adolescents continues to decline. The 2014 numbers indicate that we're at a record low of 20.8 births per 1,000 females. This represents a 55% decline since the year 2000 when we have 46.7. As long as we're talking a little bit about numbers, I thought I'd share, It's not a program, but I thought it was important for you to know about one of our major surveillance activities. Which is the maternal infant health assessment survey that we do every year of women who recently gave birth, to find out about their pregnancy, their ability to access care, any kind of barriers that they perceived. It's an outstanding database that is widely used, not only in California, but across the nation. And it's very adaptable. Every couple years, we' try to add questions that are new on emerging health issues. For example, a couple of years ago, we asked questions about adverse childhood experiences. There's a lot of data that relates adverse events in childhood to subsequent outcomes, but we were able to look at what were the outcomes in pregnancy. Did it indeed, these adverse experience of say, a loss of a parent, incarceration of a parent. Did this go on to impact pregnancy outcomes of these women when they reached adulthood? Most recently, we've added validated questions about experiences of racism. Racism as a chronic stress factor, to try to learn, did that have any impact on after-birth outcomes. So, it's a very meaningful surveillance data base that we're very proud of. Moving to programs, and in your notes, you have listed a whole variety of programs. Some of them are really small and some of them are really big. I'm just going to stick to just a couple of them for you that I think you'd like to know about. In regards to our Black Infant Health Program, the goal of this program is to improve African American infant and maternal health outcomes. I just gave some great overall data that's the aggregate of data to cross recess. But when you look at African American birth rates, both infant and maternal health rates, there's still a gap that exists and we've been working on that impact we've brought back, we've reduced the gap back to where it was about 10 years ago, but we still have a ways to go. And so this program is focused primarily on addressing this gap, and we are grateful for the additional general funds to have helped us to be able to expand this program. With this money, we were able to expand BIH into San Bernardino and Riverside counties, and we were able to adequately staff all of our BIH sites to implement this program. It's a long program. Women attend 10 sessions before delivery and 10 sessions after delivery. There's case management that goes on throughout. It's really investment of time and resources by locals. And we're happy to announce that this year, Los Angeles County is now joining. They were kind of watching and seeing how this new program was implemented, but they're now joining and coming on board and that will help our overall members. So we always want to know about outcomes that takes a while to see those final outcomes but we have tracked what we call intermediary outcomes. Things that our program are trying to change because we think that evidence says that if we can make this better, it should help in their overall health. So our initial data is showing that positive trends in the areas where we major part is make sense of social support. Those are, seem to show a positive trend, a self esteem, resiliency, mastery. Can they master the world, can they get around, can they do things that they want to, and these are all things that we believe are intermediate outcomes to help women to deal with the chronic stresses that are in their life that we think are contributing to our disparities in our racial and ethnic outcomes. We've also done little positive programs in there about improving attitudes around breastfeeding in this population, and also about putting babies on their backs to sleep at night to prevent SIDS. And those programs have also shown marked attitudinal shifts among participants. So we believe we're moving in the right direction. It takes a while when you, this is a whole new program. It's standardized across the state. It takes a while so that everyone can get up and be, we want to make sure that there's validity and fidelity in what they do that everybody's doing the same thing, and that we're measuring the same outcome so we can actually see are we moving the dial on this? But we believe we're making progress. So moving on to AFLP, the Adolescent Family Life Program, that was the other one that you asked for more detail about. The Adolescent Life Program was established in 1985 by legislation here in the State of California. In 1988, the California Adolescent Family Life Act and ALP provides case management services to expectant and parenting youth to address any social, health or economic challenges. We want to increase their access to and utilization of healthcare services. Their social and emotional support. We really strive to increase their educational attainment, keep them in school. Help them to improve pregnancy planning, reproductive live planning, so that there isn't a second pregnancy while they're a teen. They have month to month, face to face visits with the counselors who are involved in the program. This is funded through Title V funds. Right now we are in the process of similar to BIH to implementing a single standardized model throughout the state that we've been studying. We've been having external federal evaluation dollars and it's called the positive youth development. This is our new RFA that was just released as to not only implement this program throughout California again, so that you can get better measures of outcome, and you have more confidence in them. But we've also used a measure to determine areas of need, so that we're sure that there are counties of greatest need are getting the dollars that we have available for this program. And finally I thought you might be interested in our home visiting program. Title five is our major source of funding. We get about $39 million a year for our home visiting program. Our federal dollars are around $22 million a year. Home visiting was created as a result of the patient protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010. Its goal is to provide comprehensive coordinated, in home services to support positive parenting, and to improve outcomes for families. This is another long term program investment, where people, women are included when they're in pregnancy, high risk women . And then they can be followed with their families and children, sometimes up to age five. And they get in a very structured model program. The Home Visiting Program is strongly evidence based, there's an expectation that if we implement it they way that it was intended to, that we'll get the same positive outcomes and indeed that's what's happening in California. We've reached all of our benchmarks and all of our federal reporting. We are very proud of this program. As of March this year, we've served over 8,600 families and we are currently at 95.6% capacity. Several of our counties have wait lists. So we're on our sixth year of implementation. We consider it to be a mature program of robust infrastructure. That includes fully staffed local implementing agents with very highly trained nurse and home visitors. So if you don't mind, I'll move to WIC. Would that be okay? I'm going to make this very brief because when WIC comes up to talk about their estimate, they're going to go more in detail. But just to tell you that WIC's goal is to decrease the risk of poor birth outcomes, and improve the health of participants. You think about it just being about food. Certainly, WIC provides services and food assistance for pregnant, and post parted women, and infants and children up to their fifth birthday. But these services include nutrition education, breastfeeding support, assistance with finding health care and other community services vouchers for specific nutritious foods that are redeemable at WIC with authorized stores and at Farmer's Market in California. And the California WIC Program serves 1.2 million people each month and that's about 60% of infants born in California are eligible for the WIC program. So some significant issues and again, Chris Nelson my Division Chief is going to be going into more detail. We have to implement electronic benefit transfer, and EBT card going from the paper vouchers to an EBT card. It's a very long project. It's required a lot of planning. We have a federal deadline of October 2020. We're partnering with other OSI on this project and thus far we are anticipating being ready to implement in April of 2020, so we are on track. The other thing that we're working on is declining participation, this is happening not only in California but across the nation is that there has been decline in participation in WIC. You've heard earlier from Dr. Karen Smith about one of our efforts, which is partnering with the Department of Social Services, to share our databases and see where we can learn from each other and try to duel in role wherever possible. But some of the reasons for decline maybe an improving economy, or declining birth rate, or maybe our current communication approaches that have not reached our millennial population and that goes to the question that you asked. We actually have a, it's a mobile website, it's similar to an app and Dr. Nelson, I just promoted her, Dr. Chris Nelson will be describing that for you. I think it's really great. In fact it was very helpful in the Oroville Dam issue where we had to relocated people. So we have WIC victims at shelter services and we were able to give them the sights so that they could know I'm not in my nute neighborhood, and where I usually go, but here's where I can go to get my vouchers. And here is a WIC store nearby where I can get the food that I need, we are very proud of that. Similarly for the genetic disease screening program, I'm going to move to that again Dr. Richard will be coming up here to talk you in more detail. I just, our major activities are prenatal screening of pregnant mothers and then post-natal testing of all babies born for a large panel of genetic diseases. So I just have a couple of updates for you. So we were recently charged with adding Adrenoleukodystrophy to our screening panel and that was in accordance with Senate Bill 1095. Whenever a new disorder is added to the federal panel, then we're required to implement it here in California according to that legislation within two years. So last year, we started, we implemented the screening but that bill went into, we had to be able to screen as of February 2016. So we went backwards looked on, pulled all those blood spots from babies bones since February 2016 and we've catching up and we've already screened about 330,000 newborns for adrenoleukodystrophy. And so far, we've identified 16 asymptomatic boys. And that's what's important to know, is that those children never would have known until they became symptomatic, which is too late in terms of this disease. So to date the birth prevalence of boys with this genetic condition in California is approximately 1 in 20,000 which is consistent with what the literature says that we should be seeing. And again because of SB 1095 there are two more disorders and so that's where you're going to hear a little bit more in our estimate and RBCP. We're going to be adding the pompe disease and mucopolysaccharidosis 1, and the time for this is 16 months for completing all the tests thats required, the new equipment, the training, the personnel, in order to get those screening up to date for those two additional disorders. And we anticipate to start date this summer of 2018. So the prenatal screening program is different in that I talked to you about newborns so every newborn gets screened automatically in the hospital when they're born. The prenatal screening program is a voluntary program thus far around 350,000 pregnant women each year take advantage of the program. If they have identified concerns the program includes work with a medical specialist. They can do some counseling with the women and help them to ascertain what is this identified risk mean to me and my decision making. And finally and we'll respond to the specific questions but I thought in general you needed to know that we really ramped up our Zika surveillance activities, because as we know, one of the most devastating outcomes of Zika is birth defects, neurologic birth defects. We all know about the most devastating, the microcephalae, but we're finding that there can be a whole range of birth defects, and some of these don't even appear at birth. So we need to follow these infants over time that are born to infected mothers. So we have some CDC funding that has allowed us to expand our normal birth defect screening so that we've gone from 10 to 19 counties. Including all the counties where the mosquitoes that carry the Zika virus have been reported. As well as the five counties with the highest number of pregnant women with viral infections. And again all of these women that we have are related to travel. They've travel and been infected in another country. We have no local transmission here in California. As of March 3rd, our total infections since late 2015 is 510. Again, none are locally acquired. Six are due to sexual transmission. We've had a total of 90 cases of infection in pregnant women. And four infants born with Zika related born defects. We post these data every week to our Zika website so that you can go and see the table and see how the changes are overtime. I think that's what I have for an overview. Trying to hit the key highlights, I welcome any questions that you may have or I can turn it to Doctor Watt to answer your specific questions.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 297, 'end': 307, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 10771, 'end': 10783, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 11412, 'end': 11423, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 11922, 'end': 11928, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 11955, 'end': 11967, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 12512, 'end': 12519, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Vanessa Cajina: vanessa melanie cajina on behalf of mosquito and vector control association of. california. and it is certainly different to be in sub one, but we think that this is a very timely committee for this conversation to be happening. it was only about three or four years ago, that some of our districts around the state, most likely in the san gabriel valley, coachella, some in the fresno area and san diego, started to detect the mosquitoes that carried the zika virus, in addition to chikungunya, dengue and yellow fever. there are the aedes aegypti and aedes albopictus. and just by way of background, also, we are carrying legislation that's here, sb 382 by senator pan, that would enhance an existing surveillance system and database to help us get ahead of the invasive mosquitoes. they're unpredictable. they breed in very small amounts of water. they breed year-round. they don't care about borders. they don't care about anything like that. all they do is show up and attack the community. we have different abatement methods that we use when we're trying to control for those mosquitoes. so we do look forward to working with this committee down the line. we have a strong existing relationship with cdph and the vector borne disease surveillance program. and i look forward to continuing that and strengthening our database, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 667, 'end': 670, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Justin Garrett: garrett, with the march of dimes. as we heard some of the statistics about reductions in premature birth and infant mortalities, i wanted to share our strong support for a lot of the key mch programs. we know there's no specific proposal before you right now, related to mch programs. but we led the coalition that restored the funding for the black infant health program a couple years ago. we were strongly supportive of the effort to restore funding for the aflp program last year. so we just want to share our support for the effectiveness of those programs, and their critical nature in reducing health disparities. we know we still have a lot of work to do there, so thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Farley: hello, my name is karen vanessa farley with the california wic associations. we're a nonprofit association for the 83 local wic agencies, there are members. and i just wanted to support the remarks made here today. there's a real openness and vitality in the program, to make sure the program is relevant and valuable to the millennials, where wic will always have young participants and keeping up with the user needs is really important. and all the examples listed here, i can validate that. in our organization, we receive grants and we're able to actually work with the local agencies in the state. so we are working with the farmers' markets and the local agencies, to get the farmers markets authorized to the state, and get the local agencies energized to participate, so they can use those vouchers year-round. one thing that wasn't mentioned, is wic has invested in regional breastfeeding liaisons. so these staff go out and work with hospitals or work sites and other partners, to ensure that the community has effective breastfeeding practices. and this really supports the work of wic and all the community organizations, so that breastfeeding outcomes are positive. in recent ers data showed, and this was released in the fall, that the last four years the wic breastfeeding rates have increased over the last four years, and that's really hard data to get. and those are really stellar outcomes. and there are a lot of efforts are happening in the local agencies to use technology. we're working with some of the agencies also through our packard funding, to look at how, within federal regulations, that facetime can be used or skyping, phones, smartphones, because the moms do have smartphones. but also that in-person contact, because very important things in lives are saved when moms do walk into the wic office. so keeping that balance and that broad tool box, so that all needs are addressed. that's a tall order for one program but there's a real energy, and vitality, and enthusiasm to do that. and that's a hallmark of wic staff at the local and state level to this commendment, so i just wanted to commend that. and then lastly, you mentioned or had a question at the beginning about programs that work, and there's a lot of data that shows that wic works. but, we're talking about obesity and chronic disease, and recent cdc data released in the fall, show that obesity rates for two- to four-year-olds decreased in wic participants. and that again is a really hard thing to achieve. so that's current data that really showcases the important work of wic. so thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Justin Garrett: hi, justin karen garrett with the march of dimes. march of dimes advocates for states to require newborn screening for conditions once they are added to the recommended uniform screening panel. we were supportive of sb1095 last year. we're pleased to see the bcp to move forward with implementing this screening, doing so for these two new conditions will help identify infants with these conditions as early as life is possible. help save their lives and improve their health throughout their lives. thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Janet Nguyen: thank you, madame president. i feel compelled to set the record straight and know that the senator from los angeles went downstairs and met with some of the vietnamese-american media and vietnamese-americans. in response to some comments he has made as to why this is still so-called going on, basically why is the vietnamese-american community and members are here today? i would like to provide you with some clarity. the senator from los angeles, the pro-tem apology a week ago was not an apology. taking responsibility for what happened is not the same as acknowledgment of wrongdoing, of dragging me, a senator, legally, rightfully allowed to be on the senate floor and for sizing my voice, which is my constituent voice, is much less than an apology. your statement to some media outlets downstairs that i'm doing this for my 15 minutes of fame are not only both wrong and extremely offensive. this is not, has never been about nguyen. your exact quote was, i think she enjoyed the 15 minutes of fame. it is about the voices of the 34th senate district and that the vietnamese-american community was silenced. this is about the thousands of american service members who fought bravely along south vietnamese soldiers. this is about the lives that were lost at the hands of communist forces. this has never have ever been about nguyen. this is about the millions of life affected by the vietnam war. this is about freedom of speech and proper respect for the residents of the 34th senate district, whom i represent. it is not and not about 15 minutes fame.
[{'start': 934, 'end': 940, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1333, 'end': 1339, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rico Mastrodonato: Good morning Mr. Chair. Rico Mastrodonato with the Trust for Public Land. And good morning members, thank you for the opportunity to say a few words here. Proposals like this involve a lot of stakeholders. And your office and the Pro Tem's office has been very accessible to the Trust for Public Land and other stakeholders, and I really appreciate that. This proposal involves a full spectrum of investments from landscapes in densely urban places to rural, this is very timely. We think that we're about to lose any support from the federal government on natural resource investments. We appreciate the desire to keep this at a manageable size. But at the end of the day, the Trust for Public Land would like to see more investments to the AB 31 program and to places, watersheds specifically, where we get out water supply. Do you have any ideas as to what those numbers are? Pardon me?>>You said you want more investment. Do you have any particular opinion as to what you think that should be? Let's put it in the record. Well, if it were up to me, we have a $21 billion needs in LA county alone for parks. So we're never going to-
[{'start': 24, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Fernando Redondo: I'm Fernando Redondo, on behalf of the Santa Clara Valley Open Space Authority, as well as the Sonoma County Ag Preservation and Open Space District. Both groups are very supportive of the bond measure in general. And think we'll see all the amendments being suggested by the Committee. Specially on the ag land conservation funds being made available, there's some additional interest in seeing a couple of changes. Just specify the program the funds are being made available to. But beyond that, very again, thankful for all the great work on this.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marilee Eckert: hi, i'm marilee jonah eckert, i'm the ceo of conservation corp north bay, and also representing the california association of local conservation corps. we're in support of the bill, and i also have two corps members here that would like to say a few words.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert Chavez: Hi, good morning, I'm Robert Chavez. I'm the Vice President of the California Association of Local Conservation Corps. I'm also the head of the Urban Corps San Diego. County. I'm here to speak in support of SB 5, very much support it, thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Green: I'm Mark Green from Conservation Corps North Bay here to support the bill, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Lynch: Good morning Mr. Chair and members, Danielle Lynch on behalf of the Land Trust of Santa Cruz County, Community, Nature Center, and Tree People in support of SB 5. Thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sylvia Saleesha: saleesha on behalf of the city of santa monica, parks and open space are critical for healthy, vibrant communities, and we are in strong support, thanks. thank you.
[]
Vivian Erickson: good morning, mr. chair and members. vivian marilee erickson on behalf of los angeles neighborhood land trust, laguna green belt, and ocean conservancy in support.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 60, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Margo Parks: mr. chair and members, parks on behalf of the california state parks foundation, very much in support of the bill. want to thank the author for accepting the amendments to give more money towards parks, thank you. thank you, long time no see.
[]
Wendy Butts: Good morning, Wendy Butts, LA Conservation Corps. And I'm here on behalf of the California Association of Local Conservation Corps in support of the bill.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barbara Goto: thank you. good morning, my name is barbara. i'm with the arroyos and foothills conservancy, and we very much support this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chuck Mills: Good morning, Chuck Mills of California Relief. I want to acknowledge the Senate President's tremendous work on this and the Committee amendments and the Senate President's willingness to accept those. With that, we're in support, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Goulden: Thank you. Good morning, Sarah Goulden on behalf of Grasslands Water District and the Carbon Cycle Institute in strong support. Thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Harris: mr chairman, harris on behalf of water reuse california, in strong support of the section of continued funding the proposition one. thank you. thanks.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Reggie Collins: my name is reggie vivian collins from california trout, and we're just registering our support, especially for the fish passage and multi-benefit land use language in there. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Liz Forsburg: thank you. hi, liz reggie forsburg on behalf of the nature conservancy, and we're very supportive in concept of the bill. and we appreciate the recent amendments that we've seen come across, and we look forward to working with you as the bill moves forward.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jemma Wallin: thank you. hi, jemma on behalf of the save the redwoods league in support.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Fearing: good morning, mr. chair and members. jennifer liz fearing on behalf of defenders of wildlife, i wanted to concur with rico's remarks in terms of interest in future versions of the bill including more resources for watersheds. but on behalf of humane society of the united states and other groups, i'm strongly heartened by the bill's inclusion, for the first time ever, government funding for the nearly 100 ngos around the state that do critical work to restore wildlife in the state.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 49, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Amy Letheridge: thank you. thanks so much. hello, amy jennifer letheridge from community nature connection and outdoor equity advocate in los angeles county, strongly supportive of the bill and especially enthusiastic about amendment three regarding community access.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carl Amida: thank you. amida on behalf of agua california in support. thank you, sir.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kim Shriner: Kim Shriner on behalf of the California Association of Resource Conservation Districts in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jamie Go: good morning, jamie amy go on behalf of the big sur land trust, as well as the bulsacheeka land trust, in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 23, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kula Koenig: Thank you very much. Good morning, Kula Koenig with the American Heart Association, American Stroke Association in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Arnold: arnold on behalf of the cities of oxnard and redondo beach, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jonathan Nelson: thank you, sir. chair and members, jonathan on behalf of the community water center clean water action and leadership council for justice and accountability in support in concept and look forward to engaging as the bill moves forward, particularly on the drinking water issues. thank you so much.>>thank you.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cindy Check: good morning, cindy jamie check with the association of california water agencies, in support. we look forward to working with the pro-temp on the languages as it evolves.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 25, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Paul Mason: Thanks. Morning, Chairman, members, Paul Mason with the Civic Forest Trust. We really appreciate the increased focus on climate preparedness in the bill, and we're in support of. Thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Ikerd: thank you. thank you, mr. chairman and members. jason with edelstein gilbert robson and smith, on behalf of the san francisco public utilities commission and the orange county water district, in support.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 88, 'end': 93, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Pablo Garza: Good morning, Pablo Garza with the Environmental Defense Fund in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Fenstermaker: thank you, sir. good morning, mr. chair, mark cindy fenstermaker on behalf of the california tahoe alliance in support. thanks for the language on some of the forest restoration money. also on behalf of the california urban forestry council in support of the language to add urban forestry funding.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 64, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jack Walko: thank you. thanks, sir. good morning, mr chair and members, walko on behalf of the imperial irrigation district and the sacramento area flood control agency in support of the flood provisions and the badly needed money for the salton sea.
[]
Tom Zuckerman: thank you very much. that salton sea money. 100 bucks. tom mark zuckerman, central water agency in support of the bill, particularly the levy provision.
[{'start': 55, 'end': 73, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Larry Doyle: Good morning, Mr. Chair and members. Larry Doyle on behalf of the Conference of California Bar Associations who are the sponsors of the bill. Really, temporary lodging facilities are documented as among the most frequent and frequently exploited venues for human trafficking. According to the National Human Trafficking Hotline organization, the name escapes me, but they are right up at the top of the list. And so while we understand some of the concerns that have been raised about this, the fact of the matter is that that is a place where human trafficking takes place. It's a place where you can reach out and touch the victims and give them the information, the tools they need to get out of this horrific situation. And therefore, we think it's essential that Some notice be provided within that part of the industry so that we can protect these victims. And we appreciate everything else that is being done. Efforts made to instruct, to teach hotel employees about how this works. And that all should be done, it is really, really important that we get to the victims of human trafficking. And so, we ask the Committee for its aye vote.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Caldwell: Hello, I'm John Caldwell on behalf of the California Hotel and Lodging Association. We're not going to oppose. We have some concerns with the bill, concerns we shared with the staff and the sponsor. But first members, just a little background regarding what's been said. Human trafficking is a world wide problem, and the hotel industry has been taking an active role in fighting it for years. In 2015, Bradley Miles, he's the CEO of Polaris, a group that Committee analysis identifies as a leading anti-human trafficking organization, wrote about the proactive steps to confront human trafficking that the hotel industry is taking on. Wyndham Hotel Group, which is Days Inn, Super 8, Howard Johnson, quote, deepened its partnership with Polaris in 2014. Over 10 years ago, in the late 2000s, Carlson, which is Radisson Country and Suites led the industry as one of the first major hospitality companies to speak out against modern slavery and sexual exploitation of children. Miles continues, Polaris develop to training curricula for Hyatt hotels and then training and now training 45,000 employees across the globe on human trafficking. Hilton, which is Embassy Suites, Hampton Inns, and Starwood, and Sheraton, and Weston, all tackling the issue. And in 2014 the American Hotel and Lodging Association Educational Institute partnered with End Child Prostitution and Trafficking, ECPAT to develop an online training program for hotel employees. It's a 30 minute course that provides hotel, and staff, and managers with the information they need to identify and respond to the crimes of human trafficking and commercial sexual exploitation of children. The training is free to all of the members of the California Hotel and Lodging Association. Last year, Ms. Garcia authored a bill to require mandatory training for hotel employees. We were working with her when the bill got held up on suspense. Earlier this year, we were contacted by Senator Toni Atkins about her interest in Ms. Garcia's mandatory training of hotel employees. We've been working with her. The result is SB 270, which we strongly support as does the leading anti-human trafficking group, Polaris. And we believe we've worked out some of the financial, fiscal problems that resulted in Ms. Garcia's bill being held up in suspense. So our concern with this bill is that while the sign that's being put up here, we think the sign, it'll do little to combat human trafficking. It causes a great reputational risk for hotels, motels, bed and breakfasts. I mean this is a notice that was designed, this is according to the statutes, this is a notice that was designed for adult bookstores, bus stations, truck stops, massage parlors. The notice, it's at the bottom of page two on your bill, it's obviously aimed at victims of human trafficking. But in the context of a hotel lobby, what it conveys is that there is human trafficking going on at this hotel. That's a devastating message for our customers. We're told that we can just say the state made us do it. The state made you put up the sign. Well, in other words, our argument is the state is now saying that human trafficking is going on at this hotel. That's hardly reassuring. Then there's the argument that every hotel will have it, so no one hotel will look bad. But that assumes people go to a lot of hotels. I mean, I kind of, our clients would like that a lot of people go to hotels, but that's not necessarily the case. And people from out of state will see the hotel they booked online. So we've talked to the author and sponsor about our concerns, and we prefer not to oppose efforts to fight human trafficking. It's important to us. So we've suggested different approaches that the sign be at the back of house, aimed at employees and subcontractors. Then we suggested that it be aimed at transient locations that do not have employees but we're willing to work with it. But as you can see, the industry is very involved in this and we think the best approach and as does Polaris, the best approach is training of employees. We're going for a mandatory bill on that, we're supporting a mandatory bill on that. And we believe this sign is not in any of the recommendations of the groups, and it will just cause reputational risk for our clients.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 403, 'end': 416, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 685, 'end': 699, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1762, 'end': 1768, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1948, 'end': 1959, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1986, 'end': 1992, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2262, 'end': 2268, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ryan Kingston: excuse me. mr. stone, members of the committee, ryan jonah kingston representing four regional apartment associations. the apartment association of orange county, southern cities, east bay, and north valley. 10 years ago, we successfully sponsored the enabling legislation that mr. calderon is now expanding on. so we don't have any demands of any state agency for the production, the distribution, collection of immigration status, should there be any, of any of our tenant or tenant applicants. what we didn't know at the time, in 2007, 10 years ago, is that the information could be collected by other agencies of our government. this is what this bill does, it is complimentary to what the existing law is, and we ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 20, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 48, 'end': 67, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 282, 'end': 290, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sean Bacon: bacon, with the california apartment association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Larry Doyle: Good morning, Mr. Chair and members. I 'm Larry Doyle on behalf of the Conference of California Bar associations. Mr Chau's opening statement pretty much covers all the bases. This is a bill about judicial efficiency or proper use of court resources, trying to provide a framework for the quick and effective resolution of discovery disputes without going through motions to compel, which drained court resources and the resources of the litigants. It also protects all the litigants, to ensure that they downstream are not deprived of any abilities through the use of the IDC process. So it's a win win on all parts, and with that, I'd like to request Committee's aye vote and make myself available for any questions.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 117, 'end': 121, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sevina Tucker: Good morning, Sevina Tucker Consumer Attorneys of California. Good morning, Sevina Tucker with the Consumer Attorneys of California, we support the bill in concept. We've been working with the author, the sponsor, and the Committee, and we will continue to work with them, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 76, 'end': 89, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jim Lights: Jim Lights on behalf of the California Airports Council. We represent the 32 commercial airports in the State. We wanted to thank the Committee for the very thoughtful amendments that give all airports financing flexibility for these facilities with reasonable accountability measures. We're in strong support.
[]
Gene Urban: Gene Urban representing Enterprise-
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cliff Costa: thank you, mr. chair and senators. costa on behalf of the california new car dealers association. california new car dealers association, as you know, my members sell both new and used vehicles. we have spent a lot of time over the last couple of years really trying to focus on helping us get more zero emission vehicles on the road. and what we're realizing is that people who need these cars the most, the people who are in disadvantaged communities, aren't coming and buying these cars. the problem is a variety of different reasons, but one of those big problems is the ability to purchase a new vehicle. new vehicles are substantially more expensive, used zero emission vehicles right now range from anywhere between $5,000 to $10,000. let me say that again, a new vehicle that's coming off of lease, so that would be a used vehicle, that's a zero emission vehicles anywhere between the price of 5 to $10,000 dollars, if you go on to one of our lots today. that is substantially more affordable for people who are low income. it's actually something that many of our members have on our lots, and the demand still is low. because what happens with new technology is people want the brand new technology. they want to go out and lease or purchase the new zero emission vehicle, but the used zero emission vehicle that's only three years old is still significantly technologically important and much more cleaner for our state. we are in strong support of these program for two reasons. one, it really models after a cash for clunkers program that we saw the federal government used during the great recession. we saw it used substantially that helped generate new car sales. but we think that this is needed for the used car area. the second issue is that we think this helps modernize our fleet, and this will help bring people who can't afford these vehicles to come in. so with that, mr. chair, we are in strong support.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katherine Stainken: Great, thanks. Good morning, almost good afternoon. I'm pleased to be here today. My name is Katherine Stainken, and I'm the policy director with Plug in America, and we are nonprofit organization who represents the voice of the electric car driver of both new cars and used cars. And I think the Senator already said a lot about this bill. We're very much in favor of it. And Cliff said a lot, too, but I'd like to just emphasize a couple of things. That first of all, California is unique from all other states so far in that we have the most electric vehicles on the road so far. Thus, giving us a new car market but also this used car market. California is doing great things to promote the purchase of a new car, but yet we can't ignore this purchase of the used cars. Given that these cars are mainly less than three years terms, there's a lot of turn over here, and so we need to be doing more to address this huge car market. So I'd just also like to say that the sales tax exemption is a really easy policy for consumers to understand but is also even easier for the dealers to understand. And finally, we are in support of this bill to help California achieve the goals of Charge Ahead California, which has the goal of putting 1 million ZEVs on the road by 2023. And as the Senator mentioned, increasing the access to ZEVs for not only the disadvantaged and the low income and the moderate income communities. And these types of communities are more likely to purchase a used vehicle than a new one. So in summary, we support this bill.
[{'start': 93, 'end': 111, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 377, 'end': 382, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lee Adams: sure, lee jonah adams representing rcrc, rural country representatives of california. i'm also a sierra county supervisor. my home board supports this 5-0, so thank you.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ron Haymes: and i'm haymes from alpine county, supervisor. and our board also supports this and we really do expect this to be a really good thing for our county.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Smith: Mr. Chairman, members, Paul Smith with RCRC, we are the sponsor in strong support. Thank you Senator Nielsen and appreciate all the work that the Committee has done on this bill.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 101, 'end': 108, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dorothy Johnson : good afternoon, dorothy lee johnson on behalf of csac in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 35, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lester Snow: thank you. my name is lester dorothy snow. i'm representing the water foundation, which is a non profit for the sole purpose of promoting sustainable water management. my pleasure to appear with senator hertzberg today in full support of sb 231. as bob was speaking, i was reminded, i've testified in this building since 1995. i don't think i've ever been asked to follow somebody who gave such a thorough explanation of the bill. so i'm the color commentary person at this moment. this may be an odd thing to say, but this bill addresses an issue that is simultaneously critically important and essential to infrastructure investment and at the same time no big deal. it's clarifying a definition that water's actually water. storm water, i mean, first in terms of storm water it's a critical and essential waste water and water supply service. california cities and counties are facing significant investment to assure that storm water does not pollute our waterways or coastal oceans and now, in light of a five year drought that was devastating and highlights storm water as a critical wat!er supply and part of our longterm reliability. the second point, in terms of not being a big deal, this simply clarifies that storm water is water, which seems pretty straightforward. it's managed. its management clearly falls under the definition of sewer, and should follow the rate setting and disclosure provisions and processes the same as water and wastewater under current law. no reason to do otherwise. this bill, and its clarity on the definition, helps advance necessary infrastructure investment, critical infrastructure investment while maintaining critical accountability, transparency and right pair of protections. i urge an aye vote.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 203, 'end': 212, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 249, 'end': 252, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Beth Alasso: Mr. Chair and members, Beth Alasso on behalf of the Inland Empire Utilities Agency, in strong support, thank you. Sorry we were late with the letter.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeremy Smith: thank you, mr. chair and members of the committee. jeremy here on behalf of the state building and construction trades council. we're also in support.
[{'start': 51, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Benjamin Palmer: Thank you, Benjamin Palmer on behalf of Contra Costa County, in support. Thank you so much.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: Afternoon, Kyle Jones with Sierra Club California, in support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dorothy Jones: good morning. jones with the california state association of counties, pleased to support. thank you so much.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : good lester morning. lester larissa lester cespedes lester here lester on lester behalf lester of lester the lester city lester of lester industry, lester in lester support.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 11, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 21, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 28, 'end': 35, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 36, 'end': 42, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 43, 'end': 51, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 52, 'end': 58, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 64, 'end': 70, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 74, 'end': 80, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 88, 'end': 94, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 98, 'end': 104, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 109, 'end': 115, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 121, 'end': 127, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 131, 'end': 137, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 148, 'end': 154, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 158, 'end': 164, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Monica Miller: mr. chair and members, monica on behalf of the santa clara valley water district, in support. thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Wolfe: Only if I can make a direct connection. Here, I can't. So Mr. Chairman, Members, good morning again. David Wolfe for the Howard Jarvis Taxpayers Association in opposition to SB 231. Members, let me make it clear here, first of all, we're not defining the definition of water in this bill, we're defining the definition of sewer. We don't have any problem with the definition of water and in fact, as Senator Hertzberg mentioned, we were okay with AB 2403 the bill that defined water. We do recognize there is a water problem here in the State of California. And we want to make it easier for this legislature and local governments to use storm water as a legitimate water source, as long as it goes back to projects that benefit actual people. Not for environmental purposes where we're pumping it out into the ocean, but for potable water for drinking water, for agriculture, for those things. That is a legitimate use of water and that should not require an additional vote of the people beyond the protest process that's currently in place under Prop 218. We're okay with that, so the issue is not water, and it's not water storage, but it is sewer. Members, it's not the job of the legislature to clarify judicial intent if you happen to amend statute in a way that violates the California constitution, which is precisely what this bill does. The Salinas Court, in it's decision, and it is an appellate court and that is a settled decision made a very clear distinction between sewer and drainage systems. The bill, SB 231, now states in the intent language, that this Salinas Court was fundamentally wrong in refusing to use the statutory definition of the term sewer system, as was located in Section 230.5 of the Public Utilities Code. It further creates legislative intent language to state that this definition should now be used within the Prop 218, Omnibus Implementation Act, the legislative language that implemented Prop 218, but the definition of public utility used in the PC code 230.5 does not include public agencies, only PC regulated private companies, and it's very important because both the Omnibus Act and the Salinas Case only apply to public agencies and not private companies. So the whole justification for the bill, at least using that statute, just falls completely flat on its face right there. Senator Hertzberg brought up litigation, and there would be a mess of litigation, Members, if this bill moved forward because, again, we are dealing with settled appellate court law here. Members, attorney's can now file lawsuits against local governments and municipalities that are class action in nature. So should SB 231 be signed into law and be adopted by local agencies if there is a precedent setting victory in validating this bill, should it become law, and numerous cities have signed onto this, and started collecting fees and assessments. It's going to be very, very bad I think for local governments up and down the state. We certainly want local governments to avoid that, as should the legislature. Members, listen, Prop 218, when it was passed in 1996, was the right to vote on taxes, and that said, for every single property related fee and assessment other than water, sewer, and garbage that does need a vote of the people. The Salinas Court did provide a clear distinction between water and storm water and said storm water and urban runoff management does, in fact, need a vote of the people per a mail ballot election. We see no need to undermine the vote of the people and undermine the Salnas decision and cities are concerned with regards to this bill. There's a number of cities that have opposed the bill, and the league of cities has no position on this bill, perhaps, because they're also concerned. The cities of Glendora, Rosemead, Duarte West Covina, Diamond Bar, Claremont, and Sierra Madre are all opposed to the bill. Some of those are not in the analysis, but I understand that those cities have come out in opposition. So for all those reasons previously stated, and the ambiguity that these sets up in statute, I ask for a no vote.
[{'start': 101, 'end': 112, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 408, 'end': 417, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2136, 'end': 2143, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2336, 'end': 2345, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dan Medina: yes, my name is dan  medina, and i'm a city councilman for the city of gardena and we're included in the list of cities from the city of gardena that are opposed to it, as well.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 26, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rick Dehear: My name's Rick Dehear. I am a consultant for a number of cities in Los Angeles County on storm water.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Casey O'Conner: Sure, good morning Mr. Chair, Members of the Committee. My name is Casey O'Conner, I'm the Deputy Legs Director for BOE member Fiona Ma. We'll keep this brief. SB 375 allows the FTB to forgive the late filing, early payment penalty for historically compliant tax payers. And the board member thanks Senator Bradford for authoring this bill to create equity with the Federal Tax Program and strongly urges your aye vote. Thank you for your time.
[{'start': 67, 'end': 81, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 127, 'end': 135, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 307, 'end': 315, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Haleh Naimi: good morning mr. chairmen and members of the committee. my name is haleh dan naimi, i'm with the law firm of advocate solutions in beverly hills here to support the bill in its entirety of the statute. thank you so much.
[{'start': 67, 'end': 82, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Fox: Jason Fox with the California Society of Certified Public Accountants. Also in support and echo the comments of the witnesses, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Samantha Corbin: samantha on behalf of the california tax reform association, unfortunately in opposition to this measure much as we were the identical bill last year. which i would point out was passed out of this committee with amendments, some of those amendments would address some of our concerns with the bill. specifically this measure has no income limit so it would afford the same benefit to all veterans, regardless of how much money they do make, in addition to the numerous benefits that are already afforded to taxpayers under california law and the state constitution. just believe this bill to be unnecessary, particularly in addressing the issues that the author so eloquently stated in terms of housing for veterans at a $70 million price tag. certainly this funding could be better applied actually making room in veterans' homes for more veterans to have housing, rather than keeping people who make any amount of income in their homes. for those reasons we oppose the bill, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joshua Shaw: mr chair, my name is shaw with the california transit association, representing all of your local and regional public transportation systems. up until this year with the bill that is pending, based on the good work of the author and many of you here in the room, the state has not been much of a partner in funding local transit, and in fact, we've gone to the ballot many times. about a third of funding for public transportation in california comes from local ballot measures. mr. zane will tell you the real story of how hard that is to do, and how it is extremely unlikely that we are successful, although from time to time, it happens. what we really need is this measure to lower the local vote. still respecting the super majority but giving us a fighting chance. too many of our measures come really close to the two-thirds. in fact, over 60%, but not quite there, and we really need that additional boost. even after the state passes senate bill 1 to provide new funding for transit, we will continue to push at the local level and match the state's funds. so we urge your support, thank you.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 483, 'end': 487, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Denny Zane: Thank you very much. I'm Denny Zane, I'm the Executive Director of Move LA. Move LA is the organization which initiated the coalition building, which was critical to the efforts in the County of Los Angeles, LA Metro to go to the ballot. Ultimately passed measure R and later measure M. I must tell you the extraordinary circumstances, however, that were required for that level of success. We were in an exceptional crisis in Los Angeles County, and it was being talked about everywhere. Everybody was talking about the gridlock we were facing, and yet we have 3 million more people expected in the next 30 years in our county, and LA Metro had announced, they literally had no money creating new capacity in the next 30 years. Clearly, we were facing not only environmental but broad social and economic decline, perhaps third-world status if we didn't find a way to move forward. And the barrier for us moving forward would be the extraordinary hurdle of getting two-thirds vote on a measure to invest in transportation. We were able to, because of the crisis we were in, pull together coalitions of over 300 organizations, business, labor, environmental groups, social justice, faith, seniors, disabled community, etc. It took a mammoth effort to get that kind of coalition together in a crisis for Los Angeles County to succeed. I really think that this Committee needs to appreciate that we should not force our communities to a crisis state before they can actually address their genuine needs. It's also my view that there are some improvements that can be made In this legislation because we have other crises that I believe should be addressed in a similar way in addition to transportation. Affordable housing and water, clearly qualify for the kind of crisis level concerns that our transportation systems have. And I would commend to you also that we may need to broaden from city and county, the applicability of the measures of special districts. I'm not certain that transportation commissions, in fact, will be included unless you broaden at the special districts. So, thank you very much. I commend to you, your support for this measure and hope you consider my suggestions.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eddie Bernachy: Mr. Chairman, members, Eddie Bernachy on behalf of United Contractors and the United Electrical Contractors Association in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Flocks: mr. chair and members. sarah haleh flocks, california labor federation in support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 34, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jeremy Smith: Thank you Mr. Chairman,members of the Committee. Jeremy Smith here on behalf of the State Building&Construction Trades Council of California, also in support.
[{'start': 49, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Lee: Good morning, Chris Lee on behalf if the California State Association of Counties, in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Wolfe: you have three minutes. mr chairman, thank you very much, members. good morning, david sarah wolfe with the howard jarviss taxpayers association, in opposition to sca 6. members, in the words of ronald reagan, there you go again. not only are we considering a permanent $5 billion gas in car tax, averaging $300 for an average middle class family, but that's clearly not enough. members, this bill exposes the true agenda here in sacramento. you will not stop with this gas tax, and you must go after prop 13. when is enough, enough? turning to the bill, members, a super majority threshold has always been in place for a wide variety of different tax increases, including at the federal level as the committee analysis notes. a two-thirds vote is important because individual taxpayers will have to pay these taxes for decades, after local governmental officials authorize them for the ballot. you know, they're going to be paying these on property tax bills, in the case of a parcel tax, which is included in special taxes, for 30 to 40 years. so, it is important to have that higher threshold. there are a number of exactions that are included within the definition of special tax, including sales taxes and parcel taxes. right now, numerous municipalities in the state of california have a 10% sales tax rate, and we find it hard to justify increased regressive taxation at this time. further, it's worth noting with reference to the good members from orange county on this committee, that orange county has passed a sales tax twice, with a two-thirds vote. so, it is possible to pass measures with a two-thirds vote, if local governments make the case for it. i mean, if it happened in orange county, it can truly happen anywhere. so, we just don't see any reason to justify prop 13's two-thirds threshold which has been in place for 37 years. and members, let me just close and mr chairman, if i might really briefly. let me just tell the story of prop 13 really fast because, i think it's really important. especially for younger members and members of the public who maybe weren't around back in 1978. there were individuals on fixed incomes, primarily seniors, right? who were getting kicked out of their homes, getting kicked out of their properties, despite having paid off their mortgages, because they couldn't afford the property tax. that was the genesis of prop 13, that's what lead to it. even with prop 13 today, we're 19th in combined state and local per capita property taxes, according to the tax foundation. so it's not as if prop 13 is ruconius and unfair when it comes to property taxes. ask for a no vote, keep the threshold.
[{'start': 81, 'end': 98, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 195, 'end': 208, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Therese Twomey: Therese Twomey with the California Tax Payers Association. While we appreciate the need for additional infrastructure for transportation, especially to open our trade quarters, as well as to provide relief for commuters. We see that there are a lot of moving pieces. This morning, the Committee talked about SB 1 that is currently pending, as well as SB 337 by Senator Bates and Senator Nguyen. With these moving pieces with think its prudent to hold on authorizing locals to raise additional taxes at this time. Once the moving pieces on the funding is more set, we thinks it's a better time, more appropriate time to take a look at the entire funding for transportation. We urge no vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 369, 'end': 374, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 387, 'end': 393, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jason Ryan: Thank you. Good morning Mr. Chair and Members, Jason Ryan, League of California Cities. The good Senator next to me, he certainly does not need a lifeline, he did an excellent job describing the measure. At the League of Cities, we have taken the issue around housing affordability and supply very seriously. We listened very closely last year to the Governor and a variety of legislators who had bills pending in this Legislature seeking to streamline the process. And over the fall, we wanted to come up with a measure that would streamline that process without undermining environmental review and public engagement. Those are two very important things to us, and to all of you in this building. So we thought long and hard, and thankfully, Senator Roth, we teamed up with him to come up with SB 540. We believe that this measure's going to meaningfully streamline the process and not take away from that public engagement or the environmental review process. Really, what we're trying to do here is set up a system where cities can opt into the program and they can be very aggressive and streamline the process by doing that up front in the environmental review. Once that environmental review full SEQA, full specific plan, the, cities going to outline all the mitigation measures. They're going to provide the development community with a blueprint to build housing in their community, where they should build it, what types of houses they should build. It's basically a specific plan and a housing element on steroids. And once they identify all of those areas, the door is going to be open for development. And for five years, there will be no additional environmental review unless we uncover something that we didn't see when we started the process. If somebody moves dirt, finds an earthquake fault or something, we'll go back and we'll fix it and then continue on the process, but this is an attempt to meet folks in the middle. It's not an attempt to just hand out permits ministerial without the environmental review and it's a little bit of a departure from status quo, but we believe we're preserving those key elements and we ask for your support.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 752, 'end': 756, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
David Jones: mr. chairman, jones on behalf of the cities of santa rosa, murietta, and the marin county council of council members and mayors.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Harmon: richard david harmon on behalf of the cities of oakland, walnut creek, hesperia, and pismo beach in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anya Lawler: Good morning, Anya Lawler, on behalf of the Western Center on Law and Poverty and the California Rural Legal Assistance Foundation. We don't have a position on the bill yet, but we're working really closely with the author and the sponsor. Appreciate the amendments that have been taken so far we're really hoping to get there, to come up with the bill that works for cities and counties and also produces affordable housing for our clients. Thanks.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: Kyle Jones with Sierra Club California also in the same place as Western Center Law and Poverty. We've been working closely with the author and the sponsor and we look forward to a continuing conversation over spring break. Thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Keith Dunn: Yeah, Keith Dunn here for the Sonoma County Regional Protection Agency as well as the California Apartment Association. And I would never pretend to try and fill Suzanne's shoes. I will be here to answer any questions that you may have on behalf of the Sonoma County Agency, but also on behalf of the California Apartments Association. I just want to say that this is a real opportunity to allow owners and renter to get into the conservation marker, to upgrade their facilities. So that they can save water and contribute to our effort on the State to make the most of the limited water supplies that we have. It's an important program, it's a pay as you save program that is going to empower not only owners. But also renters to reduce their utility bill while conserving water and helping our state as whole prepare for the next drought which we all know is just around the next corner. Ask for your support, and if you have questions I'd be happy to answer them.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 162, 'end': 169, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Valerie Nera: Hi, Valerie Nera for the California Chamber of Commerce. We're happy to be here in support of SB 564 which allows the local agencies to issue bonds for the purchase and distribution of drought of tolerant landscapes. Upgrades to hot water systems, gray water systems, high efficiency, shower heads and toilets in their own jurisdictions as opposed to a state wide, their jurisdictions I have the local control here. SB 564 also allows the property on tenants to repay these fixture upgrades over time through their bills which is through the utility bills which is a nice way to handle it. We believe that this bill is going to help tenants and property owners save water on their water bills. And at the same time, eliminate wasting any water which is precious. And this is a voluntary program to meet conservation standards, that will be tightening according to the Water Board. And it's a sustainable model for investment in high efficiency water. We ask for your support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: good morning, vice chair and members of the committee. kyle richard jones with sierra club california in strong support of sb 564. this recent cycle of drought and then one really white years exactly what climate models project, the shift to extremes. and in order to do so, we need to increase regional self resilience across the state of california. the most cause effective way to do that is through conservation and efficiency measures. the sb 564 will use a proven model in the energy world with some modifications to get right at conservation and efficiency. and most of these measures will actually provide a benefit in the sense that they promote a cost savings over the long run. for example, turf replacement, that means less water has to be delivered. more efficient shower head is the same way. and because the newer appliances require less maintenance it's a [inaudible] in strong support of this bill today and urge your aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 55, 'end': 73, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jamie Go: good morning, jamie kyle go on behalf of the sonoma county water agency.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 24, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Denise Pinkston: We welcome you to Sacramento. Thank you so much for taking the time. Thank you for having me. I'm Denise Pinkston, I'm a partner in a company in San Francisco, the chair of the Bay Area Council Housing Committee. We were the sponsor of SB 1069 with Senator Wieckowski. And essentially, this bill are just technical cleanups to clarify the langauge that was in the legislation when it was adopted.
[{'start': 98, 'end': 113, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 257, 'end': 267, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Johan Klehs: johan, representing leading age california, an organization of 600 senior affordable housing developers and owners. we support this measure it goes a long way in sort of expanding the supply of housing for seniors.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Garga: thank you mr. chairman and members, my name is jessica with the california association of sanitation agencies. here as a tweener not opposed but we did raise some initial concerns with the author and his staff. we've been working with him to have them addressed. the amendment taken today we certainly appreciate and that does alleviate one of our major concerns and we'll continue working with senator wieckowski and his staff to alleviate our concerns that remain and i think we're really close. we're looking forward to getting to a neutral position.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 403, 'end': 413, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jessica Bartholow: Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Members of the Committee. Jessica Bartholow with the Western Center on Law and Poverty. We had intended for a CalWORKS former recipient who has exited the program and on to employment to attend today to talk about her experience as a survivor of domestic abuse and the CalWORKS program. She wasn't able to attend due to sick children. So what I wanted to do was share with you her story and the story of Velma M and Deborah G, who are people who Western Center on Law and Poverty has represented here in the building but also in the court of law on this specific issue. Velma M. was a CalWORKS recipient who herself was not eligible for benefits. Because she was not eligible for benefits, even though she was a survivor of very significant domestic abuse, her family was not eligible for the domestic violence waiver of certain rules that kept her family in poverty and increased the likelihood of abuse to continue. And with Deborah G., she actually became a victim of abuse, and later a survivor of abuse, like many women do, which is upon pregnancy or after the birth of a child. It's through this work, through domestic violence CalWORKS advocacy, that I've Learned that one of the most dangerous places for a woman to experience abuse is when she becomes pregnant or after the birth of her child. And in this case, she experienced the abuse in the hospital, following the birth of her child, while she was holding her child. In her case, she would have benefited from a waiver of the face-to-face interview requirement in the program. But because she was not participating in welfare to work, having a young infant, she was not able to secure that waiver, wasnt even offered that waiver. These are examples of the types of waiver support that we can give victims of abuse in the CalWORKS program. We know now from the new assessment tool that we've implemented, through CalWORKS, that there are many, many CalWORKS recipients who are experiencing domestic abuse. This proposal is essential to help make sure that we are establishing protection for these families, that they can seek services through the CalWORKS programs, to remain safe and to not be discouraged by rules that are unfair to them simply because they are victims of abuse. We're really grateful to the Chairwoman for bringing forward the bill and very honored to sponsor it, thank you.
[{'start': 63, 'end': 80, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 441, 'end': 448, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 607, 'end': 615, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 964, 'end': 974, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Krista Niemczyk: Good afternoon, Krista Niemczyk with the California Partnership to End Domestic Violence. We are so honored to be able to co-sponsor this bill, as Jess has stated, and the Chairwoman. Survivors of domestic violence rely on CalWORKS everyday to provide a bridge while they are able to establish a life free from violence. For survivors currently experiencing abuse, one of the primary reasons that they stay in an abusive relationship or return after trying to leave is because of economic concerns. Survivors too often are faced with the decision of staying in a violent and abusive relationship, or ending up homeless, or in a new unsafe environment. And CalWORKS is that bridge that helps so many survivors. Across the state, there are over 100 domestic violence shelter-based programs that every day, in California, serve over 5,000 adults and children. Many of whom rely on CalWORKS to help provide that needed economic stability as they establish their safety. So this is a step that I think is really in line with the long standing goals of the family of violence option and of this Legislature, and we are really pleased to be taking that step to make sure that all survivors, regardless of where they're living in this state, are able to receive the waivers that they need. Really focused in on what helps to establish their safety rather than what's tied to welfare work requirements. So we're pleased to co-sponsor the bill and urge your support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 147, 'end': 151, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kevin Aslanian: good afternoon, my name is kevin, i'm with the coalition of california welfare rights organizations. the current federal law provides for all victims of domestic violence will the protection of the family violence waiver. currently in california, that is limited to certain group of people, it doesn't apply to everyone. this basically, this bill will protect all victims of domestic violence. i would urge an aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tiffany Whiten : Tiffany Whiten with the Service Employees International Union in support and thank the author for bringing the measure forward.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Erica Hickey: hi, again my name's erica jonah hickey. and just to support what donovan and assemblywoman rubio have said, really this is only adding structure to the trainings that are going to be in place. so really giving the resource families the support as i can recall the continuum of care reform has been implemented. so really our idea here or our main goal i should say, is permanency for the foster youth. and with that being said adding structure to these eight hours of training, just eight. and really making sure that there supporting the youth is extremely important and it's very crucial. and so to do that, i support this bill and i hope that you do. so i ask for your support. thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 65, 'end': 72, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 91, 'end': 96, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Danielle Mole: danielle erica mole, california line of child and family services in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Steven Choi: i'm sure dr. arambula, also you quote, and you have to take a continuing education, to renew licence it will be similar to that concept- though. okay, with that why don't you call the role. internal motion has been made by dr. arambula, and second by choi. and okay, we have additional member, do you have any questions on this item number 4, we are discussing right now? no.>>no, okay. we are set to vote. bill 507 motion has been made and seconded resources family, so to preapproval training and annual training. to go to next committee, will be what? appropriations committee? appropriations. motion is do pass to appropriations. motion has passed. no, no, not call though. i have to call the roll.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 21, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 227, 'end': 235, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 251, 'end': 255, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tanya Kimmet: So my name is Tanya Kimmet and I am a midwife, and epidemiologist, and also the author of a first five funded home visitation program for pregnant women, that over the last three years has been shown to reduce the number of- African American infant deaths in Sacramento County. And I am here today as a member of Black Women for Wellness. And why we're in support of this bill, many of what you've already said, but just strengthening the outcomes for both pregnant women and their infants, improve educational and economic opportunities, and increase the opportunities for families to move out of poverty. Home visitation has a really robust evidence, research evidence, behind it and beginning in the prenatal period, which is my purview, pregnant women who received home visitation have better outcomes, and also has a positive impact on breastfeeding, immunization rate, infant hospitalization, maternal depression, and stress. It also has been proven to improve children's school readiness. And all studies have shown positive impacts on their cognitive development and behavior, higher grade point averages, and achievement scores at age nine. Now, you know epidemiologists love immunizations, and so I just, as an epidemiologist, I do want to point out that home visitation is one thing that can improve CalWORKS immunization rates. Research also shows that children in deep poverty are more likely to go immunize than other children. Not due to parental choice, but, because children who live in deep poverty experience multiple depredations of their basic needs. And among them medical attention. And we know that, the deep public health implications of children going unvaccinated. And, currently, according to California Department of Social Service, there are been over 30,000 penalties levy to families who have not proven that their children are immunized, and having a home visitor will help with increasing this rate. And I would also say that I have heard that there has been some opposition. Some fear that the participants would not recognize that this program is voluntary and having spent 20 years in this community working with many of the the families that would be participants in this program, that has not been our problem. If you think about the comprehensive perinatal services program, or birth and beyond, or many first five programs we actually struggle with, getting people to these good programs. And so, I recognize that concern is real, but is not really something that we would worry about. Thank you. Sorry, if I went over it. Thank you for your time.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Bartholow: Thank you, Madame Chair and Members of the Committee. Jessica Bartholow, Western Center on Law and Poverty and we are proud co-sponsor with Black Women for Wellness and Children's Defense Fund California. Thank you. Urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 54, 'end': 71, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lydia Bourne: lydia danielle bourne representing american academy of pediatrics, california division. pediatricians certainly understand the need to have home visitors and are in strong support. as a former public health nurse, i can attest to the fact that women are very welcoming for you to come in and assist them, es pecially with a brand new baby. so we are in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tiffany Wrighton: tiffany lydia wrighton with the service employees international union in support and would like to thank the author for bringing the bill forward. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer DeLuggage: good afternoon. my name is jennifer tiffany deluggage. i'm a registered nurse with a certificate in public health and a lactation counselor. the following statement is on behalf of these organizations: a voice for choice advocacy, educate advocate, million mamas movement, vile, and autism one.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Denise Mendez: hi my name is mendez. i am actually a caseworker for calworks. i was an intake caseworker for clients who needed to come in and apply for benefits. during this time clients are an open book. we have to get their finances, their health records. we need information of every part of their life in order to make their case. with this language in this bill, it will frighten them to feel non-compliance means no benefits. so, as far as the languages that i've read, it doesn't seem as though there is going to be an area to where the client can opt out or information to let them know that this is voluntary. i'm not sure if anybody has ever had a home visit here, but it's pretty intimidating for someone to come into your home and to sit and talk to you about your parenting or what you need. it feels as though you're not doing a good job at the worst time of your life. so i do oppose this bill in the wording.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gabriel Silva: Hello my name is Gabriel Silva. I'm here to tell you as a former CalWORKS recipient that AB 992 is intrusive and intimidating. This bill will allow our families to be subject to evidence based research judgements. This is an attack on personal and parental rights. I have experienced these programs first hand, and I've had to jump through numerous hurdles. Every aspect of my life was an open book. I've had to constantly report changes. I have attended job programs, and work for my benefits through welfare to work. I assure you there is no lack of hurdles, and no lack of stress. When I was on CalWORKS I feared any home visits and I felt very uncomfortable having a stranger in my home. I feared doing anything that might cost me the benefits of my family depended on. Even when they said it was optional, I have an immense fear of declining these optional services. The last thing we need is to have mandatory home visits with a certified social worker and or nurse practitioner. It's on thing to hear about these programs and another to live them. There are many aspects of the current programs that need to be addressed to make them more efficient and helpful to success, for the success of CalWORKS recipients. I strongly oppose AB 992 due to invasion of privacy and fear this bill creates especially in relation to SB 18. There are many other aspects of these services that need to be addressed for improvement. I want you to vote no on AB 992. Section three says home visiting services shall not include mandatory random unannounced visits, or visits by any personnel that do not meet the qualifications consistent with paragraph two, which refers to certified nurse practitioners or social workers. So that to me says that if they are survive, mandatory, random, unannounced are going to be happening, so I want you to vote no.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Aslanian: Kevin Aslanian  in Coalition of California Welfare Rights Organizations, strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Morgan Carvajal: good afternoon. good afternoon chair and members, since the bill has been moved and seconded, i will try to be brief. morgan with the hernandez strategy group on behalf of the california continuing care residents association, calcra for short. sb 713 is a very straightforward bill that strengthens an existing dispute process by doing two things. one, requiring that the department, or requiring that the provider does a assessment of the resident prior to an involuntary transfer and two, if that transfer is disputed, allowing the department to consider that assessment that the provider has done as part of their review. this is an important bill for consumer protection within the ccrcs for ensuring that residents who do dispute an involuntary transfer have a good thorough and fair review of their dispute. i'd like to pass it to margaret griffin, who is a ccrc resident, but also the calcra president.
[{'start': 118, 'end': 124, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 837, 'end': 853, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Brandis: brandis a resident of university retirement community in davis and i strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Shoebower: Bill Shoebower, resident of Anniversary Retirement Community, Davis, and I support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 62, 'end': 67, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rose Perges: Rose Perges, a member of CALCRA, and a resident of Eskaton Village Carmichael, I strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joyce Gilbertson: i'm joyce jennifer gilbertson, i'm a resident eskaton village carmichael, and i strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cynthia Kay: dr. cynthia joyce kay, educational management. we need to take care of our senior citizens. i live at eskaton village and the more help we can give, the better.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dorothy Swank: i'm swank, i'm a resident of carmichael eskaton village, and i support the bill.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julia Ponte: Hello, my name is Julia Ponte, I'm a childcare provider and also health and safety peers training for childcare workers. I'm proud to support the AB 676 because every childcare worker deserves to obtain the skill and knowledge that they need to prevent injuries and stay healthy on the job. The training proposed in AB 676 will address some of the most common risks childcare providers face in their work. From toxic chemical, to illness, stress, and physical hazard. What's really remarkable about this bill is the approach to provide training through our peers. I know from teaching and learning the critical skill of childcare providers are uniquely required to understand and identify the risk in our work. For example, 95% of the childcare provider cites stress as a major concern of their work. Together we can lift up our sisters on the job and learn strangers to avoid such career ending conditions. These trainings approach also helped certify us to 105 hours of professional growth required to renew our child development permits. Thank you for considering the important legislation. I help enough continue to do the work we love, serving California's parents and childrens.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Beverly Yu: good afternoon, yu with udw afscme local 3930. as a co-sponsor of this bill, we strongly urge the committee to support this important measure to increase health and safety training opportunities for early educators. thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Young: Madam Chair, Michael Young on behalf of the California Labor Federation. Also here in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susan Little: madam chair, susan cynthia little with the environmental working group also in support.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Natasha Finister: Good afternoon. My name is Natasha Finister and I'm a child care provider and a proud member of SEIU Local 99. I am here to show my strong support of AB 676, the Childcare Stability and Health Safety Act.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shirley Amos: Good afternoon, my name is Shirley Amos, I'm a daycare provider and I'm in local 521 and also I'm a strong supporter. Thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Leticia Ortiz: My name is Leticia Ortiz, provider for 10 years, member of SEIU local 521. 676- Do you speak in Spanish?
[{'start': 11, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tonya Miller: hello my name is tonya susan miller and i am a child care provider from los angeles california, i'm representing a member of seiu local 99 and i'm in full support of ab 676, the childcare stability health and safety act. thank you.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Keisha Nzewi: Hi, my name is Keisha Nzewi. I'm from the California Childcare Resource and Referral Network, and we don't have a position on this bill, but we just want to let everyone know that we have some concerns with it, and we look forward to looking at the amendments and continuing to work with the sponsors and the author to some conclusion. Thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Herald: madam chair, mike tonya herald with the western center on law on poverty. apologies to you madam chair and mr. arambula, dr. arambula, who heard us in committee last week on this very same subject. but we heard almost an hour of testimony from ssi recipients, talking about the difficulties that they are having making ends meet. this is the fourth year i think now, i'm looking at assemblymember thurmond, because he's been involved with many of these efforts, where we've been trying to get these grants restored. we had $77 cut and mr. kalra i think, in fact, made all the important points that you need to hear. what we have to have though is a commitment from the legislature to push this issue and make it a priority the same way we did with the maximum family grant.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 111, 'end': 119, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 125, 'end': 133, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 397, 'end': 405, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 539, 'end': 544, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Fred Main: madam chair, members of the committee. frede on behalf of cal pace the statewide association for the programs for all inclusive care for the elderly.  they provide integrated healthcare and long term supports and services for the frailest seniors who are all on medical. but order to live in the community they have to have rent and they have to be able to provide food, and the ssi increase will allow them to do that so that we can provide the health care and supports, and services for this very important population. we're in strong support of the bill.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 44, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Andrew Shane: Madam Chair, members, Andrew Shane from the California Association of Food Banks. Very quickly, that the food banks in all of your districts, every month, are helping sustain this population. We're not even built for that, but we're stepping in because we have to, so we appreciate your support for this bill.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stephen Knight: stephen mike knight. alameda county community food bank. thank you for your support for this important bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tessa Navarez: Tessa Navarez with the American Civil Liberties Union of California in support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christina Gallagher: christina stephen gallagher on behalf of the jewish public affairs committee and the jewish family services of los angeles in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Gonzales: Rebecca Gonzales, National Association of Social Workers, California chapter, in support
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert Copeland: robert christina copeland i belong to ... a disability rights group, shock a homeless rights group and ... ]which is a disability, developmentally disabled group here in sacramento. we all support this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carly Finkle: carly robert finkle with the food bank of contra costa and solano, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Aslanian: Kevin Aslanian, Coalition of California Welfare Rights Organizations, strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Palmer: Sarah Palmer DeFrank, California, wait, what am I up here for? California Hunger Action Coalition, strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Samantha Corbett: samantha carly corbett from corbett and kaiser on behalf of two organizations, the electronic frontier foundation, a nonprofit organization dedicated to protecting digital rights, as well as common sense kids action, an organization that specifically focuses on helping families and children thrive in a world of media and technology. very strong support on behalf of both clients on behalf of this bill. thank you so much to the author. and we ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 28, 'end': 35, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tessa Navarez: Tessa Navarez on behalf of the American Civil Liberties Union of California in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susanna Kniffen: Susanna Kniffen with Children Now in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gail Johnson Vaughan: Gail Johnson Vaughan Families Now in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vanessa Hernandez: vanessa with california youth connection, we are proud to co-sponsor this and ask for your support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maria Cordier: I'm Maria Cordier, of Current Foster Youth actually. I'm 17, and I have the right to Internet access and there's no reason it shouldn't be provided to me.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Scudlan: John Scudlan with Children's Law Center of California, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gail Johnson Vaughan: johnson vaughan, families now, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Mole: Danielle Mole, California Lines of Child and Family Services, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erin Palacios: my name is erin samantha palacios, and i am from bay area legal aid. we are, just by a way of brief background, the largest provider of civil legal services for the poor in the san francisco bay area and we have offices in six counties. i am the coordinator of our youth justice program, and we specialize in that program in providing civil legal services to youth directly, particularly homeless, foster, and trafficked youth, so very vulnerable populations. i had come prepared to describe a little bit about the services related to ab 12, but it sounds from my listening in the cali that you guys are pretty well familiar with what those services entail. so i will just point out that what this bill does is work to close a revolving door between our homeless youth system and our foster youth system. we have, in california, over 11,000 unaccompanied homeless youth, which represents 31% of our nation's total. we have over 800 minor unaccompanied homeless youth. when that point in time count was done in january, there were over 600 of those youth who were minors were unsheltered on that night. those youth have a large number of life experiences that are the same as youth who are in foster care. abuse, abandonment, and neglect at very high rates. one of the things that ab 12, obviously, was aiming to prevent was homelessness, and aiming to prevent the poor outcomes that those youth face. this would allow a subset of those youth who do not come to the attention of the child welfare system until they are slightly older, perhaps in their 17th year, to become eligible for those services despite the fact that they didn't leap certain procedural hurdles before. specifically, it would allow youth who did not have a dispositional hearing yet to be eligible for ab 12. they were in foster care, they simply did not have that dispositional hearing. i just want to share two stories that i think illustrate the point of a couple of our clients. we represented a 17-year-old boy who was living alone in a youth shelter. his father died when he was in elementary school, his mother, a few years later, took her own life. for some time, he bounced between family members and tried to make ends meet. ultimately, his family was a combination of unwilling and unable to provide support for him, and he leaned on community partners and providers. that worked for a little while, and he tried to make ends meet. they reached out to the child welfare system several times, but he was not the classic candidate. he was not literally abused, he just had deceased parents, so it took some time to get that case into court and some advocacy. in the meantime, he left high school even though he was just a few credits shy and entered a ged program. he had decided he could not finish high school without that kind of support, and he then was ready to find his own apartment, and he applied for federal and state benefits. we were able to get him qualified just shy of his 18th birthday, and that young man, with that support, which was critical, which he almost did not receive, was able then to re-enroll in high school, which he graduated from, and he attended college starting that fall. another young man we represented is the opposite and less fortunate scenario who also came to the attention of child welfare services just before he turned 18. for reasons that i won't get into here, the child welfare agency delayed the hearings in his case, not for any fault of the youth, but it took till just after his 18th birthday for the dispositional hearing to come up. he was thus declared ineligible for extended foster care services and is now, based on the decision of the juvenile court and an appellate court, not eligible because he did not get formally declared a dependent and he remains unable to meet basic needs and living in a homeless shelter at this time. so i just would give my support for this bill and say that it makes a large difference in the lives of those youth who come to the attention of the services very late, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Angie Schwartz: hi, angie erin schwartz, with the alliance for children's rights, in support. we were one of the original sponsors of ab 12 and the subsequent legislation, and this bill just makes sure that those youth, that we've been trying to make sure have access to extended foster care, that there are technicalities in the law that are addressed, that don't prevent them from being able to access those provisions. in addition to what erin spoke of, making sure that youth who exit to guardianship or adoption, and that person then subsequently dies or ceases to support the youth. we had legislation a couple years ago to allow those youth to re-enter. this would just make it clear that they can re-enter, even if they are not receiving the aap or can get benefits on their 18th birthday as long they were otherwise eligible to receive. so it's those little technicalities that we've seen in our own cases have kept kids out and that the law was intended to protect and support, so this bill will address those issues. thank you for your support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 426, 'end': 430, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Susanna Kniffen: Susanna Kniffen with Children Now, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gail Johnson Vaughan: gail angie johnson vaughan, families now, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Mole: Danielle Mole, California Alliance of Child and Family Services in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maria Ramiu: maria, youth law center, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Bartholow: Thank you Madam Chair, Members of the Committee, Jessica Bartholow with the Western Center on Law and Poverty of in support and to sponsor.
[{'start': 49, 'end': 66, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Samuel Chu: thank you madam chair and committee members. samuel gail chu, i'm the national organizer for mazon, a jewish response to hunger, we're a co-sponsor and in support of the bill.
[{'start': 45, 'end': 60, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Howard: Brian Howard with California Federation of Teachers, we're in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cynthia Castillo: Cynthia Castillo with the faculty Association of California Community Colleges in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Asdan: asdan coalition california of welfare rights organization, co-sponsor the bill, strong support, thank you.
[]
Andrew Shane: andrew samuel shane, california association of food banks, in support, thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tracey Patterson: Tracey Patterson, California Food Policy Advocates, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Suzanne Inefin: Suzanne Inefin, ChildrenNow, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stephen Knight: Stephen Knight, Alameda County Community Food Bank, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Palmer: Sarah Palmer DeFrank, California Hunger Actions Coalition, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Carly Finkle: carly andrew finkle, food bank of contra costa and solano in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tara Alexanion: tara carly alexanion, university of california student association, co-sponsor and in full support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tucker Sprinkles: Tucker Sprinkles, student at UC Davis, full support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lionel McCory: Lionel McCory, Californians for SSI in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sue Tran: Sue Tran, Californians for SSI in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrea Shwartz: Andrea Shwartz, the Alliance for Children's Rights, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrew Shane: Thank you so much, Andrew Shane from the California Association of Food Banks. I have submitted some materials that you can see, Madame Chair and Mister Vice Chair, this bill is born very much out of the recent experience of the California Association of Food Banks, food banks across the state, the heroic efforts that it takes under current rules without the kind of planning and preparation this bill calls for. So I'm happy to answer additional questions but we thank you for your consideration.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Palmer: Okay. Hi, Sarah Palmer DeFrank, California Association of Food Banks and the California Hunger Action Coalition. Just to kind of bolster the other statements, this is a very important bill, it's protecting folks when they're the most vulnerable. We know the poverty data and some it are quite high, and some of the districts represented here, but I am going to skip to that last point where the bill improves the ability to respond during a disaster and I want to mention that I was at both the Lake Amador and Calavera Spires recently, and did quite a bit of outreach while I was there. These individuals are in shock, and really in need of the state, and the counties to be able to work together on both, a very dynamic but also an automatic response to disaster and although we really did do our best, I think we that we could do better and I think this bill could really help. So thank you for you're time.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 30, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jessica Bartholow: Thank you, Madam Chair members, Jessica Bartholow with the Western Center on Law & Poverty we're a sponsor in support.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stephen Knight: Hi, it's Stephen Knight, Alameda County Community Food Bank in support.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Asdan: kevin, coalition of california welfare rights organizations, strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carly Finkle: carly, the food bank of contra costa in solano, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brenda Dabney: My name is Brenda Dabney, I'm with the Children's Law Center of California. We represent over 33,000 children in foster care in the counties of Los Angeles, Sacramento, and Placer County. I want to thank Assembly Member Friedman today for offering this very important legislation, which will provide vital support for small, but very admirable population of youth. Minors in foster care who are actually attending college. A few years ago, California passed AB 12, which took a significant step towards bettering the outcomes for foster youths, by extending foster care to the age of 21. California created a system so that young adults in foster care including those in college have the help they need to gain independent living skills without worrying about being homeless, or hungry, or destitute. California created a placement option called a supervised independent living plan that allows a foster youth to reside in a college dorm without having to terminate his or her foster care case and lose out on these very significant benefits, supports and the services of extended foster care. While AB 12 has provided tremendous supports for our transition age clients, there is a gap in the current law. Since it's implementation in 2012, we've had a number of clients at the Children's Law Center who've been accepted to college and have started attending before they reach the age of 18. Thank you, born in late fall myself, I know the rigors of being on a college campus at the young age of 17. Our current legal construct does not specify a placement option for these kinds of youth to live in the campus dorms. And this ends up causing a lot of confusion and challenges for our minor foster youth in college. For instance, we have a client in Los Angeles right now who is an exceptional young man. At the age of 16, he was able to graduate high school and be accepted to Cal State Monterey Bay which is a few hours drive from his group home in Los Angeles. Once he finished high school, he was actually asked to leave his group home because of licensing problems. And he was moved into a homeless shelter. Due to the lack of legal guidance, his social worker recommended that the Court terminate jurisdiction over his case. But thanks to the advocacy of his court-appointed dependency attorney, the Court agreed to keep his case open. And today he's living in the dorms and attending school. Nonetheless, our client reports his financial aid is barely covering his schooling, and he's struggling to survive. Extended foster care benefits would greatly improve his situation if he was allowed to actually have an approved placement in the college dorms. I ask you today to please pass this important legislation. Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 220, 'end': 228, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Angie Schwartz: angie tara schwartz with the alliance for children's rights in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Suzanne Nathan: suzanne with children now in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Mole: Danielle Mole, California Alliance of Child and Family Services in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Wildman: Rebecca Wildman with the Youth Law Center in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Bartholow: thank you, madame chair and members of the committee, jessica with the western center on law and poverty. we are a co-sponsor of this bill. i sent you a lengthy letter about the statistics and research about high school education and college degree attainment. the impact that that has on a low income person exiting poverty. but what i really want to say in my comments today is why this bill inspires me. we've seen hopefully recently, the reports that are out just about two weeks ago about the extreme inequality. the places, the distance between where low income california children are growing up and wealthier california children are growing up. but one thing we all share in common, whether rich or poor is still, thank goodness here in our state, in our country, a hope that all of our children will attain a high school degree. this is something that every parent hopes for, every grandparent, every caretaker hopes for. it's something that every child, from the very early ages are told that they are to work towards. when somebody fails at doing so, and the failure at doing so leads them further into poverty, or keeps them in poverty. it can be really hard to help them come back to the table. when caseworkers, when family members come to them and say, hey, let's work on the high school degree. the first thing they here is how they failed and try get be on that to help them aspired to a high school degree perhaps a college degree can be difficult, because they see their failure in not achieving the degree. they see a bad situation in some cases that causes them to drop out of school. and so being able to talk to them about their current situation, they live in poverty. we know that the benefit amount is not enough to meet their basic needs, and we want to talk to you about that. we have some ideas for how to change that. that's a completely different approach at talking about achievement in higher ed and high school degrees. i come from a family where not every adult in my household received a high school degree. my father didn't received a middle school degree. and my sister drop out of school, not because she didn't see the importance of high school but because she had to pay the rent. my family need a help. so i, personally have been on the circumstance of trying to approach family members and friends about getting their high school degree. and we know that in the system that we have currently is not working to address the low participation on highschool degree achievement. i think this is a refreshing approach at it, and i think it's worth your vote today, thank you.
[{'start': 54, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Breanne Holland: Good afternoon, Madame Chair. My name is Breanne Holland, I am a Supervisor in Student Services for the CalWORKS Program at American River College. And I am also the President elect for the statewide CalWORKS Association. I am here in support of this bill the funding, the additional funding for the CalWORKS Programs of costs state would allow us to Institute more permanent stall members to assist with students making it through community college. A lot of them start in the developmental educations say it which is earning those GEDs in the high school degrees. And moving towards their associate and bachelor's degrees. With that, most of our CalWORKS programs across the state are staffed with temporary staffing or with student staffing. And in order to give the students the support that they need, we need to have more permanent counselors for academic advising. We need to have more job developers on site to help build those additional study sites and create those connections with our community. We need to have more staff on site to give adequate case management. EOPS is a great case management model that shows the success of students that are given great support from the college. And CalWORKS is another one where our students are the most vulnerable across the state. And we need to be able to give them the support they need with consistency.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Aslanian: kevin coalition of california welfare rights organizations, co-sponsoring the bill. this is a bill that would make education which leads to self sufficiency, and it uses positive incentives rather than negative incentives. and therefore, we support this bill and urge an aye vote. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrew Shane: andrew angie shane, california association of food banks, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Monica Zemi: Monica Zemi with the California Alternative Payment Program Association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Edwin Valdez: hi, edwin andrew valdez with the california catholic conference representing all 12 roman catholic diocese in the state of california in support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Patrick Barrett: good afternoon, mr. chair and members. patrick with the department of motor vehicles. the dmv is pleased to co-sponsor ab 790 with department of corrections and rehabilitation. the dmv and cdcr have partnered for a number years to assist inmates in obtaining id cards upon their release from prison. the reduced fee id card income verification requirements for staff at corrections institutions and state hospitals is difficult due to the situation of the person being confined. ab 790 would create a separate path for issuance of reduced fee id card to prerelease inmates and state hospital patients. the reduced costs are expected to promote participation in this program, provide valid identification to assist these individuals when released, and prepare them for successful reentry into society. i would appreciate your aye vote.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 25, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 39, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stanicia Boatner: good afternoon, chair and members. boatner with the california state association of counties in support of ab 790, thank you.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tracy Rhine: Good afternoon, Chair and members, Tracy Rhine, Rural County Representatives of California We represent 35 of the 58 counties here in California. Deployment of broadband services in rural areas remains one of our biggest priorities. As you can imagine, having good modern technology in the most remote areas of the State is difficult. Most times, it's non-existent, and if it does exist, it's cost prohibitive. As Assemblymember Wood stated, this is not nice to have technology. This is necessary. Most technology is needed in our daily life, such as communication of your child to school or with your job. Additionally, in rural areas where access to many things is difficult, innovative technology is necessary, such as in the healthcare field, telehealth, or distance learning for education. A lot of our areas don't have close hospitals or educational institutions, and so having broadband available is very important. We understand that providing broadband, it can be especially daunting in rural areas, and that's why we're here to support this measure. AB 980 would allow the state and local jurisdictions to leverage the investment already being made on a project, just simply requiring the addition of broadband conduit. For example, there have been extensive highway improvements made along Highway 299 in Trinity and Shasta County. During this bill, conduit was not laid. The local leaders were trying to get the funds to make that happen. They were unable to, had AB 980, this bill in place, those areas would now have conduit and have a way to have broadband services. This is just one example in one area of our State. This is a very important bill, and it will be very helpful to bridge that digital divide in our counties, and I appreciate your aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 429, 'end': 433, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Nickels: mr. chair, committee members, members, my name is michael jonah nickels, and i co-chair access sonoma broadband. we operate under the auspicious authority of sonoma county economic development board and the sonoma county board of supervisors. access sonoma broadband supports assemblyman wood's ab 980, as it just makes fiscal sense to dig once and install conduit when state and federal highways are rebuilt. permitting issues required with future builds, including either aerial or trenching later, adds substantially to infrastructure costs associated with the projects. priority areas are defined by cpuc and appropriate local entities, and allows ab 980 for middle mile back haul along highway right of way from last mile installations, which serve unserved and underserved communities. in addition, conduit installation provides for alternative diverse routes for existing providers rerouting communications in the event of natural or man-made disasters. this is a win-win opportunity for all residents of california, and we support assemblyman wood's proposed legislation, thank you.
[{'start': 50, 'end': 71, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 288, 'end': 292, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1051, 'end': 1055, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lauren Greenwood: lauren michael greenwood with the california cable and telecommunications association here in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Morgan Carvajal: Morgan Carvajal with the Hernandez Strategy Group on behalf of the Utility Reform Network, also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Watts: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My name is Mark Watts, representing Riverside County Transportation Commission, and we are regretfully in opposition to this measure. In the operation of the two HOV lanes that are in question, they're very bi-directional in nature, and don't lend themselves to off our operations. Furthermore, there was federal funding, CMAQ funding that was provided to this and to these projects and we would be concerned about notwithstanding the amendments having to return some of the money. In addition, the projects had to go through an FTIP process, we administer by SCAG that also compares the emission reduction estimates that we have Assigned to these projects with the air emission goals, before you can move forward with the project, we're afraid if we change the condition of the operation of the HOV lanes, we might go out of conformity. And if we go out of conformity, that means SCAG could well be out of conformity, which could threaten the projects throughout the SCAG region. Unless we found transportation control measures in that vicinity that offset the emissions in a like amount that we expect we might lose. So for these reasons we oppose.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susan Bransen: My name is Susan Bransen. I serve as the Executive Director for the California Transportation Commission. Committee Members I appreciate the opportunity to be here today. I am not completely prepared but would like to let you know that the Commission did include a recommendation in it's annual report to the Legislature. However, that recommendation was directed to the Administration. It was a recommendation for the Administration to consider as part of their analysis, their annual analysis of the degradation of HOV lanes to look at whether or not there's a better way to operate those HOV lanes after hours or within a 24 hour period. That was really the recommendation that the Commission made. And so-
[{'start': 11, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mitch Wise: mitch lauren wise for the california transportation commission. the commission, as part of its statutory charge, advises the administration and legislature in formulating and evaluating state policies and plans for california's transportation programs. the commission supports ab 515. this bill is consistent with the commission's adopted principles for reforms and funding solutions as well as the priority statutory recommendations provided by the commission to the legislature and the commission's 2016 annual court. modernization and streamlining plans for transportation projects should be a legislative priority as it improves coordination of maintenance and transportation on the transportation system, improves identification and prioritization of maintenance activities that could avoid future rehabilitation and reduces costs. ab 515 implements this modernization approach, and that's why the commission is supportive of this measure. i'm happy to answer any questions. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Watts: Chair and members, Mark Watts on behalf of Transportation California, we support this bill, thank you very much.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debbie Hale: My names Debbie Hale I'm the Executive Director of the transportation agency for Monetery county. And we would like to put this property back into it's original purpose which is to provide important safety and congestion relief improvements in the US 101 corridor. We've amassed a large group of supports including the Salinas Valley and the Monterey Peninsula Chamber of Commerce, the County of Monterey and the cities of Carmel, Del Rey Oaks, Gonzalez, King City, Monterey Sun City, Seaside and Salinas, as well as the Farm Bureau of Monterey County, Grower Shippers Association of the Central coast, Association Monterey Bay Area Governments,Port Of Reef Authority, Monterey Salinas Transit, Monterey Bay Aquarium, and the Monterey County Hospitality Association. And the reason they're so supportive is that this is a major arterial really through the whole central coast, and the recognition and need for safety improvements is quite great. So we thank you for your consideration and ask for your support to take this money out of what's been cold storage for many decades, and put it into use doing good for the people. Thank you.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jerome Mayfield: Members, my name is Jerome Mayfield, I am from Stockton.   I was here last year and I had that car now for a year and a half, I haven't bought any gas. I'm starting to see a little change in my pocket, there's starting to be a community of Leafs in my neighborhood. It's a blue one, three silver ones, a white one, and we've become a little community where everybody drives by. We see each other, we wave at each other because it is programmed. The people are starting to go to the fair grounds. I took that old truck up there and I ended up with a 13, I'd never thought I'd end up with a car that new, but I have one and I'm driving around. I'm not buying gas and I'm starting to see the people in my community, they're starting to have Leafs also. Those electric cars are really, really helpless, and keeping little money in our pocket. So I'm here to testify on the fact. And I hope you guys keep the program going the way it is, so we can have a whole lot more Leafs driving around. Thank you
[{'start': 20, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ryan Pierini: ryan mitch pierini with southern california edison, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tom Knox: I'm Tom Knox of Valley Clean Air Now. We operate vehicle programs in the San Joaquin Valley. The low to moderate income element of CVRP is a very important piece of how to bring more vehicle programs, more low carbon programs into disadvantaged communities. It's received a lot of attention over the last nine months on how to implement that. We're really excited about what this is going to mean to a lot of programs. This is a very common sense bill that will allow that progress to continue, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : Three, four, five, six, seven, eight.
[]
 : File item number 18, ACR 23. File item number 19, ACR 24. File item number 20, ACR 29. File item number 21, ACR 31.
[]
John Lovell: Good afternoon, Mr Chair, Members of the Committee. My name is John Lovell, and I'm here on behalf of the Los Angeles County Professional Peace Officer's Association, as well as every other law enforcement group that's listed on your analysis. If you'd like I'll read those into the record, or if that's acceptable to reference the analysis. This is a good sense bill. As Mr. Calderon indicated, traffic stops are not something that we all aspire to. No one wants to go out and say, gee, can I get into a traffic stop today? They are stressful situations. And often times, can escalate due to misunderstanding. This bill enables a deaf person to have an indication connected with their vehicle, so that an officer before he or she actually makes the contact, can look and run the plate and say, okay I've got to use a different skill set in this communication. We want to commend Mr. Calderone for bringing this forward. This is an officer safety issue and a civilian issue, and we would respectfully ask this Committee to approve this bill.
[{'start': 63, 'end': 74, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 376, 'end': 384, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 884, 'end': 893, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alyssa Stinson: thank you. good morning mr. chairman and committee members. my name is alyssa jonah stinson with the california building industry association, here to express our strong support for senate bill 2. first and foremost, we'd like to thank senator atkins and the supporters for their continued commitment to this effort. we are all well aware of how grave the housing crisis is out there. over the past several years as we've attempted to get this piece of legislation across the finish line, we've continued to see the crisis gets worst and worst. putting housing both for sale and rental out of reach from more and more californians. and that is why our members across spectrum from publicly traded companies to our small mom and pops, to contractors and design professionals have long been in support of this effort. they are prepared to do their part in paying this fee on a host of real estate transactions. the facts are, the backlog is estimated by hdd to be at 2 million units. we need to build 180,000 new units per year through 2025. home ownership is at its lowest level since 1940s and more than 3 million californian households pay more than 30% of their income towards rent. more than 1.5 million households pay more than 50% of their income towards rent. we have historic housing problems in california and the most direct path to resolving this dilemma is to bolster the estate stock of market rate and affordable homes. that is why sb 2 is a top priority for cbia. this is also a measure that supports california's economy and companies by ensuring our companies can compete and provide housing for their work force. for too many californians, finding an affordable home is not just a struggle, it's becoming an out of reach dream. as the affordability crisis worsens, it will undermine all of the gains made since the great recession and it is imperative that we act now. thank you for your time and i strongly urge an aye vote.
[{'start': 71, 'end': 91, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 244, 'end': 250, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jessica Sloan: good morning committee members. my name is jessica and i'm mayor of the great city of mill valley. thank you for the opportunity to address the committee this morning. i'm here today to urge your support for senate bill 2, the building homes and job acts. as mayor of a city which is grown from a small mill town to a full service city with largely residential neighborhoods, i know the value that home ownership brings to families and local economies. mill valley which has approximately 14,000 residents, is a highly sought after market, but the average home cost being $1.4 milllion. because of the high cost of the housing, the vast majority of our workforce including our firefighters, our police officers, our teachers, our other city employees are shut out from living in the community they serve. as former representative to the association of bay area governments for city of mill valley and a human rights attorney, the need for affordable housing is clear. housing for all of our residents improves our communities, our safety and our local economy. while there are many voices in the discussion on how to spur the much needed housing construction and affordability, i want to focus your attention on the great need for state and federal funding to support the development of affordable housing. in the last 10 years, federal investments in critical housing programs have been slashed by 50 to 77% and there's a lot of speculation that more cuts are coming. the elimination of redevelopment agencies has resulted in an annual loss of $1 billion for affordable housing. proceeds from the last state housing bond passed a decade ago have been expended. senate bill 2 would help fill the funding gap by generating hundreds of millions of dollars per year for affordable housing, supportive housing, emergency shelters, transitional housing and other housing needs via $75 recordation fee on specified real estate documents. like all cities, mill valley seeks to provide a high quality of life for all those who live and work there. to continue to do so we must provide and prepare for the housing needs of this generation and the next. the cost inaction is just too great. i urge you to support me, to join me and the city of mill valley and supporting sb 2 and establish a permanent source of funding for affordable housing. thank you.
[{'start': 43, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marina Wiant: wiant at the california housing consortium in support.
[]
Jennifer Speck: jennifer on behalf of the california association of realtors. we are in strong support of the bill. we thank the author for working with us and we'd also like to express support for the governing boards inclusion within the bill and maintaining that on a go forward basis. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Johan Klehs: johan alyssa klehs representing leading age california. an organization of over 400 members who build senior non-profit affordable housing. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Jones: David Jones on behalf of the cities of Glendale, Santa Rosa, Sacramento and the cities of Marin, support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tyrone Buckley: buckley on behalf of housing california, pleased to cosponsor this bill. urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roxanne Miller: Roxanne Miller on behalf of Mayor Sam Lacardo and the City Council, City of San Jose, in strong support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 34, 'end': 45, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jason Rhine: Jason Rhine with the League of California Cities, in strong support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: kyle with sierra club california in support, and also on behalf of california league of conservation voters in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dorothy Johnson : Good morning, Dorothy Johnson on behalf of CSEC in support, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 29, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael McLaughlin: Hi I'm Michael Mclaughlin. I'm a volunteer with AARP. AARP supports SB2.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Shaw: Tim Shaw on behalf of the San Francisco Bay Area Rapid Transit District also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tiffany Fan: Tiffany Fan on behalf of Bridge Housing and also Straud Investment Group, strong support.
[]
Jeremy Smith: Thank you Madam Chair and the members of the committee, Jeremy Smith on behalf of the State Building and Construction Trades Council also in support.
[{'start': 56, 'end': 68, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Keith Dunham: Keith Dunham in behalf of the of California Apartment Association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Myra Prox: Myra Prox of the California Council for Affordable Housing, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anya Lawler: Anya Lawler on behalf of the Western Center on Law & Poverty, the California Rural Legal Assistance Foundation, and the California Coalition for Rural Housing, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Warner: Linda Warner with the California Catholic Conference, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lexi Howard: mr chair and members, lexi johan howard on behalf of the california escrow association, the california mortgage association, and the united trustees association. we recognize the affordable housing crisis and commend the author for her efforts. regrettably, this bill is unfair, will result in uneven application, and will defer or delay the recording of important documents. the bill is unfair because it increases dramatically the rate of recording fees on some documents that individuals record on a regular basis. for instance, an affidavit of death where a survivor is recording a document including a death certificate to transfer the property from a deceased to the survivor, increase in cost, $13 to $88. a mechanics lien where a contractor or sub-contractor is recording a document to enforce money that is owed to them because of the construction of a work of improvement. that could also be an employee of a contractor or subcontractor. increase from $16 to $91, the same fee again to release that when that lien is paid. and particularly, in the case of an owner who's property is being foreclosed, that owner has the opportunity in many cases to redeem that foreclosure. that is pay all the fees and costs of the foreclosure and the delinquent principal and interest. and do that up until the moment before the foreclosure sale. those fees and costs include or would include the $75 for each recorded document. because in a foreclosure, documents are not recorded, generally, in large groups, so this $225 cap would not apply. you may have a notice of default, a substitution of trustee, multiple assignments, a rescission of a notice of default, a notice of sale. you could have as many as 10 or more documents at $75 which the person redeeming would then need to pay. additionally, uneven application, thank you, i'll wrap it up. counties, it's unclear how counties will apply this whether they will be able to determine whether property is single family, single parcel, unsure how that will be applied. and lastly, it will deter the recording of certain documents, many of which, and in particular, those that are invalid unless recorded. two years ago, this legislature, in 2015, enacted the revocable transfer on debt deed to allow people- want to give everybody- thank you, senator.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Courtney Jensen: committee members, courtney lexi jensen with the california credit union league, we're in oppose unless amended position. i apologize for the late opposition, our committee members met last week. but we are just asking to be exempt for the smaller dollar transactions. thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Schoff: My name is Bill Schoff, small business owner in Conta Costa County, records about 1,500 deeds a year. This would really affect poor people, the $75.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ian Duncan: Morning, my name is Ian Duncan from California Association of Legal Document Assistance. Our members prepare the types of title documents which are not exempted as the deeds with documented transfer tax are. We are- This is not a speech. Sorry, and at this point, we're opposed we'd like to work with the author's office.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dan Carrigg: yes, thank you mr. chairman, mr. chairman, members of the committe, dan courtney carrigg on behalf of the leauge of california cities, this bill and we appreciate the authors' tenacity and continue to bring it forward it really is about righting a wrong. these four communities incorporated, they were following the laws of california that this body had said in terms of the lafco process fiscal viability, other aspects of it. they were relying on the revenue streams that this body also approved as part of the fix. the league helped support, ab 1602 layered and this body went, dealt with that issue and the nuances of that issue. and then the bill that the senator referenced that removed this, had no public discussion, no hearing and it went through quite quickly so this is about fixing a wrong and making the funding for those four communities stable and providing some equity with other cities in the state. for those reasons we support the bill.
[{'start': 68, 'end': 80, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 81, 'end': 88, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Coleman: Michael Coleman, I'm a Fiscal Policy Advisor for the League of California Cities. I was around back in 2004 when the original VLF swapped took place. And at the time that happened so quickly and the closing days of the Legislature we raised objections. We had language very similar to what's in this bill to be able to establish a VLF adjustment amount in the property tax, just like every other city, for any new city that would come along and incorporate later on. That we couldn't get that amendment taken at the time because folks didn't want to hold it up for things that could be cleaned up later on. It took us a couple of years to get a clean up going. We managed to do that in the Laird Bill that's been discussed and that then disappeared in a very quick in action in 2011 and let these four cities hanging high and dry. This is really an important bill to correct this wrong, and make sure that these cities are treated fairly like every other city in the State of California.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 690, 'end': 695, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jean Hurst: Thank you, Mr. Chair and members, Jean Hurst here today on behalf of the Board of Supervisors of the County of Riverside in strong support.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pamela Miller: morning chair and members of the commission, pamela dan miller representing the state association of lafcos, in strong support. i want to thank the senator for his perseverance and persistence.
[{'start': 45, 'end': 62, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dorothy Jones: Good morning, Dorothy Jones with the California State Association of Counties, pleased to be in support this morning, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jolena Voorhis: mr. chair and members, jolena on behalf of the urban counties of california, in support. thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Jones: Mr. Chair and members, David Jones of the city Murrieta in support. Thank you so much. Are there any other folks who would like to come forward and speak in support of the bill?
[{'start': 23, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dennis Mathisen: very good. thank you, chair maguire, senators. thank you for inviting me. first, i'd like to introduce myself, i am mathisen, california state fire marshal as appointed by governor brown about two months ago. so relatively new in the position. but with that said i have over 30 years of experience in the california fire service, 26 of those at the local government level and most of that as a local fire marshal. so i can kind of look at things from both perspectives. our offices is responsible for management oversight of a variety of programs including fire and life safety inspections, new construction plan review for state buildings, code development and analysis relative to fire and life safety standards, fire protection equipment listing and licensing fire and fraud investigations, fire work safety hazardous pipeline, safety wild land fire prevention and stay fire training. so we have a lot of variety. first i'd like to compliment your staff who provided the background information to you, the information relative to the state's role in code development is spot on. and so i'll just kind of touch on that and emphasize it and be available to answer any questions that you might have. so in terms of the california safety standards, fire and life safety related regulations go, our regulatory process involving building standards is run through the state building standards commission. and how that works is various state agencies, state fire marshalls specifically addressing fire and life safety issues. looks at the national model code in the case of california we utilize the international code council published documents, international building code, international fire code, and so on. those documents are updated every three years with intervening updates in the interim years. our office looks at fire and life safety issues, we address statutory requirements that are unique to california, we propose those amendments utilizing a process that involves a lot of stakeholders. and ultimately goes to the state building standards commission for adoption. once that's adopted, it becomes the code for california. at that time it's the local government's opportunity to take the series of codes and make any local amendments that they deem necessary based on their own unique community needs. and once that's done, they would adopt that as a local ordinance, either through city council board of supervisors or a fire district board. with that said, that's the california process. at the same time, we participate very heavily in the national code development process so we have the model code. we work on trying to help influence change nationally which helps california ultimately. and so we look at it from both the california perspective and nationally. i'll provide a quick overview of state law, mandates, inspection frequencies and the type of occupancies that those affect. in california there are basically four categories or four different occupancy types that have a mandated inspection frequency. those are public and private schools kindergarten through 12th grade, multi-family dwellings, so, apartment houses, hotels, motels, lodging houses etc., high rise buildings. which in california health and safety code defines as any building with the highest habitable floor 75 feet above ground level is a high rise. those three categories are, it's incumbent upon and required in state law that the responsibility for inspections of those resides at the local level with the fire chief or his or her designee. and the frequency required for those is annually once a year. the fourth category is detention facilities, so, jails and prisons. those are required to be inspected every two years. the inspection responsibility resides with my office, the office of state fire marshall with the exception that the law allows the local jurisdiction to perform those inspections if they opt to. so, we go through a process where they're given an opportunity to let us know if they're going to inspect them. if they are, we document that and make sure that that gets done. and if they don't provide that, then we perform those inspections. so, essentially, those are the four categories. all other occupancies above and beyond those are really done at the discretion of the local community. as was mentioned before i believe by ms. cabio, there's a process typically at the local community level, where you go through and you have to look at your risks, and you prioritize your fire prevention activities based on those risks and the resources that you have available. so again, anything beyond those four categories is identified as a target hazard or some other kind of life hazard prioritized and then performed at a frequency that's determined by the local jurisdiction.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 35, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 116, 'end': 124, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 181, 'end': 186, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4353, 'end': 4358, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kerry Simpson: Thank you Senator Mcguire and Members of the Committee. Kerry Simpson, I'm actually here representing the California Association of Code Enforcement Officers. I've been a code official for 28 years, and dealt with some cases such as the Ghost Ship, for which we're very sad that happened. I had a very similar case in the City of San Jose in the 1990s. [INAUDIBLE] talk right into the Mike please. And a very similar case in the City of San Jose in the 1990s. And we were able to, fortunately, get that building vacated. AB 2228 which was supported by this Committee which we appreciate last year, allowed for certified code enforcement officers that are highly trained in due process investigative techniques, warrants, criminal and civil process, more importantly interpersonal relationships, and we're educators and collaborators. We fund our programs somewhat through CDBG funding, which is going to go away unfortunately, or maybe. General fund, cost recovery through permits, we have a rental house, an inspection program in a lot of jurisdictions that allow us to do that. But we do believe that code enforcement should be cost recovery, by using the value of the property for its own rehabilitation. As project managers, we collaborate with other key stakeholders, fire, police, building professionals, for additional technical skills. We determine timelines depending on how severe the issue is, whether something needs to be vacated immediately or not. We deal with the human factor. We work very closely with the Healthy Housing Coalition and other human service organizations, to ensure that the tenants have their needs met as well. We have relationships with the housing departments, and we're looking for ways to help create and build housing opportunities, especially creative housing opportunities for issues like this. We believe that we would research permits, the history of the zoning, business license and ownerships of properties, and do a formal inspection of the property. We feel that there are appropriate laws on the books, but if they're there they need to be enforced. We would, particularly in this case, have obtained an inspection warrant and dealt with the property owner. We do think there are some issues where the property could have had some, or we believe there are some things that could be changed in the laws that could help us. Relocation, we're not sure that relocation actually covers commercial properties. We do believe that the Business and Profession Code 17200 could be reviewed, to see whether it would have helped smaller jurisdictions. Right now, as was stated earlier it's 3,700 and 50,000 or more, but we do believe many district attorneys won't allow smaller jurisdictions to utilize that. And I have been successful in using that in former cities, such as San Jose that were larger cities. Receivership laws, we're not sure that a lot of judges actually agree these receivership laws cover commercial properties. We do know that we've been successful in residential properties, but it would be great if the Legislator could look at those types of laws. Assisting with links and assessments would also be helpful. And we believe that in improving these enforcement tools for better cost recovery and little fixes would help make code enforcement in these types of cases more helpful, thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 25, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 56, 'end': 69, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shane Diller: thank you, senator, thank you for having me. i'm shane pamela diller, i'm the assistant director of development services in the city of elk grove. i'm also a member of the board of directors for calbo, the california building officials. my role in elk grove is to oversee the building department, but i've also overseen code enforcement there for the last decade. and we wanted to make sure that the committee had some background in regards to the function of the building department itself. its interaction with code enforcement, with the fire service, and the fire prevention, and some of those aspects. building departments are almost exclusively funded and operated based on permit fees and the projects that come in. the fees are tied specifically to the plan review and the permit, the building permits that are applied for. and that covers sort of the upfront cost of initially reviewing the plans, initially seeing that the building is inspected, that it's built to code, and that the property is safe. the code enforcement function in the building code is a function that comes on after and is generally a general fund burden for each city and county to take on, and it's done almost, well, almost exclusively reactively in most agencies. most building departments, most code enforcement agencies respond to complaints. they do not have the staffing or the resources to provide a lot of proactive patrol, if you will, for looking for code violations, and they really focus on what's being reported. calbo, as the father of the victim that spoke at the very beginning, was talking about the issue of permit complication, permit needs, permit avoidance. calbo believes that the code requirements should be minimal, and that they should meet the life safety needs, the building structural needs. and that if you have code standards that exceed those for some reason, you really have to look at whether or not the code standard is necessary or if it's going to be something that's going to drive cost or drive permit avoidance and end up in a situation where you have people discarding the system basically to work or live in buildings and structures that either are not permitted or not permitted for the use of their being permitted for. the code enforcement and, code enforcement is not always included in the building department's function, code enforcement divisions, or departments can be housed in police agencies, fire agencies, the city's general community development department. and depending on how that local jurisdiction sets up their function, there can be a direct tie from the work of the building inspector, the code enforcement officer, or it could be detached depending on the discipline that the code enforcement function is housed in. we think that, as ms simpson spoke to, we're always looking at ways to both streamline permitting processes so that permits, the code is easy to understand, the permits are easy to apply for and receive the inspections are educational and helpful. so that up front, things are done in a way that is legal and permitted and safe. and on the code enforcement end, you try to do things that meet the due process that's required. and then partner with property owners that have run afoul of the codes somehow, so that you achieve voluntary compliance, and you work out a compliance plan that gets them to meet you halfway and they're voluntarily working to comply with the codes and to fix those systems. the dilemma you run into, and this is where i'll close, is that in that small percentage of cases where you do not get a voluntary compliance and cooperation, the back end support to recover the time of the department, to recover the cost of the department, to generally handle the case, and to enforce the action, and to drive compliance at that point is lacking in a lot of ways. and our ability to recover those costs is not good at this point, i would say they're certainly universal.
[{'start': 49, 'end': 68, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1508, 'end': 1513, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1661, 'end': 1666, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2783, 'end': 2790, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Matthew Hargrove: thank you mr. chair, thank you for having me here today and thank ms. skinner for her still being here. right off the bat, first of all let me introduce myself i'm hargrove with the california business properties association. we represent a whole host of commercial real estates groups from the international council of shopping centers to the building and owners and managers association of california to [unknown] of california. very large institutional commercial owners. the buildings that we're talking about today probably aren't in our membership and probably will never be in our membership, but we are the ones who are at the codes meetings every day. we have over 4 billion square feet of leasable space in california. so we're very appreciative that we were invited to come here and talk a little bit about of some of the issues that we as institutional owners are seeing. i also want to give condolences to the family and friends of the victims that we're here today. it's a terrible tragedy and we have heartfelt sympathy. i'm actually somebody whose gone to diy spaces since 1984. i continue to go to them to this day and i will continue to go to them. my daughter is the bass player of the band. and these other types of spaces that we want to make sure are out there and available. but they need to be safe, none of us want to be in an unsafe spaces. we as an industry also want to support artist work loft space. we want to see more of that product and new buildings and we want to see more of that product in historical buildings. we think that these types of buildings, these types of spaces bring a vibrancy to the community that we're already in, that we are owning buildings in and that we are apart of ourselves. but ignoring the health and safety issues is not an acceptable way to bring about that goal. so we would like to bring some of our expertise as you have a stakeholder group on this and you move forward. i have a lot in my notes about the professionalism of the commercial real estate industry. i think that that is understood, so i'd like to just skip through a lot of that. and get to the part of our testimony where we have some solutions. i think today that everything that im about to touch upon has in some way been discussed by one panel or another or from dice. so, none of this is controversial and i think that everyone that's here today is heading in the right direction. we think that at the local level, political entities need to be able to enable their code personnel, fire and safety to do their jobs and back them up on tough calls. we've heard that several times today. we think that the state and local governments need to figure out how to restore some of the funding that has been lost to local codes and standards and fire safety departments. when we went through the down turn in the economy a lot of these planning desks were decimated. some of the cities that we worked at that had 12 people at the desk now might have two if we're lucky, that's a huge issue for us in this area. especially when you're dealing with smaller owners who don't have institutional knowledge nationwide to be able to deal with codes and who are trying to figure it out. they look to the local government in the planning desks to help them through some of these issues. we think that the state might want to look at whether or not some of the policies that you're passing here in this building that don't have anything to do with fire and safety and health and safety but have to do with energy efficiency and green codes might be displacing some of the code enforcement that's happening at the local level. because the folks who are out there looking at codes have to look at very complicated energy efficiency rigs at the same time they are trying to do life safety. and sometimes there's a prioritization issues here that we think could be addressed. and we think that the state should look at whether or not it's unnecessarily increasing the cost of upgrading an existing building or a building that's moving from one use to another. and forcing some of these building owners to not ever call the local code folks, because they know when they do, when they want to rewire something for health and safety issue, they know they're also going to have every single other bit of the code crashing down on them, and that costs a lot of money. so we think that there's ways that policy makers can help us figure it out. right now the state of california applies every single code for new buildings to an existing tenant improvement when they want to make it done. something that's a six to 10% increase on a brand new building for energy efficiency. sometimes can double the cost of a tenant improvement and on many times these smaller companies don't have the money to do that or the ware with all to do that, so they just, they don't deal with it. in terms of the live work spaces we think that we can look towards a historic building code as an example for some of these live work spaces to foster then and make sure that they can come forward. maybe in some areas like they've in los angeles you look at ways to fund them and you look at maybe some special codes for some very special areas so that the city can work with these groups to make sure that these performance and live spaces are safe. some cities like i said are already doing this. provide subsidies for artist groups so they can make their spaces safe and also look at special grants to contractors that are out there that are working with non-profit groups or local artist groups, so they can do some of these types of upgrades and tenant improvements in a way that's maybe more affordable than market rate. and with that, i would just again like to thank you for inviting us to be at the table.
[{'start': 70, 'end': 77, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Thomas Dolan: Thank you. Chairperson Mcguire, Senator Skinner, I'm Thomas Dolan, an architect, living and working in Oakland. I wrote the Live-Work Building Code for Oakland in 1996. And in 2012, published Live-Work Planning and Design, a comprehensive book on the subject. Since the Ghost Ship fire, I've devoted much of my time to the aftermath of that terrible event, visiting roughly 25 live-work studios. What I can observe is that the Ghost Ship was an outlier, and the other studios I have visited, while often not legally converted to live-work, are generally safe and provide home to and work space to large numbers of artists in Oakland, throughout California, and worldwide. I've been asked to consider what local governments can do to deal with extra legal live-work space to accommodate the arts community. Our motto, and that of Oakland Mayor Schaaf, has become keep them safe, but don't displace. Our overarching goal is to save spaces, many of which are threatened by occasionally overzealous inspectors, overly fearful landlords, and overly cautious insurance inspectors. My first piece of advice is don't panic and rush to crack down on such spaces. Most are safe and many have made real efforts to become safer after the fire. The City of Oakland has genuinely shown understanding and restraint here. It's been said that there's a code problem. I would reply that most of all, there's a money problem. The greatest obstacle to legalizing spaces is the cost. Specifically those costs triggered by designating live-work as a change of occupancy. [INAUDIBLE] means the building needs to be brought up to today's code as if it were a new building. We're recommending that large single kitchen work-live buildings, much of which I have seen since the fire, be exempt from change of occupancy, because they remain essentially, commercial buildings. This would save roughly 50% of the cost of conversation, seismic retrofit and other measures. We're also recommending that spaces granted this particular code relaxation a new kind of work-live be designated as permanently affordable to low and moderate income artists. This requirement is consistent with the goal of Vital Arts, a new organization founded by myself, Bethjay and Ed Bernbaum, father of Jonathan Bernbaum, who died in the fire. On the subject of performance and Assembly spaces, performance will not be forced to use unpermitted underground spaces for events if codes are changed to permit all night gathering. These stand-alone performance spaces and Assembly spaces within work-live units could be monitored for safety and or sprinklered. Sprinklers save lives but they are also very expensive. Creation of a sprinkler fund at the state level would be a great way to ensure that the Ghost fire doesn't happen again. To close, I would reiterate the importance of regulatory restraint, consistent with the goal of keeping artists in their spaces and safe. Thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 30, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 40, 'end': 47, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 53, 'end': 65, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 843, 'end': 849, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2216, 'end': 2223, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2228, 'end': 2239, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2251, 'end': 2268, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Matthew Silver: thank you very much, good afternoon, my name is matthew shane silver. i'm a code enforcement attorney, so i have a little bit different perspective to share with you here today. i represent about five dozen cities up and down the state, up to del norte county and down to mexico, and everywhere left and right. i also sit on the board with ms. simpson for ceaca, the code enforcement association in california, and i would like to reemphasize a few points that she made, or i guess emphasize my support for them. i think some very minor legal fixes, i don't think new laws are necessarily necessary. i've heard a few times now that we have the laws in place, and i think we do. i think that's definitely true. but i think some very minor tweaks to these laws could reap very great benefits and probably could avoid a ghost ship in the first place or certainly repeat ghost ships. what do i mean by that? well, i have the benefit of practicing in courts up and down the state. the cases come to me like ghost ship. i was not involved in that case, but ones like those where owners have been given every opportunity to comply through the various fire and building and code enforcement notices, and compliance agreements, and inspection warrants, and so on. for whatever reason, they've been unable or unwilling to comply with the laws. those that come to me, my job is to go to court to get compliance one way or the other. and then make taxpayers hole so that cities has been aptly pointed out, or budget strapped, or able to fund this over and over. where we're running into roadblocks is frankly in disparate results in different courts with the same facts. we're getting different judges and maybe different departments in the same court, ruling differently on the same facts. and i think, just through my observation of handling thousands of these cases, i was in court yesterday on one, as a matter of fact, a large substandard motel. i think that there is some vagueness in the law, that it's confusing judges about how we enforce these housing laws. i'm not sure that the education is out there yet to really understand that ghost ship is a real and repeating risk. i have personally watched several buildings burn. you have a minute, sir. i'm sorry, thank you, and know it's a real problem, but that's not pervasive yet among the bench i think a few fixes, i would love to see the fix to bmp17200. i don't understand the reasoning for not allowing jurisdictions less than 750,000 to enforce substandard building laws through that section without da approval. secondly, fix to the california receivership law. very minor fixes would make them much more effective, make our job much easier in getting compliance. i will add that, that law provides a relocation benefits, in fact, mandates them for substandard buildings. so in any event, a very specific fixes. i have many more ideas i'd be happy to discuss later, but i know i'm out of time, thank you.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 68, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 344, 'end': 351, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kathleen Salvaty: Thank you, Senator. Good afternoon, my name is Kathleen Salvaty and I am the system wide Title IV coordinator for the University of California. Over the last few years, the University of California has really sought to make itself the standard bearer in sexual violence, prevention, and response, so we have strengthened and expanded our prevention efforts, we have implemented a lot of new policies and procedures, and we have dedicated significant resources to supporting our students and creating a violence free learning experience. I would say the most important resource that we've added is the confidential care advocate, which exists on every UC campus. So the confidential care advocate works exclusively with our students and community members who've experienced sexual violence, and that includes domestic violence. They provide counseling, referrals, they provide safety planning, they provide important information about reporting rights and options, and if a student decides that they do want to report, either to the University, or to law enforcement, they will accompany the student through that process. We believe that the care advocate is an extremely valuable asset in keeping our students safe. So Senate bill 331 would mark a small change in statutory language but a large improvement in how our care advocates and how counselors, domestic violence counselors, at other public universities and colleges can serve their students. Right now, the counselors who work at public universities, such as the UC, like our care advocates, cannot qualify for this domestic violence privilege, whereas a counselor who works at a private University could. The requirement that the counselor be part of a non-governmental entity in order to obtain that privilege was not intended to cover public universities and colleges, it was intended to cover district attorneys and counselors who worked for district attorneys, because those counselors are still subject to Brady obligations and have to turn over exculpatory material. But care advocates and counselors at universities don't have those obligations, so there's really no reason to exclude them from qualifying for this privilege.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 63, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Meredith: thank you, i'm sorry. thank you, my name is sarah, i'm the director of the care program at uc davis, and i serve in this capacity as a domestic violence and sexual assault counselor for the students and the community members at uc davis, so i would just say that i echo everything that my colleague had said. thank you so much, senator jackson, and thank you all for hearing this bill today, it's very important to our survivors to be able to be assured of confidentiality in our counselor client communications, and so i will let you do what you do best.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 336, 'end': 343, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Krista Niemczyk: good afternoon madam chair, krista with the california partnership to end domestic violence, in support.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lupita Carballo: good afternoon, my name is lupita i am a high school student at the youth justice coalition. we are proud to be co-sponsors of senate bill 190. my older brother has been in and out the system since he was 10 years old. my mother is single, my mom, and she was, my momma she had paid thousands of dollars for fee required by the court. this has included the time when he was in juvenile hall and his time in probation camp. the stress that put on our family was even worse, because my brother also helped my mom financially. i could tell how it worried, how it worried her. my mom would leave the house for wake at four am and would come home till six or seven at night. she would just look so sad and tired. when i went to court in my own case in elementary school. like most little children, there is no way i can help pay the fees. we know other families who are suffering. for example, we met the pops family at the juvenile hall. they had a bill over $6,000. when their mother was laid off from their job, she pawned all her jewelry. and rented half of their house to pay probation. over 95% of families charged with probation fees by la county are family of color. white youth are more likely to have access to pay lawyers that rush your cases throughout court. poor families of color end up paying much more for the exact same charges. we achieved some changes in l.a. county but families in los angeles still have to pay for court classes, public defender fees, and court fines. for all of these reasons, we are pushing you to vote yes on senate bill 190.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Gioia: good afternoon, chair skinner and members. i am john jonah gioia from the contra costa board of supervisors and i'm here to support this bill and tell you a little bit about why contra costa county ended the practice of collecting these fees last year. last october, a bipartisan board, we have three democrats and two republicans on our board last year, unanimously voted to suspend collection of these fees after we conducted a thorough study of these fees at our public protection committee, which i serve on. we concluded that these fees do not further public safety. they economically burden families and that they raise very small amounts of revenue. so we joined other counties, there are now six counties in california that do not collect this fee. and those six counties represent 40% of the population of this state, including alameda, san francisco, and los angeles are three of those counties, alameda. we found that this is one of those high cost, low return fees. high cost to families. high cost to collect, and low return in terms of net revenue collected. our experience, i think you'll find, reflects the experience of many other counties. and the hidden secret in this fee, one of the hidden secrets, it costs more to collect this fee than what it generates in net revenue. we spend around $300,000 to collect $500,000 which means we net $200,000. not a very efficient way to spend taxpayer dollars. same issue in alameda county where they spend $250,000 to collect $420,000 or net $170,000. we net less than what it costs to collect this fee. also, the net revenues received are an extremely small part of the cost of operating our juvenile detention facilities. it costs around $30 million to operate our two facilities. we net 200 to 250 thousand out of this fee. that is less than one-half percent of the cost of operating those facilities. this is not a fee that benefits victims. it supposedly, for the purpose of allowing counties to recoup their cost, it clearly doesn't serve that purpose, and its price on families far outweighs what small monetary benefit we get. in addition, in our review of our own fees, we found that these fees were assessed on many families in violation of state law. there were some statutory exemptions on collection of this fee. our own chief probation officer was unaware that we were collecting fees that violated state law. in fact, we looked at cases over a three-year period, and found that of the 930 families that paid the fee, 130 of them were improperly assessed; that's about 15%. in addition, we're exploring refunding to those families. the majority of the fees assessed remain unpaid. we have $8,000,000 in unpaid fees. for those families, they have the potential to have their credit impacted, their financial lives impacted by failure to pay these fees. so, for families that are trying to improve their situation, provide stability, and support their children, they are being impacted. for all of those reasons, our bipartisan board voted unanimously to suspend collection of these fees and to explore how we provide refunds for those improperly assessed.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 29, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 48, 'end': 64, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: Ignacio Hernandez, on behalf of the California Attorneys for Criminal Justice, in support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lewis Brown: Good afternoon, Lewis Brown, on behalf of PolicyLink, we are proud co-sponsors of this bill. Also Lewis Brown, on behalf of the Alliance for Boys and Men of Color, also in support of this bill.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 98, 'end': 109, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Emily Friedman: Emily Friedman, with the East Bay Community Law Center, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Ridolfi: Laura Ridolfi, with the W. Haywood Burns Institute, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maureen Washburn: maureen john washburn, with the center on juvenile and criminal justice, proud co-sponsors, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Herald: mike maureen herald, with the western center on law and poverty, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gail Brown: brown, chair of solano inmate family council. i deal with families all the time in the system and have for 22 years. this is one more punitive way that it's the high cost of having someone that you love in the criminal justice system. it's just one more way that makes them poor and never get out of it. thank you, please support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jerome Dixon: Good afternoon, Madame Chair and Members of the Committee, thank you. My name is Jerome Dixon, and I'm here in strong support of SB 395. I live in Los Angeles, where I am a project manager for a construction company that specializes in residential and commercial development. I am currently overseeing five major remodels. I just ran the LA Marathon this past Sunday with an unofficial time of 4:19. Not my personal best, but I finished. I am also someone, who, as a teen, was interrogated by the police. It was one of the worst experiences of my life. At 17, I was taken to the police station and put into a small room. There, I was interrogated for 25 hours. I don't remember them reading me my Miranda Rights. I'm not saying that they didn't. I think they probably did, but my teenaged self had no real understanding of what those constitutional rights meant or what it meant to give them up. During the first five hours of being questioned, I gave the investigating officers a detailed outline of my day's event up until the point I was placed in the backseat of the patrol car. I spoke the absolute truth, but they kept questioning me. By the tenth hour of the interrogation, the officer's attitude had changed. He moved from being comforting and engaging to provoking and authoritative. He told me that the truth, my truth, was a big lie and that I needed to stop playing games. By hour 15, I was drained, and I couldn't have told you if it was night or day. There, it was just a small window in the room, and that was taped with a folded piece of cardboard on the outside of the glass with a small peephole cut through it. At hour 21, the interrogating officer asked me to put myself into the scenario that they had displayed before me. In my 17 year old brain, all I wanted to do was go home. By the 25th hour of the interrogation, I would have told the interrogating officers anything. So, I confessed to the crime that I didn't commit. Maybe some of you listening right now can't really comprehend how a 17 year old can give up his rights without understanding them and then go on to confess to a crime he didn't commit. But I did not understand what it meant to give up my constitutional rights. And after the intense interrogation experience, I would have told the police officers anything. I was convicted based in part of that confession. Tried as an adult, I served 21 and a half years in prison for a crime I didn't commit. I never had not one disciplinary action throughout the whole years of my incarceration. In October of 2011, I was paroled. I support SB 395 because I think young people deserve to have an unbiased person explain their rights to them. It is the least we can do to protect youth. Please vote yes for SB 395, thank you.
[{'start': 81, 'end': 93, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: good afternoon, madam chair and members. ignacio on behalf of the california attorneys for criminal justice, statewide association of criminal defense attorneys. we are a proud cosponsor of the measure.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rosa Aqeel: Rosa Aqeel on behalf of the Alliance for Boys and Men of Color, in very strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Rudolfi: thank you. laura mike rudolfi from the w haywood burns institute, in strong support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ian Noble: Ian Noble, Silicon Valley De-Bug and we support this bill. And I too have had a son that was interrogated for a number of hours and was not able to call home and all he said was I want to call my mom, I want to call my mom, but some kids don't and can't do that. One close friend of the family, he was interrogated for 12 hours. He admitted to, they kept saying, tell me what we want to know. We'll let you go home and he told them what they wanted to know, and it's been two years. He was 17 when he was arrested. He is now 19, but thanks God for Prop 57. It was a direct file. He's been brought back to juvenile hall and still fighting his case. So, please support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 540, 'end': 543, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jean Hurst: madam chair and members, jean laura hurst on behalf of the los angeles county board of supervisors, in support.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Aviliano Lopez: My name is Aviliano Lopez from the Anti-Recidivism Coalition and I strongly support this bill
[{'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Darlene Frontudo: darlene jean frontudo from the anti-recidivism coalition, i strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ryan Lowe: ryan darlene lowe from the anti-recidivism coalition and i strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gail Brown: gail, chair of the inmate family council at solano prison and we support this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mica Doctoroff: Mica Doctoroff on behalf of the ACLU of California, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cory Salzillo: Good afternoon, Madam Chair and members. Cory Salzillo here on behalf of the California State Sheriffs's Association. Unfortunately, here in opposition to SB 395. We opposed SB 1052 last year and as you know that bill was vetoed. We remain opposed to this measure. Our overarching concern is that this bill goes far beyond what existing case law requires as it relates to juveniles and Miranda. For nearly 40 years, US Supreme Court case law has held that quote, the court must take into account, special concerns that are present when a young person is involved, including a child or youth with limited experience, education immature judgement. That's from the Fair Case in 1979. SB 395 and SB 1052 before it exceeds that standard bill, requires a minor to console with council prior to a custodial interrogation and prior to, before they waive rights under Miranda and that this consultation cannot be waived. This raises questions like who will provide the counsel? Who will pay for it? And why is it being mandated, even in cases before a person is arrested? Law enforcement may simply want to talk to a minor and even if the parent or guardian is present and notified in advance, this discussion would have to wait until a council could consult with minor if there was a chance the interrogation could fall under the undefined umbrella of a custodial interrogation. SB 395 will cast out on an otherwise truthful statement that is called into question, simply because a minor had not consulted with counsel before choosing to waive Miranda. For these reasons, we are opposed to the bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1536, 'end': 1543, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jonathan Feldman: chair and embers of the committee feldman with the california police chief association and i'll .. the reference the comments of my colleague. we also opposed 1052 first year and we also opposed 395 for the same reasons. unsure exactly what the consequences may be as that was mentioned in the governor's veto message from last year. as this would apply to almost every custodial interrogation, that would come before us procedurally. it puts a roadblock between getting information from the individual even if they're consenting or wanting to do so. practically, we've looked at concerns about well, what happens in those cases where we can't find legal counsel in a timely manner. most likely will result with a juvenile being booked and then the interrogation happening later, but that creates further impact to the court case. we'll note that the courts already have a more generous interpretation of the miranda rights for juveniles, having to take the juvenile's age, education and maturity level into account when considering whether there's been a valid miranda waver. when the case was brought up where justice goodwin lou wrote the dissenting opinion, she does mention in that case that the juvenile did not understand at first what the officer had asked him. he said, do you know what it means when you have the right to remain silent and the kid said something to the effect of i believe, it means i have the right to remain calm. the officer actually corrected him and said, no, this is what it means and he went into detail about exactly what he was doing and what he was agreeing to by waiving his miranda rights and made sure it was explained to the child, ensured that the child's mother was present and understood what was happening and that's what our officers do, because that's when they end up in a courtroom setting, they have to make sure that they've proven that the kid understood and had the maturity to understand what they were saying when they waived the miranda rights. so for those reasons, we do oppose. thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1120, 'end': 1127, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1128, 'end': 1131, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Marty Veranacar: thank you, madam chair. marty on behalf of the california district attorneys association, we too are opposed to this measure. we were opposed to it last year. measure was vetoed by the governor. i don't see that any new studies or anything new has changed with this version. thank you.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kim McGill: Kim McGill from the youth justice coalition first interrogated by police without understanding Miranda at the age of 12. We're very honored to be co sponsors of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 95, 'end': 102, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Wilson: michael ryan wilson, youth justice coalition, also interrogated by the police, and would have almost received a lwop due to the nature of the crime. so it is very, very imperative, because it was exaggerated, as with donald trump calls it, what is it- falsified fake news.  yeah, yeah, but honestly, very, very support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 217, 'end': 229, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Christine Clifford: Christine Clifford, Silicon Valley, debug, in support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joel Aguilar: thank you, madam chairman and committee members. my name is aguilar, i am here in support of sb 394 and ask for this committee support. today, i'm a college student on track to graduate in two years with a ba in philosophy. i am employed full-time as a resident advisor in a transitional living home in san fernando valley, guiding and mentoring young people. i spend time volunteering with organizations such as arc. i'm a doting uncle to my nephews and a devoted son. however, at 17 years old, i had distanced myself from my family. i was perhaps, especially a mature and consumed with how i was perceived. i hung out on the streets and thought of about nothing other then my selfish needs. one day, i made a decision that i will for every hour of my life regret. i said, yes to participating in a robbery that ended with a co-defendant killing an innocent man. that was 25 years ago, but the weight of my involvement in such a horrible crime, it's something i carry with profound remorse. i was convicted of murder and sentenced to life without any possibility of parole. it was a sentence to die in prison. as a young person, i could not comprehend it. i felt hopeless and worthless. i believe that i was no more than my worst act and deserved to die in prison. i want to be clear, no amount of time could ever be enough to right my wrong, but my punishment told me that i was unworthy of redemption and that is how i behaved when i went to prison. i yearned for growth. emotional, educational, spiritual growth, but thought i'd forfeited that right, but as i began to meet people that were good, talented, sensitive and generous, i began to believe that i too could be a good person and do good in the world. i was one of the lucky few not only did i have the support of family and friends. i was represented by a fleet of attorneys and students from loyola law school who worked hundreds of hours on my case, secured expert witnesses and helped me convince a judge in los angeles to re-sentence me to a parole eligible sentence. many other youth sentenced to life with no possibility of parole do not have the benefits i had and they won't get a chance. i learned what hope means for the human spirit, unlike the hopeless of life without no parole. sb 394 speaks into the inner most soul. it says to a young person, you are more than your worst act you are redeemable and worthy of a second chance. to that end, i plead for you to support sb 394.
[{'start': 60, 'end': 67, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Heidi Rummel: Members of the Committee, thank you. My name is Heidi Rummel, I'm a Professor of law at the University of Southern California Gould School of Law. I was a federal prosecutor for 12 years in both Washington DC and Los Angeles. I prosecuted violent crime, gang crime, rapes, murders, human trafficking in two of this country's most crime ridden cities. I know very well the impact of crime in our society. I support Senate Bill 394, because it brings California into conformity with the Eighth Amendment and the national trend to eliminate this sentence. Science, the courts and this legislature agree about the fundamental principle that underlies this bill. Children are different from adults. Their brains are not fully developed. They have a great capacity for growth and change. They outgrow the behaviors that lead to crime. Last year, the US Supreme Court clarified the constitutional limits on sentencing children in Montgomery. It is cruel and unusual, it violates the Eight Amendment to sentence a child who possess the potential for rehabilitation to life without parole. Only those rare few who are eruptively corrupt with no hope of redemption can be sentenced to die in prison. California courts are struggling with how to make that very difficult determination. These sentencing require many hundreds of attorney hours, costly mitigation investigations, experts, court time and many years of appeals. Senate Bill 394 provides the alternative suggested by our United States Supreme Court that will make sure California gets it right. On the front-end, no child will face an unconstitutional sentence. On the back-end, California's rigorous parole process ensures that those who do prove to be irreparably corrupt are never released. In 2012, California took the lead on this issue when it passed SB 9. Creating a statutory after the fact opportunity for re-sentencing for some, but the US Supreme Court has gone much further in Miller and Montgomery and California has fallen behind the curve. 24 jurisdictions in the United States do not use the sentence at all for youth under 18. Another 14 states have legislation in the works to remedy the issue. There is growing national bipartisan consensus of the 10 states that have banned the use of juvenile life without parole since Miller came was decided. Nine of those pieces of legislation were sponsored by Republicans and, or received more than 90% of the votes in both houses of the legislature. Texas, South Dakota, Utah, West Virginia, Wyoming and others. It's time for California to catch up. As a prosecutor, I advocated for prison sentences that would best protect the public and hold offenders accountable for their crimes. As co-director of USC's post conviction justice project, I have seen first hand that it is impossible to know how people will grow, mature and change in the course of 25 years. This bill makes sure that we always get it right. That those who change and rehabilitate can seek release on parole after 25 years. Those who do not will remain in prison. I strongly urge your support of Senate Bill 394. Thank you.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 60, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1940, 'end': 1946, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1951, 'end': 1961, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2291, 'end': 2297, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kim McGill: mcgill from the coalition, we're honored to be co-sponsors on this bill. we urge your support. i'm also here for ricky p and his family who served 20 years already on this sentence. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 113, 'end': 120, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Elizabeth Calvin: Elizabeth Calvin, Human Rights Watch is honored to co-sponsor this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gail Noble: Gail Noble, Silicon Valley Debug, I support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jade Granue: jade michael granue, justice coalition, we're here in full support of sb 394. i'm here for jose z, who was 17 when he was arrested, and has already served 17 years and we are honored to sponsor this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 91, 'end': 97, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jerome Dixon: Jerome Dixon, Anti-Recidivism Coalition, and I support this.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Judie Griffin: my name is judie. i'm with youth justice coalition and i'm here for jared h. he was two years younger than me when he was arrested at the age of 17 and he's been incarcerated for 23 years and i strongly urge you guys to support sb 394.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 68, 'end': 76, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Christine Clifford: christine, silicon valley law foundation and pact, people acting in community together in strong support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Yolanda Ledesma: yolanda jade ledesma, silicon valley de-bug, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vanessa Deleon: vanessa with the youth justice coalition. i'm here for jason h, who was 16 when he was arrested. he has served 22 years in prison and could die in prison if we don't act. so please support sb 394. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 55, 'end': 62, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ryan Juarez: i'm here for ryan yolanda juarez, sentenced to 50 years to life in prison at the age of 16.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Zach Lopez: my name is zach, i'm an ex-felon. i'm here to strongly support this, and i appreciate everybody here.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rick Bernal: Rick Bernal, with the California Catholic Conference, and we are in strong support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christopher Castreo: Christopher Castreo, on behalf of the California Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rosa Aquille: rosa ryan aquille on behalf of the alliance for boys and men of color in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maurice Gomes: Maurice Gomes on behalf of Fathers of Families of San Joaquin strong support for this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Wilson: michael rosa wilson, youth justice coalition in strong support, here actually for lee g, who is now serving 20 years, who was arrested at the age of 16. i also am here also representing everybody that i left currently at the compound while i was facing as a juvenile myself two life sentences without the possibility of parole. i was fortunate enough, please, i strongly, strongly urge you to support this bill. so we can have these children come out and these youth come out to be something better.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 82, 'end': 87, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Patricia Song: song with the children's defense fund in strong support and also on behalf of adolfo davis who i represented for seven years. he was 14 years old when he was sentenced to life without parole and was not the trigger person and remains in prison today.
[{'start': 78, 'end': 90, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Paula Sevano: Paula Sevano from Richmond, California I strong support SB 394 also as a social worker for Contra Costa County.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Makaye Lotro: Makaye Lotro, Anti Recidivism Coalition, happy to co-sponsor this bill and strongly urges support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Redelfi: laura from the w haley burns institute in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maureen Washburn: washburn with the center on juvenile and criminal justice in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mica Doctoroff: mica michael doctoroff on behalf of the aclu of california, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sue Burrell: Sue Burrell for the Pacific Juvenile Defender Center. We're honored to be a co-sponsor of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jose Gonzales: Jose Gonzales, the Anti-Recidivism Coalition. Proud to co-sponsor, and in strong support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Art Gonzales: Art Gonzales, with the Anti-Recidivism Coalition, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Darlene Frantudo: darlene with the anti recidivism coalition in strong support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Mendoza: Michael Mendoza with Club 50, former youthful offender tried to a life sentence, in strong support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alexandra Malik: Alexandra Malik from Cut 50, we're proud co-sponsors of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Norma Cumpion: Norma Cumpion from the Anti-Recidivism Coalition in strong support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Griggs: Michael Griggs with the Anti-Recidivism Coalition in strong support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Weiker: rebecca mica weiker with healing dialogue in action in strong support of this bill. i'm also a murder victim family member and teach a class on victim awareness and have several students who are serving a sentence at lancaster prison.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Emiliano Lopez: Emiliano Lopez, with the Anti-Recidivism Coalition, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ryan Lowe: Ryan Lowe, with the Anti-Recidivism Coalition in strong support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Scott Connor: connor from the anti-recidivism coalition in strong support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: Ignacio Hernandez on behalf of the California Attorneys for Criminal Justice in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Glenn Backingsfield: backingsfield for center for human rights, in support.
[]
Gale Brown: gale, chair of the inmate family council, solano prison in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Tanney: Good morning, Madam Chair, and Members of the Committee. Thank you. Laura Tanney from the Office of the San Diego County District Attorney, District Attorney Bonnie Dumanis. We are also strongly opposed to this bill. We're not talking about wrongfully exonerated or wrongfully convicted people here. We are talking about individuals who were convicted of that, which the Legislature and the people of the state have declared to be the most egregious crimes. We're talking about people who have killed multiple other persons. We're talking about people who have killed police officers. We're talking about people who have poison and torture. We 're talking about 16 and 17 years olds, albeit on the younger end of the spectrum. That have committed atrocious crimes. The re-sentencing provisions referred to by my colleague have worked to weed out some of those individuals, but treating this individuals the same as a person who commits one act of premeditated murder Is not appropriate. It is neither proportionate nor appropriate. In San Diego County in 2004, a 17 year old went on an intentional killing spree for the purpose purportedly of killing rival gang members. He shot into crowds of innocent people. He shot a 16 year old boy who was not a gang member in the head. He went the next day and shot into vehicles traveling on highway 163 killing another innocent individual by shooting him. He wounded three other individuals and he admitted that this was intentionally done and that he was hunting people down. This is a person who does not deserve to be treated the same as a person who's convicted of 25 to life as already determined. This is a person who has taken lives of other people, who has sentenced their families to life and sentenced them to life and the lack of proportionality in this bill Is not proper. We met with the co-sponsor, the California District Attorney's Association, myself included, met with the cosponsors of this bill to look at potentials for re-sentencing some of these individuals. And they completely ignored our input when they authored or sponsored this bill. We were amenable to working with them to look for potential solutions to the wide net that may have been cast that captured some people that might deserve a second look, but to cast this broad of a net and to give all of these individuals a second look at 25 years and, treat them the same as the other 25 to lifers. Is not the right way to do this and, for those reasons I urge your no vote on this bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 68, 'end': 80, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 158, 'end': 172, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Harmon: thank you. my name's jennifer rebecca harmon. i'm an assistant director with the orange county crime lab. we were here a year ago to discuss an emerging threat that we were seeing in our county which is illicitly manufactured fentanyl and fentanyl analogs. fentanyl is the most potent opioid available for prescription use for pain management. fentanyl is 80 to 100 times more potent than morphine, and as much as 50 times more potent than heroin. 1 kilogram of fentanyl is equivalent potentially to 4 million lethal doses of the drug. we started to see illicitly manufactured fentanyl in 2015 but it started to significantly increase last year. this is no longer an emerging threat in california, it is here. we've had a 100% increase in 1 year of deaths, where fentanyl was detected in orange county, and our colleagues in la county have seen the same 100% increase. we see this drug as counterfeit pills. oxycodone, hydrocodone, vicodin, norco, and xanax, which is an anti-anxiety drug. we see it in powders, liquids, and in tar form. it appears to be tar heroin, but there is no heroin in it, it is fentanyl. it is mixed typically with heroin or other synthetic drugs including bath salts. we have discovered five different analogs in orange county and we've been notified of a sixth involving a death in ventura county last month. we had a recent case in which four nightclub goers went to nightclub purchased cocaine or what they believe to be cocaine and within 10 minutes of use all went into respiratory distress and overdosed. one died. our colleagues in the midwest and northeast have seen increasing death rates due to carfentanyl, an analog that is 100 times more potent than fentanyl itself. carfentanyl is a large animal tranquilizer. it is used to anesthetized elephants. first responders, crime scene investigators and crime lab staff now have narcan, naloxone in their possession for their own personal safety as well as the safety of the public. we've had to maintain many different types of changes in our processes to ensure that we can keep our own personnel safe and being able to test the narcotics that are coming into the laboratory.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ashraf Obdelmooti: good morning, my names investigator ashraf jennifer obdelmooti with the orange county sheriff's department, here on behalf of orange county sheriff's andrew hutchins, in support of sb 176. fentanyl has been trafficked into california for several years by mexican cartels. fentanyl we're seeing come across in kilo forms along with other narcotics such as cocaine and heroin. that narcotic then is brought into the state and it's being cut into the heroin to increase quantities and ultimately increase profits for the cartels. because fentanyl's so potent, you're able to quadruple the amounts of heroin, if not use a kilo of fentanyl and make 20, 30 kilos of heroin by increasing the potency and increasing the volume, yet the end user is still able to get an extreme high. all that does is it basically gives the cartel a better brand, a better product, which is what the end user is out looking for the next high or a better high and essentially increases their profit. we're seeing cases specifically in the last year. at least three or four cases where, one was last month where an individual who was trafficking narcotics from mexican into the united states was stopped and he was in possession of two kilograms of cocaine, two kilograms of heroin, 4.8 kilograms of pure fentanyl. that product then is brought here, it's cut, where they add numerous other chemicals, that don't necessarily give a high, but because of the presence of fentanyl with the heroin, now you're using substance that's extremely potent and deadly. we're also seeing it where the kilos are brought over here and are taken to commercial warehouses and people are illicitly using pill presses to make what make and the end user believes to be vicodin or oxycontin. they're using pill presses to put the exact markings that you would see on a prescription pill and they're also using some kind of a color to give it similar colors to where it resembles and mimics those prescription drugs. so when you have a 17-year-old or a 16-year-old who goes into mom's medicine cabinet and has been experimenting with oxy or any of the narcos. when that bottle's out, he goes out to the street to seek similar products. what he doesn't know is he's buying this product that's actually not norco it's in fact fentanyl and that's where the overdoses come in. this bill is not targeting the end-user who commonly possesses less than a gram of a heroin, fentanyl, or cocaine. it doesn't target the street dealer who commonly possesses one or two ounces of this product. it doesn't even target the supplier of the street dealer, who in my experience possesses less than a pound of that product. this bill is targeting the individuals who are trafficking this product from other countries into the state and using members of this community for a profit. the people who do in fact traffic this substance are not even users themselves. they are not individuals who need rehabilitation or need any kind of help with an addiction. these are individuals that work in an organization that functions as a business for primarily profit. common questions are why are the cartels flooding the market with this product that's so deadly and killing off their customers. it's simple, these guys are not pharmacists, they are not doctors. they're individuals who i may not even have an education. they are sent here to smuggle and traffic this narcotic. the ratios are not obviously proportionate. whoever cuts it may cut higher than the last guy that cut it, therefore, delivering a deadly dose to the clientele. what they want to deliver is a product that's got a high, to keep the customer coming back, so they can continue their profits. another question would be, we're going to flood the jails with people that are going to be subjected to these enhancements. the group of people that are actually trafficking and involved with quantities that are a kilo or more for the enhancement.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 62, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 150, 'end': 165, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Marla Marshall: Chairman Members of the Committee, my name is Marla Marshall and I'm here in support on behalf of Sheriff Bill Gordon and the San Diego Sheriff's Department.
[{'start': 46, 'end': 60, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 106, 'end': 117, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Osha Metchler: osha ashraf metchler on behalf of the california state sheriffs association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Glenn Backes: good morning, glenn osha backes for drug policy alliance. we are opposed to the section on enhancements, we're not opposed to the other sections. the goal of drug policy should be to reduce death, disability, an injury caused by drugs. to reduce the suffering. this bill and its new spending on incarceration, longer periods of incarceration, will not accomplish that. it will not reduce the availability of fentanyl vs carfentanil. it is in the same sections that we already have for heroin and cocaine. those sections have been in code for a long time and heroine is more widely available and cheaper than ever before. it will not reduce deaths. it will not reduce overdose. but it will waste money. we don't have time to waste money. we don't have time to waste time. we need every available dollar dedicated to treatment on demand, overdose prevention, and treatment. this policy builds on and imitates policies already proven to be an expensive failure. and for those reasons, we respectfully oppose.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 24, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mica Doctoroff: doctoroff on behalf of the aclu of california. also here in respectful opposition to the enhancement portion of the bill. i would echo my colleague's comments and add a few additional arguments. first, existing law already provides sufficient penalties for possession, for sale, and sale of fentanyl. if carfentanil is added to the list of controlled substances under schedule ii, it too will be subject to these penalties. we, the governor in recent years has criticized the ever-expanding list of crimes and sentence enhancements pointing to the complicated web in the penal code that this expansion creates. second, i would like to point out that these enhancements won't make our communities safer. research has shown that the certainty of punishment, in other words, the fact that somebody will be punished for a crime, serves as a far greater deterrent than the length of sentence. rather than acting as a deterrent, these sentence enhancements will only serve to overcrowd our already overcrowded jails. at the end of of 2015, there were 32 jails over their population caps. for these reasons, we respectfully oppose the enhancement portion of the bill. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rafael Madrigal: Good morning, Ms. Skinner my name is Rafael Madrigal, an exoneree. I was convicted of a crime I did not commit back in 2003. I was exonerated in 2009. I've been released since 2009. I've adapted to the society pretty well let me say, but I have had my struggles and majority of the part of the struggle that I've been having is due to the process of the compensation, and not necessarily just myself but my family along with me, in the seven years that I've been home I've been trying to get two of my older boys through college. It's been very difficult. I mean, spending 10 years in prison, coming out with no kind of experience, re-experience actually I should say. Having no support from the State of California in helping me reintroduce myself into society. Not helping me find a job. Not helping me find medical assistance. I mean literally I was, the door was open and said, you know what? Be on your way and that's it. I have done the best I can in these last seven years, but like I said, I still have struggles that I need to get through. I have a son that's going to graduate from Cal State Long Beach in May. It's been very hard and especially with the way jobs are out there right now so scarce. We've managed but we're hoping that you guys can help us out and speed up this process for the compensation for not just myself, but for all the exonerees that are out there in California right now, asking California to help us. Thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 25, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 37, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alex Simpson: I certainly can. My name is Alex Simpson and I'm the Associate Director of the California Innocence Project. I was Mr. Madrigal's attorney for about two years to reverse his conviction and I've been his attorney for seven years, trying to get him compensation. Now, this is something, this process should be fairly simple. Mr. Madrigal's case, a judge found that he was at work at the time of the shooting, a judge found that another person had confessed to the shooting, and a judge said that he was innocent of the crime that he was previously convicted of. The compensation board, despite these findings, has taken seven years and we're still waiting for compensation. And the reason is because the board is not really set up for compensation for the wrongfully convicted. It is the victims compensation board. There is no experience training familiarity with the types of issues and the types of Cases that a reversal of a conviction that an exoneration entails. This bill would allow for a special master to have the experience, the training, the familiarity that is necessary to make sure that the cases and the claims are consistent. That the board's decisions are consistent with the judge's decisions and more importantly, that these claims are decided much more quickly. Nobody wants to see innocent people struggle and nobody wants to deny compensation to somebody's innocent, but it's just as important that we make sure that compensation is granted quickly and efficiently to make sure that people like Rafael can get back on their feet. So, thank you so much.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 119, 'end': 127, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 327, 'end': 335, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1516, 'end': 1522, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: Good morning, Madam Chair and members. Ignacio Hernandez, actually here on behalf of two entities today. The first the California Attorneys for Criminal Justice, which is a state-wide Association of criminal defense attorneys in private practice and work in public defender offices. We are a co-sponsor of the measure and there's little that I can really add to what was already said other than a couple of things. I want to keep in mind that up until two years ago individuals who were exonerated here in California were not entitled to any transitional services coming out of state prison. So the services that are available to parolees were not available to exonorees up until you passed a bill two years ago and so, there's a lot of work that needs to be done even on that law, but certainly, this bill would be really important to help streamline the process at the victim's comp board. I'm also here on behalf of Obie Anthony who is Executive Director of Exonerated Nation. Who was trying to be here today, but couldn't make it, and he's testified in front of you, this body, before. He spent 17 years in LA County on a murder charge before he was finally released and exonerated. It took him a number of years to get his claim dealt with at the victims comp board. And so he wanted to express his strong support. He's now spending his time, he created a new non-profit to work with exonerees, not just in California but around the country, to help them re-enter. So he's been working with lots of folks and so he wanted to add his support to this bill. The last thing I'll add is, keep in mind the timing of what happens at the victim's comp board, and once you go through that process, it still has to come to the legislature to be approved, and unfortunately, there have been times where a claim has been approved, but the legislature's out on recess, or off on interim, and so that also delays that. You guys have been very good at responding quickly and moving the claims through when you are in session, but remember, there's just a lot of steps to this process, and in the meantime, as you heard already, exonorees need to make it through, so we ask for your support.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 919, 'end': 931, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Micah Doctroff: Yeah. Micah Doctroff, on behalf of the ACLU of California, in strong support.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kim McGill: kim from the youth justice coalition, an organization led by people who've been incarcerated in our families, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maurice Gowens: Maurice Gowens, Fathers&Families of San Joaquin, strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Tanney: laura glenn tanney, san diego district attorney's office, bonnie demanus. we are also opposed to this bill as currently drafted. i echo the comments of my colleague here from the california district attorney's association. well we have absolutely no opposition to increasing the efficiency of these decisions, and of allowing the process to move in a manner that is beneficial to people who are wrongfully convicted. these are often contested hearings with county counsel appearing on behalf of the state or excuse me the county. and because they're often contested hearings, there needs to be a neutral arbiter at these hearings to make the appropriate determinations.  again, we also have no objection to taking it out of the victim's compensation board if that's this committee's will. however, again, it needs to be a neutral arbiter that makes the decision. particularly, if there are not three arbiters making the determination, for the same reason that to avoid any bias that would otherwise might enter based upon the somewhat vague and very broad qualifications required under the current drafting of the bill. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 58, 'end': 72, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nick Strodotten: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Nick Strodotten for the California Public Defender's Association. We strongly support this bill and I would like to make three points to the Committee. The first is that under current law because of the court ruling in 2016, essentially people who were not guilty of the crime because of their mental health condition are now in a worse position than people who were guilty of the crime and had no mental health condition. In other words, people who were convicted by a jury and found to be morally and actually culpable of the offense went to state prison, but can now apply for a reduction in sentence. Whereas people who were found not guilty of an offense by a jury because of their mental condition and confined to a state hospital cannot. We think this is fundamentally unfair and actually contrary to the intent of the voters in passing the initiative statues. The second two points Senator Beall has already made, but I think they're worth reiterating. One is is that these people are taking up bed space that might be used by people who are actually in need of acute psychiatric treatment and because the Prop Prop 47 and Prop 36 statutes require a court to evaluate that person's current dangerousness. This may free up bed space that's needed for people who are actually currently dangerous that are currently sitting in county jails. And the final point, of course is that because this bill would require courts to make an individualized determination as to dangerousness, none of the people who would be released by this, by extending this to the mentally ill, would actually be dangerous according, at least, to the trial judge who sentenced them.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 923, 'end': 928, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mike Romano: Hi, my name is Mike Romano I work at Stanford Law School, I'm here on behalf of the NAACP Legal Defense Fund. I want to just reiterate with Senator Beall and other witnesses had said, that this is a modest correction to Proposition 36 and 47 to allow people who are mentally ill and committed the same offense, the opportunity to go before a court and prove that they're no longer a threat to public safety. It streamlines procedures that are already in place for folks who are in the state hospitals, it will increase capacity in the state hospitals, and will allow these people to get treatment in the communities, rather than the state hospitals once the judge finds that they're no longer a risk to public safety. The folks who have been released so far under Proposition 36 have been doing extraordinarily well with treatment in the community and I think this community will also benefit, as well.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 148, 'end': 153, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jacqueline Danowski: additional witnesses in support. jacqueline laura danowski with disability rights california and we support this bill.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Coby Gazow: Mr. Chair and Senators, Coby Gazow with California Association of Psychiatric Technicians. This is simply an equity matter. There is a 700 person waiting list for incompetent to stand trials in the state hospital system right now, this would free up some bed space. We appreciate this and support the bill.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mica Doctoroff: mica jacqueline doctoroff, on behalf of the aclu of california in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bob Dura: madam chair and members, bob on behalf of sal rosseli and the national union of healthcare workers. we have thousands of clinicians in the kaiser permanente system and other hospitals statewide and we strongly support the bill.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 42, 'end': 53, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tiffany Whiten: tiffany with the service employees international union in support.
[]
Cory Salzillo: good morning, mr. chair and members. cory mica salzillo on behalf of the california state sheriffs association. unfortunately, here in opposition to sb 143, i think there's a critical distinction between the classes of persons that we're talking about here in this bill. persons who were found not guilty by reasons of insanity are committed to the state hospital for treatment and not punishment. conversely, people who are found guilty of an offense can be sentenced to incarceration and punishment. and while both types of people may ultimately be confined, the purpose of the confinement is materially different. an ngis term of commitment reflects the need to treat the mental condition that underlies the activity at issue, allowing the commitment length to reduce simply, because of criminal sentence of the same length may be retroactively shortened under prop 36 or prop 47. ignores the reason why a person is committed to the state hospital, namely to be treated. additionally, given that, a person found not guilty by reason of insanity may be released before his or her maximum term of commitment expires by prevailing at a sanity restoration trial, the bill is unnecessary. when prop 36 and prop 47 were drafted and when they allowed persons to be re-sentenced, they could've made the accommodations sought by this bill, but they did not. and so, i would point out that it was not the court who ultimately made this determination. it was merely the court who identified the lacking that prop 36 and prop 47 that has been identified here by the proponents today. it's not the court's doing. this is the authors of prop 36 and prop 47. so whether it was an oversight or whether it was a purposeful ignoring of this particular thing, that's the reality of it. so for that reason, the material differences that exist between criminal sentences for the purposes of punishment and a term of committment designed to treat a mental condition. the sheriffs must respectfully oppose sb 143.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stephen Manley: My name is Stephen Manley, I'm a Superior Court judge from Santa Clara County. I'm speaking for myself only and not in behalf of the courts. I have been working with mentally ill and substance abuse offenders for over 25 years. I supervise all the mental health and drug cases in our court and what I wanted to speak to is this. I believe that judges need to have more options in terms of disposing of cases and finding the right answer for those who are mentally ill. What we have seen in my county, and across the state, is a dramatic increase in the number of mentally ill offenders who are in custody. In our jails, since realignment, it has gone from 12%, we did a study last year, the county did it, not the court. 40% of the individuals in our county jail suffer from mental illness and are diagnosed as mentally ill. It's an incredible cost to the county. Our county is joined with the court in trying to find alternatives to move the mentally ill out of jail. I think SB 8 would give the court another option in working with these offenders and I want to point out the fact, as the previous witness noted, we have military diversion. The statute is based somewhat on military diversion and that model. It is a model that requires a standard of proof that is much less, much lower than SB 8. It only need be demonstrated that the individual served in the military, and as a result of service, I mean nothing to do with the crime, has mental illness or some other serious disability. What we have found is that those veterans coming back from Iraq and Afghanistan often commit serious misdemeanors. Domestic violence, battery. These offenders, if diverted, do very well and that is because the mental illness, the symptoms of the mental illness relate to the crimes and if you don't treat the symptoms, you do what we've done for years in the courts, which is sentence far too many mentally ill people to far too long in jail. They receive disproportionate sentencing in comparison to those who are not mentally ill and commit the same offenses. And I think what diversion allows to do, with a high standard of proof placed on the defense, and in the requirement of an adversarial hearing, is to move more mentally ill offenders who are appropriate into the community without the necessity of long periods of incarceration. Having watched cases over many years, and supervising over 2,300 mentally ill offenders, I can tell you what happens in the courts is they sit in jail, and in the end, the charges are dropped to a lower charge, they plead guilty, they're given credit for time served and put back into the community with no treatment, no intervention at all. Therefore, the criminality continues. If you do not treat the underlying basis of the criminal behavior, you get nowhere, in my view, and I have seen this over the years. And we've made real progress has been pointed out in San Diego, Orange County, Santa Clara, and many other counties, in military diversion. Showing that we can take offenders who do commit serious crimes as well as crimes that are not that serious, and through treatment, get them back in the community. The bottom line, to me as a judge, is no matter what the punishment is, no matter what the sentence is, all of these offenders come back to the community, and often, back to our courts and we start all over with the same process. We need to do something different, and I think this gives us an opportunity with a very high burden of proof, and the opportunity for an adversarial hearing. I'm often asked, do these programs require more judicial resources? We have not needed more judicial resources to handle military diversion where, I assure you, is an adversarial hearing. Because the prosecution, often, for very solid basis, opposes because wanting to protect victims and the seriousness of the offense. Not everyone is diverted, many are denied, but it is not a process that requires great resources from the court. Because in the end, the court has to deal with all of this anyway and therefore, I urge you to support this bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jaclyn Zenowski: Jaclyn Zenowski with Disability Rights California and we support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Gonzales: rebecca with the national association of social workers, california chapter, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kim McGill: good morning. mcgill from the youth justice coalition. we're in strong support and we've all been detained in the jails, and seen firsthand the suffering.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Wilson: Michael Wilson, Youth Justice Coalition, also have been taken to jail and seen the effects, in full support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rosa Aqeel: Rosa Aqeel on behalf of the Alliance for Boys and Men of Color, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tiffany Wayne: wayne, with the service employees international union, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Coby Pizzotti: coby with the california association of psychiatric connections, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: Ignacio Hernandez on behalf of the California Attorneys for Criminal Justice, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Ridolfi: laura on behalf of the w haywood burns institute in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dawn Koepke: hi, dawn cory koepke on behalf of crime victims united of california. we apologize to the committee and to the author's office for our late opposition unless amended. we did speak with the member staff as well as committee staff indicating our concerns regarding the lack of victim protections in the bill, as well as for restitution purposes. and we need to clarify that any particular instances where there is a victim involved, that that may be maintained as part of the individual's record, specifically in instances where there may be additional re-offenses later, to be able to prove patterns for prosecutors and law enforcement in any future instances. so for these reasons, we are opposed unless amended, but look forward to working with the author and committee to address these, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Craig DeLuz: chairman, members of the committee. craig with the firearms policy coalition in the california association of federal firearms licensees. if one looks at the statistics, when you look at the overall number of firearms that have been stolen in the state of california and those that have actually been stolen from gun stores. it represents less than 1% of all firearms that have been stolen. and most of them, quite frankly, have in fact been recovered. in fact, it's more likely that a firearm is to be taken, is going to be stolen, from law enforcement than it is from a gun dealer. our concern is also the fact that in this measure there is no provision that deals with, for example, instances where local municipalities or even local property owners don't allow such modifications. such an example happened right here in sacramento. a retailer, sacramento black rifle sought to make these sorts of changes in the city of rockland. and not only did the city of rockland not allow them to do so, the property owner did not allow them to do so. and the challenges that created was that individual was then required to move, when in many municipalities in the state of california there are greater, and greater zoning requirements. for example, in the county of alameda there is no place to open a gun store in the unincorporated area of alameda county. so if your landlord says no we don't allow this, or alameda county says we don't allow this, then they are basically going to have to shut their doors and not be able to reopen. in a state where more and more we are making it difficult to exercise the right to keep and bear arms by exercising the ability to sell firearms, we see this as an attack on a fundamental right. the more difficult you make it, and in this particular case we are looking at a situation where the number of firearms which, you know, any firearm stolen is an issue. but when you look at this and the impact that's going to have compared to the overall scope of these number of firearms in the overall scope of the problem. we just see this as a problem looking for a solution. we spoke with the author's office, we inquired as to why not an incentive as opposed to a stick? we seem to be in the state of california always interested in offering punishments for people who don't do what we say, instead of encouraging them to do things. and if one reads into the author's testimony, the market, in many cases is already solving this problem and finding ways in which to address this issue. for these reasons we oppose the bill.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amanda Wilcox: good morning, i'm wilcox, here on behalf of the california chapters of the brady campaign to prevent gun violence. we have 28 chapters throughout the state. many of our members have lost a loved one to gunfire. our core mission is to keep weapons out of dangerous hands, and to the extent that firearms missing from law enforcement agencies, either by theft, or being lost, or some other way disappearing. being disposed of, whatever, to the extent that those guns end up in the hands of people who are prohibited from owning firearms, or who are dangerous. that's obviously a great concern to us, and how those guns will be used, and if lives will be lost. frankly, i am surprised that law enforcement agencies don't already have these protocols. i guess some do, but many do not, and there certainly is not a law requiring it. and it makes sense that we ask our law enforcement agencies in the state of california to keep better track of their guns. do this annual accounting of guns they think they have and what they actually have. and learn the extent of the problem in their agency. because, of course, one of the first ways to address a problem of missing guns is to identify the extent of the problem. so we thank you for carrying this measure, we're in support.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 75, 'end': 80, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Craig DeLuz: Madam Chairman, Members of the Committee, Craig DeLuz with the Firearms Policy Coalition. On this issue three independent investigations have been done by the San Jose Mercury News, The Orange County Register, and the NBC Bay Area. And there were three things that basically came out of all three of those. The first was that most law enforcement agencies had absolutely no way to account for or track their firearms. Secondly, that law enforcement firearms have gone missing and, in some cases, those law enforcement agencies have absolutely no idea how those firearms went missing. And then, finally, some of these firearms are, in fact, being used to commit crimes. The State of California, this Legislature, and the Governor have long said we want to promote responsible gun ownership. And have thus hoisted upon individual gun owners and citizens of California a number of regulations to that means. It would only make sense that the same level, or even a greater level of accountability, ought to be placed upon the State's most prolific firearms owners. In particular, when we're talking about the state. It is for these reason that we support this measure.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Baker: good morning, madam chair and members. baker for the american civil liberties union of california. if i may, just at the outside, i want to correct an apparent misimpression. we, as senator hill has indicated, have been in dialogue with the author's office for a number of months. we are willing to work with them and continue to work with his office over the last few months. we appreciate the direction in which the bill is going, including the amendments that were taken this morning. which we weren't previously made aware of but i will be happy to review. and we certainly do appreciate senator hill's interest in this issue. the law enforcement's secretive acquisition and use of surveillance technology has been of particular concern because of its disproportionate impact on low income californians. communities of color and immigrants. unfortunately, our review of the bill so far leaves us with the conclusion that, at this point, it offers more, or appears to offer more, than it delivers. we, as i say, appreciate the new definition of the law enforcement agencies covering those like the alameda da, who were previously excluded. unfortunately, though, it also still fails to cover certain surveillance technology. now senator hill indicated a few minutes ago his concern about social media scrubbers and facial recognition technologies. and those are real concerns. unfortunately, we would like to continue to work with senator hill because we don't think those technologies are among those covered by the bill. social media scrubbers, for example, are essentially software that is not within the definition. facial recognition technology, on the other hand, is supposed to be covered. but when it's used on devices that are not, quote, unquote, primarily intended for it to collect that purpose, for instance, cell phones, they would be excluded. so there just seem to be a lot of holes yet in the bill and we would like to continue to work with senator hill to address these concerns. thank you.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 190, 'end': 194, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 600, 'end': 604, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1097, 'end': 1111, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1240, 'end': 1244, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1442, 'end': 1446, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1969, 'end': 1973, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cory Salzillo: Good morning, Madam Chair, members. Cory Salzillo here on behalf of the California State Sheriffs' Association, unfortunately in opposition to the measure. We have discussed the bill with the author, but unfortunately, remain opposed. As he noted, we do fear that the bill provides a roadmap to criminals on how and when law enforcement deploys surveillance technology, how surveillance is used, what data can and are allocated or are collected, and how technology is monitored for security is information that's vital to the security and protection of that information. But it's required to be made public pursuant to this bill. And where some have noted they want this bill to go further, we disagree with the bill's encouragement of local agencies to adopt more strict regulation. Despite the bill's purported notion that it creates a statewide standard. We're also very concerned about the requirement that sheriffs submit plans for approval to the Board of Supervisors. Sheriffs are independent elected officials. And should not be required to obtain board approval when determining how to best carry out their duty to protect public safety. I would incorporate, by reference, the remarks made by Mr. Vranicar about the violation of government code Section 25303 about obstructing a sheriff's ability to carry out its investigative function. And would respectfully ask for your no vote.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1206, 'end': 1214, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Craig DeLuz: Craig DeLuz with the Firearms Policy Coalitions support the measure.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrew Medino: madam chair and members, andrew jonah medino of asian americans advancing justice california, proud to co-sponsor sb 31 with the aclu and care california chapter. recently, the state recognized february 19 as a day of remembrance. this year, the day of remember and serve as a reflection of the 75th anniversary of the signing of executive order 9066, which ordered the internment of japanese and japanese-americans during world war ii. and now we are faced with calls to establish a muslim registry by national leaders. we know from history, we must stand up against the formation of laws that are based in prejudice and discrimination. sb 31 will incur minimum costs state of california. however its impact on our most vulnerable communities is immeasurable. we strongly urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Yanita Casillas: thank you madam chair and members of the committee. my name is yanita andrew casillas and i'm with the council on american islam relations california. we're the nation's largest muslim civil rights group, and we represent here in california approximately 800,000 muslims. so sb31 protects the safety and well being of all californians by ensuring that state and local agencies, as well as personnel, do not participate in, or use agency resources to create a registry list or database of individuals based on religious belief, practices or affiliation or national origin or ethnicity because president trump has kept true to many of his campaign promises. espitori one will be instrumental in proactively defending the civil rights of the muslim and immigrant community in california. this is very important because in 2007, the lapd actually started a muslim. some mapping program. they had provisions that indicated that if you had decided to convert to the religion of islam, you had 30 days to register. that program was immediately scrapped due to the efforts of local aclu, our care act, la chapters as well as other civil rights group. so as you can see, this is something that's really important and proactive. so sb 31, as we stated before, will incur minimum cost to state of california, but we hope that with the passage of this bill and your aye vote, that we can, as a state, be a role model for what civil rights should look like in the state, in this country.
[{'start': 63, 'end': 85, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 602, 'end': 607, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tristan Brown: Thank you Madam Chair and members. Tristan Brown with the California Federation of Teachers also in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christopher Sanchez : Christopher Sanchez with Cheer Love, the Coalition for Remain and Immigrant Rights in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rosa Aqeel: Rosa Aqeel with the Alliance for Boys and Men of Color in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cesar Diaz: cesar yanita diaz with the state building and construction trades council, also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rene Bayardo: rene cesar bayardo, sciu california, also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Parra: laura rene parra, in behalf of the city of long beach, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Welle: deacon jason laura welle from delores mission church in boyle heights la. and pico california's 480 multifaith congregations, schools, and institutions, in very strong support.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kaitlyn Bellis: kaitlyn jason bellis of public council in los angeles in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ronald Coleman: ronald kaitlyn coleman on behalf of the california immigrant policy center, here in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amanti Nole: amanti ronald nole from oakland, oakland pico organization, and i strongly support sb 31. it protects religious freedoms, a value that i hold dearly. and also it takes a necessary next step to make sure that state resources are prohibited from being used to provide information to create a despicable, unlawful registry based on religion, national origin, or ethnicity.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Les Morones: hi les amanti morones oakland community organization in the city of oakland, pico affiliate, and i'm in strong support and i would also like to translate what my colleague just said. ..., he's an oco leader also in the city of oakland. st louis bertram church and the pico affiliate. as a person of faith i firmly believe that we should not permit that local and state agencies share, stats about religion or nationality at this city of persons in order to create a registry for the federal government.
[{'start': 3, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joe Michael: joe les michael for equality california in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gretchen Young: Gretchen Young PICO, California Sacramento Area Congregations Together, definitely in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dennis Seaton: dennis joe seaton on behalf of the church state council and north american religious liberty association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gabriel Garcia: Gabriel Garcia with the South East Asia Resource Action Center, also in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Noe Paramo: noe dennis paramo on behalf of california rural legal assistance foundation in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stacy Barth: yes, my name is stacy. as far as the fiscal impact, i believe it's already been stated that it's unknown. so really, no one has any clarification on that yet. if and when there ever will be this is kind of based all on political rhetoric at this point, and people are in a frenzy about something that hasn't even happened and they are reading too much into policies that are meant to protect us all even the people here illegally. so i don't understand honestly why people are freaking out about wanting to keep everyone safe? whatever the political impact or financial impact or fiscal impact of that is, how much is your life worth? how much would you pay to keep your children safe? and what lengths would you got to? so, if you're saying i'm not going to spend $10 per citizen to keep everyone safe, and then your child dies because of it? are you going to regret that? yeah, so, you kind of gotta do what you gotta do. unfortunately, we live in a day and age where we do have to be proactive. we do have to make sure that everyone is vetted properly, because we do have an imminent threats against us. they're on the internet, they're on tv and they're very vocal about it. so i don't understand why even if there is a fiscal impact to us, why there wouldn't be something sufficient especially when we're trying to consider giving free legal aid, taxpayer aid to illegal aliens trying to fight deportation.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Deedee Rammel: my name is rammel i represent the american indians of california and i oppose sb 31.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jim Bills: Jim Bills, US Navy veteran and I oppose SB 31.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Guzban: john noe guzban, i'm a united states citizen and california resident and i oppose sb 31.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cesar Diaz: mr. chair and members, cesar john diaz on behalf of the state building and construction trades council. i think this committee knows very well, there's no secret, the underground economy and the abuses of workers in that underground economy. as mentioned by an earlier witness, up to 3.5 million workers could be undocumented. many of those are in the construction industry. when you have a workforce that is in the shadows, that causes a lot of problems, not only in the state's fiscal picture because you don't have workers' compensation coverage, you don't have healthcare coverage; all of those costs then are put on, and it basically benefits the employer, but unfortunately, put onto the taxpayer as well. we find it unconscionable that children could be separated from their families and actually have to represent themselves in proceedings against actual government lawyers. the state building and trades council has a responsibility to protect all construction workers in the construction industry. i, myself, am a proud immigrant. i worked on a construction site, as well, when i was 12 years old, and i was undocumented at the time. so i know very well the fear that a worker may have on the site and also need to have the ability to protect and have legal counsel. so for those reasons, we urge your support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ed Barrons: barrons on behalf of the los angeles county board of supervisors, in support.
[]
Andrew Anthony: Andrew Anthony on behalf of Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 46, 'end': 59, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bless Sheppard: Bless Sheppard representing the Silicon Valley Community Foundation, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Valderrama: tim with the weideman group on behalf of next gen climate in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rene Bayardo: rene, seiu california in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 6, 'end': 10, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Laura Parra: Laura Parra on behalf of the City of Long Beach in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Caitlin Vega: Caitlin Vega for the California Labor Federation also here in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Austin Webster: austin cesar webster, on behalf of the faculty association of california community colleges and the california community colleges extended opportunities programs and services association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tristan Brown: tristan austin brown of the california federation of teachers, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Welle: deacon welle from dolores mission church in boyle heights, los angeles and the 450,000 families of pico, california, strongly in support of a bill that would help protect families and keep them together.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gretchen Young: gretchen, california pico, sacramento area congregation, strongly in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sandra Palacios: Sandra Palacios with the California Catholic Conference in support, as well as representing the Archdiocese of Los Angeles, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carol Rogers: carol tristan rogers, resident of elk grove and voter, i'm in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sylvia Saleesha: sylvia carol saleesha on behalf of the city and county of san francisco and the office of mayor ed lee in strong support. also, i'd like to testify on behalf of the california faculty association in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 96, 'end': 102, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jo Michael: jo sylvia michael for equality california in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christopher Sanchez : christopher jo sanchez with chir, the coalition for human immigrant rights, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ryan McElhinney: Ryan McElhinney on behalf of California's 412 elected Community College Trustees in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dennis Seaton: Dennis Seaton on behalf of the North American Religious Liberty Association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Noah Epadema: Noah Epadema on behalf of California Rural Legal Assistance Foundation in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gabriel Garcia: Gabriel Garcia with the Southeast Asia Resource Action Center, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ronald Coleman: Ronald Coleman with the California Immigrant Policy Center, here in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maya Ingram: Maya Ingram with the ACLU of California in strong support, also on behalf of the California Coalition for Universal Representation. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Yannina Casillas: Yannina Casillas with the Council on American-Islamic Relations California in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Angie Knoll: Angie Knoll from PICO Oakland, a member of Imani Community Church in Oakland. I'm here, too, as  person of faith and a chance to put my faith in action. It is important that due process be provided to immigrants and that you take the action to make that happen.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Aurelio Pena: mi nombre es aurelio. yo apoyo a la sb6. para que pedides que por favor voten para que las organizaciones no lucrativas reciban fondos para apoyar a las familias inmigrantes y que puedan tener un abogado para su defensa.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 20, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 22, 'end': 32, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Les Morones: Les Morones, good morning, Oakland Community Organization, a PICO affiliate, St. Louis Birchon. And as a Catholic, I'm a firm believer of SB 6 and ask for you to vote for it. I firmly support it.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Raul Rodriguez: yes, my name is raul christopher rodriguez and i am the california coordinator for america first latinos. i'm a proud american, i was born in this country and those that come to this country should come to this country legally. when you don't come to this country legally, then there is consequences that you have to suffer. we should not have to pay for that representation for them to have legal counsel or attorneys whatever it takes for them, it is not our responsibility. therefore, you are in violation of our constitution by promoting illegal immigration. these people are lawbreakers. they've broken the law. they've come across our borders illegally. they have to suffer the consequences. they have to get in line and they have to become legal citizens. like i said before, they are lawbreakers. the 14th amendments, section 3 states, i previously stated that you are in violation of that law. when you promote illegal immigration, you have given up your citizenship. you have forfeit your citizenship, because you are in violation of the constitution. when we don't have representation, we don't have liberties. so therefore, you need to support our constitution. you need to stop violating our constitution and you need to introduce bills that will promote americans. we're asking you to put americans first. this is what this country is founded on. to put americans first, our veterans first, our homeless first, and those that are in this country legally. allow them to do their bidding, because they are legal citizens, so therefore please, i'm asking you, gentlemen and women to do the right thing to vote no. i oppose this bill 100%. it is unconstitutional, it is un-american, and thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Didi Remela: I'm Didi Remela for the American Indians, California, and I oppose SB 6.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jim Bills: jim, us navy veteran, 30 year afl-cio union member. i oppose sb 6.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Grossman: i'm grossman in riverside county. speaking again, opposing sb 6 because as an american, californian tax payer, i'm representing those tax payers who differentiate between legal immigration and illegal immigration. so lets go ahead and support those legal immigrants that are here that need our support as well as the citizens of california. those are the people that you were voted in to represent. please do not represent the illegals, those that are foreign born that have their ties to foreign countries that don't have our interests at heart. please vote no on sb6.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Caitlin Bellis: yes, i'm caitlin raul bellis of public counsel in los angeles. i'm here to provide technical assistance today. and also, public counsel is in support of this bill. so, first of all there is no right to appointed counsel for people who are in removal proceedings. so, you can be detained and you can be removed from this country without ever having the support of an attorney. even though the government is represented in every proceeding, and even though it's a trial-like environment. and so, in fact, the vast majority of detained people who are in removal proceedings currently do not have counsel and never receive competent legal advice in their proceedings. this includes many people who have meritorious claims for relief and who would have a legal right to stay in the united states, and who fail to achieve that relief because they don't have counsel. i also would like to clarify that the bill would only provide funding to attorneys, that we are hopeful that the requirements would actually be quite stringent where removal defense is extremely complex. and immigration law is extremely complex. and we're hopeful that the eligibility requirements for grants would ensure that funding only goes to organizations that have sufficient expertise in the area. and so, not just attorneys but attorneys where their organizations have five years experience providing complex removal defense services or have already shown their competence by undertaking contract with the federal government through a couple of the programs that have provided counsel to unaccompanied minors or to mentally incompetent detainees. and then, there are a couple of other eligibility requirements. on the post-conviction relief point, oftentimes, a conviction will completely bar someone to immigration relief, even if that was convicted without the confident advice of a public defender as to the immigration consequences of the conviction. and so, people can sometimes accept pleas where, it reduces peas where they end up being automatically deportable. and they had no idea that that was the case when they would have otherwise fought the conviction. and also, under prop 47, a lot of current felonies can be reduced to misdemeanors. and that can help provide people with immigration relief. furthermore, immigration law is retroactive, so sometimes a person is convicted of something when it wasn't a deportable offense, and then, it becomes a deportable offense. so, in all of these scenarios, sometimes with decades old drug convictions or minor convictions that end up rendering someone automatically deportable, at post-conviction, relief is the best way to help that person stay in the country. so, it's not to, it's really to-
[{'start': 9, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Angela Chan: good morning. my name is angela caitlin chan, i'm the policy director and a senior staff attorney at advancing justice asian law caucuses, a civil rights organization based in san francisco with affiliates throughout the country including in los angeles. i'm here today to urge passage of the california values act sb 54 authored by the pro-temp of the senate kevin de leon. with about 28 percent of the country's undocumented population, which is estimated in 2.5 to 3 million in california alone, our state stands to be one of the hardest hit by the new administration anticipated inhumane anti immigrant policies which we've already seen a glimpse of through their several executive orders attacking immigrants. at the same time, california's poise to lead the country in fighting back against mass deportations because of ground work led my many years of state organizing by immigrant communities and immigrant rights organizations such as those who help pass the trust act and the truth act over the past few years, many of whom are in the room today in strong support of this bill. the california values act will keep our communities are being torn apart. it'll keep families, such as pedro's, from being being torn apart. it'll protect due process rights, it'll reduce fear in our communities, and it also will make sure we don't use state and local resources to fuel mass deportations, and also to burden local resources. in particular, the bill contains the following key provisions. first, state and local law enforcement agencies along with school police would not be allowed to engage in immigration enforcement, with some exceptions. no state or local law enforcement will be allowed to detain or transfer any person for deportation without a warrant. there's also a federal case law that supports this since it's a due process constitutional violation to do these things. no state or local resource will be used to investigate, detain or detect, report or arrest a person purely for immigration purposes. secondly, the bill will also create safe spaces. it will require that california school, hospitals, and court houses remain safe and accessible to all california residents regardless of immigration status. each agency would be required to establish and make public policies, model policies, that limit immigration enforcement to the fullest extent possible under federal and state law. this bill would save us local and state resources, because it costs a lot of money to engaged in trump's deportation machine. we'll fight, we'll resist and we'll protect our communities against mass deportation. we look forward to working with all of you here to protect california, to protect our residents and to make sure that our residents are not in fear because of a broken immigration system that does not allow many people in california who contribute immensely to this economy, and this large community, to remain here and to feel safe. california's ready to lead the charge, and we want to really encourage you and support you in voting yes for the california values act, sb 54, today, thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 360, 'end': 373, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1191, 'end': 1196, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2502, 'end': 2507, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Carol Rogers: my name is carol angela rogers, i'm a us citizen, voter in elk grove, california, and i rise in support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sylvia Saleesha: saleesha, on behalf of the board of supervisors for the city and county of san francisco as well as the california faculty association in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tristan Brown: Thank you Mr. Chair and members, Tristan Brown of the California Federation of Teachers, proud to support this bill. Thanks.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kalidia Alamjabid: good morning, kalidia with the advancement project. i'm proud to support this bill.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bruce Palmer: palmer, sacramento jewish community relations council in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Patricia Sturdevant: patricia carol sturdevant,  national council of jewish women, sacramento section, a community that well knows the consequences of other rising members of our community in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rene Bayardo: rene, seiu california in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 6, 'end': 10, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Laura Parra: Laura Parra, on behalf of Students Matter in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jody Hicks: jody patricia hicks on behalf of planned parenthood affiliates in california in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Caitlin Vega: Caitlin Vega for the California Labor Federation here in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cesar Diaz: cesar jody diaz for the state building and construction trades council in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jacqueline Aguilar: hello, my name is jacqueline cesar aguilar, i'm community organizer with plaster people faith together in alliance with pico national network, and strongly support of this bill.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gretchen Young: gretchen jacqueline young, california pico, and little old ladies everywhere, i'm strongly in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 27, 'end': 42, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alex Gibbs: alex, on behalf of the cities of st. pablo, berkeley, the city of oakland, san leandro, and emeryville in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Les Morales: hi, good morning. les gretchen morales from oakland, california, oakland community organizations in st. louisburg john catholic church, in support of sb 54. and we have close to 4,000 letters from our city in support.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Felix Estanada: My name is Felix Estanada from Sacramento. I represent the Sacramento community and I support 254.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gabriel Garcia: gabriel les garcia with the se asian resource action center, in support
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christopher Sanchez : Christopher Sanchez with CHIR, the Coalition for Humane Immigrant Rights, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Aurelio Pena: good morning, my name is pena. i'm coming from oakland, and from pico california, and i support sb 54.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Manuel Arias: My name is Manuel Arias, and I'm here for Oakland Community ... and I'm here to support SB 54.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joe Michael: Joe Michael for Equality California, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maya Ingram: Maya Ingram from the ACLU of California, in support, also extending the support of MALDEF, the Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund which is also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christine Smith: Christine Smith, California Partnership to end domestic violence in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kaitlin Valice: Kaitlin Valice of Public Counsel in Los Angeles in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Unina Costias: Unina Costias with the council on American Islamic relations, the nation's largest Muslim Civil Rights group and strongly in support of SB 54.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maya Alvarez: maya, on behalf of cal state l.a. university and school of social work, strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Isabelle Esparza: Isabelle Esparza, on behalf of Cal State L.A. School of Social Work, strongly in support of SB 54.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joanna Mesa: joanna gabriel mesa from los angeles, california and i'm support of sb 54.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Reyna Sotelo: good morning, reyna here on behalf of cal state ula, masters in social work student. i support this bill, not only because i as a daughter of an immigrant, mexican mother, have experienced a similar situation as this gentleman just spoke about and also as a social worker, who represents a lot of our clients who are vulnerable and are afraid to speak up. and we see some of our resources that we have to offer into our communities. i'm in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 48, 'end': 51, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tina Ahmed: Tina Ahmed, I'm from Los Angeles, I'm a former public school teacher and social worker and I'm in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Caitlyn Medina: Caitlyn Medina, UCLA, MSW Masters of Social Welfare, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gabriella Maperanta: Gabriella Maperanta, undocumented student, masters student at Cal State L.A.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robin Pomeranke: Robin Pomeranke with Asian Americans Advancing Justice, ALC in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rhonda Rios-Kravitz: rhonda joanna rios-kravitz ceo of alianza and immigrants rights group, and dean ... at sacramento city college in strongly support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 30, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Carol Bergen: bergen, retired california public school teacher with aclu and pico in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 54, 'end': 58, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 63, 'end': 67, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sarah Badur: sarah on behalf of clergy and laity united for economic justice in los angeles. we give our support for sb 54.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Allison Delgado: allison rhonda delgado with the east bay agency for children in oakland and we give our strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jess Leardo: Jess Leardo on behalf of the East Bay Young Democrats and the California Sanctuary Advocates in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paula Doe: Paula Doe in strong support SB 54, as a social worker and student of Cal State East Bay MSW.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ariane Cats: ariane allison cats from the county of napa, social worker in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sabrina Word: sabrina ariane word from solano county, masters of social work, student from san jose state, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Andrew Antwih: Andrew Antwih on behalf of Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti, we support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 45, 'end': 58, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ruby Aguilar: Mi nombre es Ruby Aguilar And I strongly support of this bill. I am a MSW student at San Jose State University and I intern at [FOREIGN], a non-profit organization for Latinos diagnosed with cancer. And again I strongly support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 25, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Guillermo Rodriguez: Good morning. My name is Guillermo Rodriguez. And I'm from Salinas, California, and I'm a Master of Social Work student at CSU Monterey Bay. And I'm also a parent of an immigrant child. Thank you, I'm in support.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jackie Smith: good morning. my name is jackie sabrina smith. and i'm a student at california state university of monterey bay. i'm a master of social worker student and a strong supporter of this bill, and so is my department of social work and master of social workers student's association. so please pass this bill.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrew Marquez: good morning, my name is marquez, i'm with california state university of fresno, master of social work program, and i proudly support this bill.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Remy Converse: Hello, I'm Remy Converse, I'm a Masters of Social Work student from Cal State Fullerton and I support this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cona Testra: good morning, cona jackie testra from city of tustin, masters of social work student from cal state fullerton, and i strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jacob Fracker: jacob cona fracker, undergraduate at san jose state university school of social work and also the nasw south bay unit, strongly in support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marita Estrada: marita jacob estrada from cal state fullerton, masters in social work from the city of orange, and fully support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Fernandez: jessica, masters social work from cal state fullerton, strongly support sb 54.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Janice Qom: janice from san francisco california, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cassandra Debronski: good morning, my name is cassandra marita debronski. i'm a resident of laguna beach, california and a constituent of orange county representatives on this committee today. i am here as a student of social work from cal state long beach, as well as with the national association of social workers in strong support of this bill.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Taylor Hughes: hello, my name's taylor cassandra hughes and i'm a student of social work as well through cal state fullerton, and i support this bill.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sharon Santos: hello, my name is sharon taylor santos, i'm a resident of alameda county. and an msw student at san francisco state, title 4e and i'm in extremely strong support of this bill.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Ryan: good morning, my name is sarah sharon ryan. i'm a masters in social work at cal state fullerton and i strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert Rodriguez: Hello, my name is Robert Rodriguez. I'm a resident from Orange County and I'm currently a Masters of Social Work student at Cal State Fullerton and I strongly support this bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Yvette Tillman: Hi my name is Yvette Tillman I'm MSW student intern at Monaset Los Angeles. I represent unaccompanied minors who are traumatized by immigration and ICE and I strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cory Salzillo: go ahead. good morning, mr. chair and members. salzillo here on behalf of the california state sheriff's association, regrettably still an opposition to the bill. we remain strongly opposed to the policy, specifically the limitations of sb 54 imposes on law enforcement civilian to communicate. this limitation creates a significant public safety problem in as much as it precludes law enforcement from lawfully communicating with federal authorities about persons who are in our jails who may be a risk to public safety. let me reiterate that sheriffs do not wish to act as immigration police. they are not doing so and they protect everyone in their communities regardless of immigration status. and they are not engaging in frontline law enforcement contrary to the statements that have been made thus far about the bill. let me also be clear that the amendments do not resolve our concerns. the amendments still preclude communications with federal authorities about potentially dangerous people. the amendments only allow communications with people who've been convicted of a misdemeanor and who have a prior violent felony. this leaves open a ban on communication about people convicted with felonies, and people who are alleged of committing crimes, who are in county jails. as to the specific fiscal issues, we fear the compliance with the bill jeopardizes federal funding as the analysis points out, potentially hundreds of millions of dollars or more to state and local governments. the bill also creates a severe economic impact on the counties that have lawful contracts with the federal government to have as ice detainees. and as the analysis points out, this bill potentially creates liability for the state for impairing those contracts. again, sheriffs do not wish into engage in front line immigration law enforcement, but this bill makes significant concerns clear about how we can engage with our federal partners. the fiscal impacts are clear, the policy impacts are just as concerning, and for those significant policy and fiscal impacts we're respectfully opposed to the bill.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chanelle Temple: My name is Chanelle Temple. And I'm an American citizen. And I like to say that I opposed SB 54 because American citizens deserve to be protected from illegal immigration. California sets a trend. And if you pass this bill, you are saying that it's okay to allow illegal aliens to come into any state, and be corrupt, murder, kill, and rape people all across this country. We have had enough. According to Stephen King's office, there's at least 15 to 25 Americans killed every day by illegal immigrant. That is over 9000 people a year. If you round that up, I am sure it is more than that a day. If you take 10,000 times the last decade, that is over a 100,000 American citizens that we know of, that are murdered by illegal immigrants. According to the Constitution we have a right to be protected. We have a right to be protected by domestic and any foreign invasion and this is a foreign invasion, especially on the black community. What you're doing is allowing people to come over here and bring apartheid, because that's what you have done to the black community. They come over here when my people commit a crime, I have a nephew in jail now, we get restressed. They come over here, the law gets changed for them. They get sanctuary, it's unfair and it's unconstitutional. The 14th amendment was written for descendants of black slaves not for anchor babies. Okay, you come over here and you do not respect our laws. I was married to an immigrant. I stood in line with him downtown, with the Immigration officers on Los Angeles street. It took him over 10 years to get his citizenship. He entered this country, he assimilated the correct way, it took him 10 years. We're not against illegal, we're not against immigration, we're against illegal immigration. And again we're not going to have it, no matter what law you pass the Federal government tops that law. You are not the law of the land, I don't care how many laws the State of California pass, okay? Your day is going to come. Thank God to Donald Trump and Jeff Sessions. We have had enough, as American citizens, we pay taxes and we have a right to be protected by the Police Department. That's what they're for. When the bank robbery happens, they don't stop and say I will wait for the Federals to get here before they apprehend the suspect. They arrest that suspect, that same thing with crimes here. We'll not going to go for, we'll not going to tolerate. You'll wasting tax payers money, writing all these senseless, corrupt bills, sending a message out of the State of California. We're not going to have it. We're going to send the right message because we're going to stand and we're going to stop the spread of your corruption. We're not going to have apartheid. You're not going to bring apartheid to the state. We're not going to have two laws. We have one rule of law, and that's the Constitution of the United States. Not one law for American citizens and one law for illegal immigration. We're not going to have it.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 406, 'end': 420, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2006, 'end': 2018, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2023, 'end': 2036, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ray Grangolfren: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My name is Ray Grangolfren, I'm here on behalf of Orange County Sheriff, Sandra Hutchens. One thing the sheriff does want to make clear, and it's a message she's been working to reiterate over these past few months is that the Orange County Sheriff's Department does not enforce immigration law as we patrol neighborhood's and respond to calls for service. We view that as a federal responsibility. We don't ask for the immigration status of suspects, witnesses or those who call in the reported crime. It's very important that any resident regardless of immigration status Can confidently call local law enforcement for help without fear and that is a message she continues to reiterate. However, we are very concerned about the fiscal impacts of SB 54. There are areas where our jurisdiction between state, local and federal government overlap in areas where we receive crucial funding to address significant public safety challenges. One such area is an ICE funded Child Wxploitation Task Force in which Orange County Sheriff's Department contributes in investigator and the federal government helps fund that investigator's overtime, their office space and their equipment. That child exploitation task force has caught numerous individuals that exploit our children. One was a business executive who won the task force concluded their work, they were able to file 30 counts of child abuse against that individual. Another thing for Orange County that is very significant is we have some vacant space in our jails. We have a contract with the federal government to lease bed space that generates significant dollars, $22 million that helps us during a time of economic challenge to fund our front line public safety services. That is significant. And incidentally, it's all a benefit to those family members of those being detained where they can visit them in their local neighborhood rather than going out to a out of state or in a distant area like the Mojave Desert. So I would just encourage this Committee to take the time to look at how this bill is going to fiscally impact your state budget and also our local government, because that impact can be significant if some of these issues aren't clarified. Thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 98, 'end': 113, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Shaun Rundle: mr. chair and members, pro tems, shaun sarah rundle with the california peace officers's association. observing the physical impacts of the latest amendments across the profession, but remained opposed on policy grounds that is there.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jim Dales: thank you. my name is jim, i'm a us navy veteran. i'm a 30 year afl, cio union member and i'm a local union 246 member out of fresno, california and i am seriously opposed to this bill. it stinks. thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robin Vitsten: I'm Robin Vitsten, I am the Executive Director for We The People Rising. I say, help Americans first. Help our homeless. Help our veterans. Help our unemployed. Help our disabled. Help our foster children.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stacy Bart: yes, my name is stacy shaun bart and i'm an anti, well, i'm completely against illegal immigration and i do as much as i possibly can to be an activist against it. so, i am definitely against this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Guzban: My name is John Guzban from Riverside County. Driven 450 miles, my wife and I to get here today and ask you to not vote for this bill. This bill supports illegal immigration. My father came across as a guest worker back in the 40s and I was born here in America. I supporting Americans. There's a difference between legal immigration and illegal immigration, and what this bill is doing is supporting illegal immigration.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melanie Perron: Good morning chair, members. Melanie Perron, Legislative Director for Caltrans. We are also in support of AB 28. We have seen a median time savings of 10 months on environmental documents. These time savings equal cost savings. We're able to approve projects quicker, therefore we're able to deliver projects quicker. This allows us to create jobs and help the economy. Just ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cesar Diaz: Mr Chair, members, Cesar Diaz on behalf of the State Building and Construction Trades Council in support.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Moffatt: Mr. Chair, John Moffatt on behalf of the American Counsel of Engineering Companies in the City of Visalia in support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bob Nailer: Bob Nailer with just one client, the Orange County Toll Road in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrew Antwih: Mr. Chairman and members, Andrew Antwih with Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti in support, the Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority in support, and the Fresno County Transportation Authority in support.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 63, 'end': 76, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kirk Blackburn: kirk stacy blackburn on behalf of the san diego association of government, sandag in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eric Johnson: eric with the california transportation commission in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jacqueline Wong-Hernandez: jacqueline with the department of finance. we have been supportive of this policy and we think that because the bill extends current practice and because of efficiencies have been identified by caltrans, the bill doesn't result in any new costs, and probably some work load savings.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jaclyn Yanez: Good morning. My name is Jaclyn Yanez. I am a junior at UC Berkley California. I arrived to the United States when I was 8 years old and lived in Arizona until I was 16. I moved to California when I was in my junior year of high school and during high school I was a very devoted student. I aspired to go to University, sorry. At that time I wasn't really exposed of the requirements I needed to attend University, but I know I really wanted to and I didn't know the Requirements to attend. After talking to an academic counselor, I was notified that I didn't apply for any financial support. Then because I didn't have the three complete years in California high school, my family was also not able to financially support me because It was so expensive and, thank you, I really did not have a chance to continue my education. After high school, that let me four months of depression, blaming myself, sorry, and I blame myself because I didn't, I felt like a failure, because I wasn't able to continue my education with something I felt like I worked really hard for it. But after getting more information, I was able to continue with community college. Through I receive a work permit. I work up to three jobs to save money so I could continue my education, but it was not enough, sorry. Now that I'm going to UC Berkeley, tuition is more than $14,000. Housing is even more expensive and it's been less than a year that I've been there and I've already spent my savings that I saved for over three years. Currently I no longer have money to continue, sorry I can't even. Currently I no longer have the means to pay for the last two semesters of my degree. Somehow, I'm realistically looking to take a semester off, a year off, to continue saving to finish my degree. It has not been easy, it has been five years since I graduated from high school and still have to face the challenges of having to pay tuition. SB 68 will not only benefit me, but other students in my situation to continue and finish their education.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark McDonald: thank you chair, members. mark jonah mcdonald, mccallan group, on behalf of the foothill, de anza, los angeles, los rios and san diego community college districts, in support. thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rosa de Anda: thank you, mr. chair and committee members. rosa with the community college chancellor's office. i'd like to thank the author and his staff for working with us on amendments to this bill and we're in support of this bill. we don't have a formal letter to you yet, but it's coming, thank you.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ryan Macklehaney: Ryan Macklehaney with the Community College League of California to testify on California Sub D2 Community College districts behalf in support and we also would like to thank the author for working with the chancellor's office. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dillon Hepkey: thank you, mr. chair, members. dillon mark hepkey with hepkey associates on behalf of the california council for adult education and california adult education administrator's association. we appreciate the amendments the author and staff took relative to adult schools in california in addressing similar situations for adult school students moving on, and we're strongly in support. thank you.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cynthia Castilio: cynthia dillon castilio with the faculty association of california community colleges, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ron Rapp: Good morning Mr. Chair, Members of the Committee. Ron Rapp speaking on behalf of the California Federation of Teachers, in strong support. Thank you.
[{'start': 50, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rene Bayardo: Thank you, Mr. Chair, members. Rene Bayardo, SEIU California, also in support.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ray Vernal: ray cynthia vernal on behalf of the catholic church in california in strong support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christopher Sanchez : christopher ray sanchez with chirla, the coalition for humane immigrant rights in strong support and also representing our collegiate arm on 33 campuses across the state. the california dream network in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kat Neo: Kat Neo on behalf of Asian Americans Advancing Justice in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Cruz: cruz on behalf of the california immigrant policy center in strong support. ryan spencer on behalf of the california charter school association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 76, 'end': 88, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Liz Gian: Good morning Mr. Chair and Members, I'm Liz Gian with Public Advocates. I'm very honored to be able to say that we support after having worked so closely with Senator Lara and the creation of the foundation of this work. Thank you.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 167, 'end': 171, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Thomas Evangelista: Hello people from the chair. My name is Thomas Evangelista and I'm a fellow DREAMer and I'm I just wanted to come and give a little bit of my own testimony and that I benefited from AB 540 and I'm in strong support of this bill.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cesar Diaz: Thank you Mr. Chair and members, Cesar Diaz on behalf of the State Building and Construction Trades Council. We're proud to be working on this bond but also many pieces of legislation to address the housing crisis. We believe this bond rightfully focuses on assisting local governments to target the right type of housing that is in dire need across the state. We know that very low income, even moderately income individuals and families cannot afford much of the housing that is actually getting built. California's a great place. Our economy is doing fantastic. Businesses continue to grow. And when those things happen, oftentimes you see the income inequality appear. Whereas a middle class family that was able to purchase a home, or even have rental abilities, no longer has those abilities in certain regions of this state. And so oftentimes, you're looking at what type of development. We know that local governments need the assistance. With re-development going away, it further exacerbated that problem. Having streamlining proposals is one way to address that issue. But it doesn't necessarily solve the issue of producing the type of housing that will allow Californians that are hard-working in that middle class to lower income levels to have proper housing communities in which they can send their kids to, have groceries that are located nearby. I think this bill rightfully focusses on the successful programs that were promoted by Proposition 1C, made significant improvements, and also has the added benefit of providing a lot of good paying jobs for countless individuals in the construction industry. Many people that are building their own communities. So for those reasons, we strongly urge your support, thank you.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tyrone Buckley: thank you mr. chair and committee members. tyrone jonah buckley on behalf of housing california, also in strong support for this legislation. since 2008, the state has lost about 66% of all federal and state funding for affordable housing. there's been a catastrophic loss of funding. that's about $1.7 billion a year the state's lost to invest in people who are struggling here in the state of california. at the same time the average the low income family is paying 68% of their income to rent. so we have a huge disparity there and we have to do something to adjust the problem. and this bill starts down that road. we have to address this catastrophic disinvestment. what i'd like to highlight for this committee is that this bill really invests in some tried and true programs over at the state department of housing and community development. the multi family housing program, the joe serna farmworker housing program and the calhoun program. and what you see in this proposal that you don't often see in state proposals around funding is that this begins with addressing the geographic equity issue, making sure that all jurisdictions of state get a chunk of this funding to address their affordable housing crisis. for instance, the multi family housing program has a 20% set aside for rural communities. i know our developers who work hard to build developments in the central valley and other rural communities, really utilize mhp program, the joe serna farm worker housing program, and the calhome program to address those needs. so with all that we ask for you aye vote and we strongly support.
[{'start': 43, 'end': 63, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 887, 'end': 896, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 932, 'end': 939, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Yohan Clege: thank you. yohan tyrone clege representing leadingage california, support sb 3.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Arnold: thank you, mr. chairman and members, michael yohan arnold, in my sky blue shirt. hey look at that. senator beall's bill today on behalf of the association of bay area governments because of the housing crisis in the bay area, thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 107, 'end': 112, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jason Ryan: good morning mr chair, members, ryan with the league of california cities. we are in strong support.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Lane: michael with the nonprofit housing association of northern california in strong support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jacqueline Zenoski: jacqueline michael zenoski with disability rights california, and we strongly support the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Yoder: Mr. Chairman and members, Paul Yoder on behalf of San Francisco Mayor Ed Lee. I believe a big 10 letter is forthcoming on Senator Beall's bill, and so Mayor Lee will be a part of that in support, thanks.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 70, 'end': 76, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 130, 'end': 135, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 157, 'end': 160, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Rattigan: Michael Rattigan on behalf of the Board of Supervisors Santa Clara County in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maureen Higgins: maureen jacqueline higgins on behalf of the california housing consortium in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Shot: Mr Chair and members, Tim Shot on behalf of the San Francisco Bay Area Rapid Transit District also in support.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 25, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Fred Main: fred maureen main on behalf of the california programs for the all-inclusive care for the elderly in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tiffany Fan: Tiffany Fan on behalf of Bridge Housing and also Strata Investment Group, support.
[]
David Jones: Good morning, Mr. Chairman, David Jones on behalf of Glendale, Santa Rosa, Sacramento, and the Marin County Council of Mayors and Councilmembers in support.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roxanne Miller: roxanne fred miller on behalf of mayor sam liccardo and city council, city of san jose in strong support. we thank our senator for his good work, thank you. absolutely.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 39, 'end': 51, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ryan Hen: ryan, on behalf of the california federation of teachers. we don't have a formal position yet, but we're recommending a support. right on. thank you so much.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Wolfe: of course mr. chairman thank you. mr. chair and members, david roxanne wolfe good morning with the howard jarvis taxpayer's association in opposition to sb 3. members of the 2015 report of the non partisan legislation office said quote the key remedy to california's housing challenges is a substantial increase in private home building in the state's coastal urban communities. the analysts went on to say that considerable evidence suggests that construction of market rate housing reduces housing costs for low income households. while government programs for affordable housing help only a fraction of low income californians, and expanding those programs, the lao said, would be, quote, extremely challenging and prohibitively expensive, unquote. members, we can all agree here today that we have an affordable housing crisis. needing to build 180,000 units of housing a year over the next decade to keep pace with demand when right now we build less than half of that is indeed a serious problem. but there's not a bond or a recording tax that we have here today that can fix the damage that's been caused here. government programs cannot be the solution to fix problems created solely by government. no bond or housing tax is going to make it cheaper to build a unit of affordable housing that costs $330,000 on average. but a ceqa exemption and using lawsuit abuse will. no bond or recording tax is going to make it easier or cheaper to build housing in california where the impact fees are in the tens of thousands of dollars and $72,000 in san francisco. and members, there's not a bond on earth that will fix the problems that we are creating right now. no bond will fix ab 199, which mandates prevailing wage for private market rate home development adding 90,000 to the cost of building a new home. no bond will fix the added cost of mandating solar panels for new residential development and repealing costa-hawkins and so on and so forth. no matter how well intentioned sb-3 is, it will never accomplish the stated objective, unless we take proactive action to impose regulatory reform. regarding the bill, members, i mean this is, let me just speak to the bill. i mean, this is, this is really the point. 20% of californians live in poverty. we do have an affordable housing problem. and imposing debt, imposing government programs, there is a place for that. the governor had the by right solution last year that he presented with $400 million of general fund money tied to that. that's for forums tied to a specific general offense solution. we can argue, whether or not, what's the appropriate measure to get more affordable housing, but that was on the table. if we're going to talk about a bond, let's talk about a bond, that's fine. but without implementing some these reforms, it's not going to have the impact that everyone thinks it's going to have. and that's my one point, i ask for a no vote.
[{'start': 57, 'end': 76, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 665, 'end': 668, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Angela Galia: galia with the university of california office of the president. and we're co-sponsors of this measure and in complete support on behalf of the entire uc system. thank you,
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Autumn Ogden: ogden with the american cancer society cancer action network, also a proud co-sponsor and urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vivian Ericson: vivian david ericson on behalf of the breast cancer prevention partners in strong support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lindsay Gradis: Good morning, Lindsay Gradis with the American Lung Association California, here in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrew Shane: Andrew Shane, California Association of Food Banks, proud to sponsor the bill. Just want to thank the Committee's work last year and also the great work by the staff. We'll keep working on it, thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Becky Gershon: How do I turn this on? You're on, you're good. Great, thanks, thanks for having us. I just wanted to say really quickly that- Who are you? Sorry, Becky Gershon with the San Francisco Marin Food Bank. Yeah, thank you. Just wanted to put into the perspective some of the numbers that were just mentioned in terms of the funds that are collected each year. Of the $500,000 that was generated last year, our particular food bank received about $10,000 of that. We serve the San Francisco and Marin County, both counties. And with that money we actually purchase chicken, which is an item that's in really high demand with the 30,000 families that we serve each year. And it's not something that's donated very often, so it's something that we have to go out and purchase. And that money allowed us to buy chicken for over 9,000 families. And so, I just want to point out, with our purchasing power, how far we're able to stretch that fund and how significant it is for our food bank and other food banks across California. Thank you.
[{'start': 146, 'end': 159, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rico Mastrodonato: Thank you. Good morning, Mr. Chair and members. Rico Mastrodonato with the Trust for Public Land, in strong support. There are two points I actually want to make. One being the impact on the economy, our parks have in California, specifically and the cost of not having park access. Outdoor recreation in California generates over $85 billion annually in consumer spending. $27 billion in wages and salaries, $6.7 billion in state and local tax revenue and over 730,000 jobs. Needless to say that is an impressive array of statistics and positive impact on our economy. However, ignoring our parks or not having parks has a cost. A rural districts like yours are tied to state parks and having them in disrepair or not having people be able to access them has a serious impact on your district, and many others. Urban districts that feature no place to play have a cost to society, as well. Countless studies site direct correlations to childhood obesity and lack of park space. Rand UCLA, USC, countless others and chronic obesity or pardon me, childhood obesity leads to chronic health issues that are not only devastating to the individual and family, but are expensive to society. So parks are not only about having recreation and providing scenic beauty, but are really about a healthy California. I urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 65, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 979, 'end': 988, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Marilee Eckert: hi, my name is marilee and i'm the ceo of conservation corps north bay. i'm also representing the california association of local conservation corps today. in the audience, i have two corps members from conservation corps north bay that would like to say a few words in when it's open to the general audience. we're in support of this bill and allocating funding for cores throughout california both for certified community cores, and the california conservation core. prior bonds have provided funding to conservation cores for projects to improve our parks and i gotta say that some of the words that i heard before, i mean, our core members, once they work on a project in a park, they go back to that park. they take their families. they take their friends. so, it really exposes them to our out of doors in a different way. these projects provided thousands of young adults to make positive changes in their lives, get jobs skills and employment credentials. complete their education while making environmental and well, making our environment and our communities safer and stronger. so, this is a win-win situation and i encourage you to support the bond.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Benny Thirakoun: hello, i am thirakoun from the conservation corps of north bay and we've done various projects ranging from restoring creeks in petaluma to building new paths on hood mountain and even on mount tamalpais. but before this program, i had no prior occupation. so it was pretty vital for me growing up to become the man i am and going to become to be and i believe programs like this is vital to our communities, just to help develop the adolescent youth. thank you.
[{'start': 12, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christiana Simpson: hi, i'm christiana vivian simpson from conservation corps north bay and i am here to further my education to make myself greater for my son and to get the job skills needed, so i can have a good life and i support the bill.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Lynch: Hi, good morning, Mr. Chair and members. Danielle Lynch with the Association of Professional Landscape Designers, Tree People and the Los Angles Neighborhood Land Trust, in support. Thank you
[{'start': 41, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marissa Yannis: good morning, marissa christiana yannis with community nature connection in, support, especially of the community access language.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Lewis: I'm David Lewis, Executive Director of Save the Bay in San Francisco Bay and also representing the coalition that helped pass measure double A last June. Speaking in strong support of the concept of the bill. We appreciate the opportunity to continue working with the Pro Tem and his staff in advancing the Bay Area opportunities in this bill.  Thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Arnold: arnold on behalf of the cities of redondo beach in oxnard, in strong support
[]
Barry Nelson: Barry Nelson with the Golden Gate Salmon Association, in support of urging the Committee and the Pro Tem to consider an approach similar to that used in Prop 1 that dedicates funding to multi-benefit flood protection projects. As the Pro Tem mentioned, he included some timely flood protection funds. Prop 1, we dedicated funds to multi-benefit projects that provide effective flood protection, also protect the salmon fishing industry which is really suffering. We think that same approach would make sense here and we'd be happy to work with you on amendments.  Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Caldwell: mr. chairman, john marissa caldwell on behalf of the california association of recreation and park districts as well as the midpeninsula open space district. we're in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jamie Go: good morning, jamie john go behalf of the big sur land trust, the bolsa chica land trust, the sonoma agricultural preservation and open space district as well as the santa clara valley open space authority in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 34, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Reggie Collins: reggie jamie collins here from california trout and we're in support of this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 42, 'end': 47, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Vivian Ericson: Good morning, Mr. Chair and members. Vivian Ericson on behalf of Laguna Greenbelt and Orios and Foothill Conservancy in strong support.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Juan Altamirano: Good morning. Juan Altamirano with Autobahn California and also on behalf of Sierra Club, also in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Fearing: morning, mr. chair and members, fearing here on behalf of the defenders of wild life and the humane society of the united states expressing strong support.
[]
Mark Smith: good morning, mr. chair and members, smith on behalf of the ocean conservancy and the grassland water district in support. thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Samantha Corbin: corbin, on behalf of the california tax reform association in strong support of this measure. of course, deductibility should always be permitted for the cost of doing business. however, to the author's point, punitive damages do not represent such costs. they're court judgments that make clear businesses have avoided the law, usually intentionally, in some very important way that endangers the public. moreover, ordinary tax payers can not deduct fines and penalties and the exception for punitive damages for businesses is not only unnecessary and inappropriate, excuse me, is unnecessary and inappropriate since these damages are not part of the ordinary cost of doing business. furthermore, this actually was part of an administrative ruling at the irs level. california's never affirmatively approved this practice and so we're very pleased that the author has introduced the measure to eliminate it's use. thank you.
[]
Kevin Baker: Good morning Mr. Chair and members. Kevin Baker for the American Civil Liberties Union of California. I'll be very brief. I know this Committee has passed this version of this legislation in prior years. As the Chamber of Commerce and other business groups have pointed out, punitive damages are in the nature of financial penalties and serve the same purpose as criminal penalties and other statutory penalties, which are not deductible. And of course the reason for that is that it makes the penalty much less punitive, if you do take a tax deduction for it. So this, I think, policy is designed to sort of prevent people from being subsidized for their wrongful behavior, and we would ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Cunningham: good morning mr. chairman, senators, senator. bell. thanks for having me here this morning. i'm michael jonah cunningham with the bay area council. we're a civic leadership organization whose members are several hundred of the largest employers and businesses in the bay area. collectively they provide jobs to hundreds of thousands of bay area residents. and as you know, workers and businesses in the bay area are enjoying a really robust economy and strong economic times. you might think that this is kind of a golden age for the bay area, they're generating thousands of jobs. and many, many dollars for state and local tax roles. but in reality, residents, workers, and businesses in the bay area are feeling under stress, anxiety, and uncertainty about the future like never before. i've been at the bay area council 15 years. i've never seen residents this concerned about their future businesses. this concerned about their future. all at the same time, when on paper you would think things are going wonderfully. we do a poll every year of bay area residents to judge their mood. not long ago, we asked them what they thought about living in the bay area, a third of them told us within the next five years, they thought they would leave the bay area, because too difficult to live there. every day we hear from member companies that tell us that either they, or a company with which they do business, is planning an expansion outside of california. moving operations outside of california because it's too difficult to move their employees and their goods around the bay area. one member, a very prominent member, recently told us there'll always be a silicon valley. it just might not be in california, if california doesn't get serious about addressing its transportation problems, and i don't think he was joking. in the bay area we've got some of the worst highway commutes in the nation, hours and hours of agony for hundreds of thousands of workers. incredible inefficiency for goods movers, and companies that rely upon goods movement. we've got massively overcrowded regional transit systems. i say good luck to folks who want to commute on caltrain or ferries, or like me on bart. systems are tremendously overcrowded, falling apart and unreliable. and those are the systems that we rely upon for efficient, climate-friendly transportation in the bay area. we have crumbling pavements on highways and local roads. just our local streets have a 2-billion-dollar shortfall over the next 10 years, just to maintain their existing fair condition and prevent deterioration to the point where they can't even adequately be maintained at any cost. businesses in a bay area are spending tens, and tens, and tens, and tens of millions of dollars. money that they would prefer to be spending on workers, on investing new products, building new facilities, inventing new products. instead they're spending it to provide their own transportation systems for their employees to try to backfill and overcome the inefficiencies of the system that's not working in the bay area. other businesses are continually having to realign their operations in order to accommodate highway congestion, introducing tremendous inefficiencies and diminishing their productivity. i'll have you wrap-up in about a minute, sir. it's not a recipe for a sustainable economy, it's not a recipe for a sustainable prosperous society. fortunately the solution is right before us, it's always been before us. the state of california has always had the responsibility and the authority to adequately fund a transportation system for the state of california. we're now at the point of having to backfill and make up for years of what we would consider inadequate attention. we commend senator beall and the members of the senate for sb1, for your attention, for bringing the matter forward. we support sb1, encourage it to move to the floor and to the governor, look forward to a more sustainable, successful, efficient transportation system for all of california.
[{'start': 46, 'end': 50, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 96, 'end': 120, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 3771, 'end': 3776, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Roger Dickinson: Thank you Mr. Chairman, and that's very kind and thank you, Senator Moorlach for the opportunity to appear in front of the Committee today. I am Roger Dickinson, the Executive Director of Transportation California. Our coalition is comprised of a group of transportation stakeholders including business labor, industry associations, construction organizations and planning agencies. Our members and thousands of employees are at work throughout California everyday. We support SP1 and urge you to vote for it. Mostly developed nearly 50 years ago, the state's transportation infrastructure has supported decades of economic and population growth that helped propel our state to become one of the world's leading economies. But over the last 2 decades we have watched our transportation system decay to the point of being unreliable, and in too many cases simply unsafe. This year's massive storms as pointed out by Senator Beall have only exacerbated the deterioration. We, like millions of our fellow Californians, worry that without a solution such as SB1, conditions will only get increasingly worse. In fact today, 10 of California's urban centers have pavement conditions that rank among the nation's most deteriorated, including the top three in the country, San Francisco-Oakland, Los Angeles-Orange County, and San Jose. Simply put, California can no longer provide a safe, suitable and efficient transportation system. We're falling further and further behind, with available funding manifestly insufficient to repair our aging infrastructure and prudently provide new capacity to meet existing and growing demands. Everyday, millions of Californians also find themselves stuck in gridlock. We've all experienced it. Whether they are in their own or transit vehicles, they lose precious hours of productivity or family time, up to 100 years, 100 years it seems like that, 100 hours a year, or more per Californian are sacrificed to congestion. It doesn't matter where you live, Northern California, Southern California, the Central Valley, congestion is simply always a fact of life. Not only does gridlock steal people's time, it impairs our economy. Efficient goods movement within our state and out of the state to the rest of the country and beyond is directly linked to the state's ability to generate jobs and remain competitive. In 2010, nearly 1.5 billion tons of freight a day moved on California's highways. The Federal Office of Freight Management estimates the amount of freight move for more than double between 2002 and 2035. We need both increase capacity and significantly greater maintenance of our system if we are to meet the economic requirements of California and the nation. Not only will SB1 helps us fix our roads, reduce gridlock and help us move goods across our state, it will also generate 18,000 good paying skilled jobs for each $1 billion invested in new infrastructure activity, including jobs created directly within the industry, as well as other economic activity that will be stimulated throughout the state. For all of these reasons, Transportation California strongly supports SB1 for system preservation, maintenance, and investment. Thank you Mr Chairman.
[{'start': 68, 'end': 76, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 145, 'end': 160, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 923, 'end': 928, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Chris Lee: Good morning members. Chris Lee with the California State Association of Counties. I'm a Legislative Analyst for transportation, and I just want to touch on some of the same points that others have brought up about this winter of storm damages that we've seen in California. So In the local counties that are just represented on this Committee we've seen millions of millions of dollars worth of damage that's really exposing the backlog of maintenance on our system. So in Senator Mcguire's district, we had $17.5 million of damages in Del Norte, 15 to 20 million in Humboldt, 5 million in Moran, 7 million in Mendocino, 10.8 million in Sonoma, in January alone, and 10 million in tiny Trinity County. Santa Clara County, where Senator Beall's district is located, has had $22 million worth of damage just on the unincorporated county roads within the county. And then in Los Angeles County, another $20 million in damages. So while these are pretty significant numbers, especially for small rural counties A lot of these major disasters, we're going to at least be able to draw down federal and state disaster assistance funding. The real problem is, and potentially much more costly problem is the fact that our entire system is approaching a point where we're going to have to have significantly higher levels of investment to repair a degraded system rather than to maintain one in good condition. So, Statewide CSAC, the League of Cities and our regional partners have identified the $73 billion maintenance need on California's local streets, roads, and bridges. Without the levels of investment proposed by Senator Beall's SB 1, we're going to continue to see deterioration of that system. And in just 10 years, the amount of unfunded maintenance work would grow from about $38 billion today to about $58 billion in 2026, and that doesn't even include an inflation factor. So, CSAC is strongly in support of this proposal by Senator Beall. It provides an adequate amount of money to reverse the trend of declining condition. And to allow us to actually address some of that deferred maintenance before events the storms we've seen this winter really rip apart the band aids and tape that's holding together the system at the moment.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 482, 'end': 489, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 737, 'end': 742, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1623, 'end': 1628, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1941, 'end': 1946, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Joshua Shaw: thank you mr. chair and members, shaw with the california transit association representing all of your local public transit agencies. and very similar to the dire conditions on our city streets, county roads, and state highways, in public transit we have to maintain our capital assets, in fact, the federal transit administration scores are equipment. we're talking about buses, we're talking about railcars, the conveyance systems at stations, escalators and elevators, in the bart stations in the bay area that mr. cunningham mentioned. and in fact, right now, across the state, and we maintain more than 20,000 vehicles, 40% of our equipment is in less than adequate condition. and we've looked at the funding trend over the next 10 years, and without some additional funds above and beyond where we can currently expect from the federal state and local government, up to 60% of our equipment will move into that substandard or poor condition. substandard's bad, beyond their useful life. poor, you're talking about at least unreliable equipment, and possibly unsafe equipment. so in public transit, there is also a similar huge need for new investments, and that's why we support senate bill 1, which could provide up to $500 maybe $600 million a year. and with the way the bill is constructed, we would spend most of that money on improving our state of good repair. and finally mr. chair, i'll mention because the chair and other speakers mentioned the recent storms, most local governments have as part of their local disaster preparedness and emergency evacuation plans, a heavy reliance on public transit vehicles. you saw that in katrina, for instance, in new orleans. literally, a thousand buses were brought in from across the country to get the folks out of there that were in danger because of the flooding. and that has happened, smaller scale, but things like that have happened in california. we've gotta maintain that fleet in a state of good repair. again, we urge you to vote yes on senate bill 1, thank you.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 518, 'end': 528, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cesar Diaz: Good morning, Mr. Chair and members, Cesar Diaz, on behalf of the State Building and Construction Trades Council, in support. Thank you, sir.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Orville Thomas: Orville Thomas, on behalf of the California Alliance for Jobs, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Pimentel: michael michael pimentel, on behalf of santa cruz metropolitan transit district and the solano transportation authority, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Arriaga: thank you so much. john michael arriaga, on behalf of the transportation agency of monterey county, the board of supervisors from monterey county, city of salinas, the league of california cities latino caucus, thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eddie Bernacchi: mr. chairman, eddie john bernacchi, on behalf of the united contractors and the national electrical contractors association, in strong support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kula Koenig: kula eddie koenig, on behalf of the american heart association, american stroke association, in support. i do want to ask the senator to consider the concerns of the california after transition leadership
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Steve Baker: thank you so much. steve kula baker with aaron read and associates for the professional engineers in california government, in support.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alex Gibbs: alex steve gibbs, townsend public affairs, here on behalf of oakland, city of emeryville, san leandro, walnut creek, hayward, pismo beach, turlock, dinuba, tulare and carson. as well as the counties of imperial and mariposa, and the north county transit district, all in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ronnie Verdugo: Morning Chair and Members of the Committee, Ronnie Verdugo on behalf of the League of California Cities in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Felipe Fuentes: felipe alex fuentes on behalf of the associate general contractors of california, both chapters san diego and the california chapter, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Van Dyke: Thank you for your service. David Van Dyke in with the California Transportation Commission, in support.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kirk Blackburn: Kirk Blackburn on behalf of the Western States Å  Association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kira Rosoff: rosoff on behalf of the cities of glendale, sacramento, santa rosa and the marin county council of mayors and council members, all in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Shaw: Mr Chair and members, Tim Shaw on behalf of the San Francisco Bay Area Rapid Transit District, the board has an official support if amend position, asking for additional revenue to float towards transit. Also on behalf of the Capitol Corridor Joint Powers Authority, in support also Thank you so much.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Manny Diaz: mr chairman, manny felipe diaz, representing the california of railroad industry, which includes bnsf railway, union pacific railroad, and all the short lines here in california in support.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Watts: mr chairman, members, mark manny watts today representing metrolink, the commuter rail service of southern california. we have a work with author, but we're enjoying very good collaboration with the author's office on transit funding, thank you. thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ed Barrons: mr chair members ed mark barrons on behalf of the los angeles county board of supervisors in support.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vincent Wiraatmadja: mr chair and members vincent ed wiraatmadja with widerman group on behalf of byd motors in support.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dorsey Moore: mr. chair, members of the committee, i'm moore, representing the santa clara open space authority in support, in particular the advanced mitigation features as well as the wildlife corridors for caltrains. thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 46, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mike Legan: Mike Legan, on behalf of the California Teachers Association will be taking this bill for a formal position shortly, but I want to say we're very encouraged by the approach Senator Beall has taken to finance it. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 181, 'end': 186, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rosanna Carvacha: good morning, mr chair and senators, carvacha on behalf of the alameda county board of supervisors, also in support and want to thank the senator for his hard work.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Rosa: thank you. rosa, on behalf of the silicon valley leadership group, in support. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Pariset: Good morning, Chair and members, my name is Michelle Pariset, and I am with Public Advocates. Public Advocates is a nonprofit civil rights law firm and advocacy organization that, among other things, works for equity in the built environment. I have a lot of comments prepared, but I'm going to keep this brief here. With the constitutional limits imposed by Article 19 in mind, we propose amending SB 1 to include an increase in the vehicle license fee from 0.65% to a full percentage, point to fund transit operations and maintenance. According to the California Transit Association, this increase will generate $1.3 billion annually, and we would love for that to go to transit operations and maintenance. Thank you so much.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 60, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeanie Ward-Waller: hi. thanks. good morning, chair and members. jeanie vincent ward-waller with the california bicycle coalition. i'm also here on behalf of a number of grassroots groups around the state that's signed on to a letter that can't be here in sacramento today, but do have some concerns with the bill. i think, in concept we're supportive of fixing roads, we definitely support active transportation funding and transit funding, that's in this bill. we'd like to see more of that, and also. just to focus on really providing benefits, ensuring benefits to low income communities that are unfairly burdened by regressive taxes, such as gas taxes. thank you.
[{'start': 45, 'end': 71, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tam Ma: good afternoon, mr. chair and members. my name is tam jonah ma, and i am the legal and policy director at health access california. we represented consumers when regulators consider health insurance mergers, including the four mergers that the state has seen in the last couple of years. and the key question that we always ask is, is bigger actually better for consumers? health plans and insurers should not be allowed to get bigger unless they actually get better. and we are sponsoring this bill because we want the dmhc, our state regulator of health plans, to actually have the ability to protect consumers and reject mergers if they are bad. generally speaking, we hear the same promises when insurance company executives when they seek to merge. they promise lower costs, better quality, higher stock prices. but we also know from history that having fewer insurers leads to higher premiums, both for large employers who buy coverage for their workers, and for consumers who buy their own coverage in the individual market. as we looked at the recent mergers, we were surprised to find that the department of managed health care, which regulates 95% of the market, doesn't have sufficient authority to make sure that bigger is actually better for consumers. as a result, dmhc can approve or approve a merger with limited conditions but they can't reject a merger. and they're not even required to hold a public hearing. we had to ask them to do that in the mergers that they've reviewed. ab 595 strengthens the dmhc's authority over these mergers, and makes it clear in statute that they can approve, approve with conditions or reject the mergers. and much of what the dmhc would be required to do is modeled after what the general attorney currently does, when it comes to mergers involving non-profit hospitals, and we want to make sure the process is public and transparent. even though two of the major mergers, the anthem cigna merger and aetna humana mergers, were blocked in federal court for the time being, we expect health plans to continue merging in the future. and we know that premiums go up and not down when markets become more concentrated. that's why we think ab 595 is an important bill, and we respectfully ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 50, 'end': 62, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sara Flocks: mr. chair and member, sara tam flocks, california labor federation on behalf of purchases of healthcare, we are in support of this bill.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 30, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Christy Bouma: Mr. Chair and members, Christy Bouma on behalf of the California Professional Firefighters pleased to be in support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Gonzales: rebecca sara gonzales, national association of social workers california chapter, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Nguy: linda rebecca nguy with the western center on law and poverty, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Savage: karen linda savage, california pan-ethnic health network in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amanda Wallner: Amanda Wallner, California LGBT Health and Human Services Network in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nick Louizos: Thank you, Mr. Chair and members. Nick Louizos on behalf of the California Association of Health Plans, regrettably in opposition to Assembly Bill 595. Let me start by saying that we do appreciate the sentiment that a healthy competition is good for consumers. California's market is both competitive and healthy. Our association for instance represents 49 health plans covering 28 million lives in all lines of business. With 23, excuse me, with 2.3 million enrollees including 1.4 million enrollees in Covered California, our state's individual market offers competition and choice. With 11 health plans participating in the exchange, consumers can easily shop for coverage and compare prices. Our issue with this bill isn't whether public authorities have some role in mergers and acquisitions. Indeed, they already have a role. In fact, in approving recent transactions, the DMHC has required extensive undertakings on the parties involved, including my member health plans. Our opposition then is based primarily on the vast scope of the bill and what we view as a vague and broad standards that plans and regulators would have to meet in order to obtain prior approval from a state regulator for transactions. As currently drafted, Assembly Bill 595 discourages reasonable new investments in health care that are intended to create efficiencies in economies of scale. From our read of the bill, even a relatively basic consolidation or transfer of assets within the same corporate family could trigger prior approval from state regulators and hold back innovative investments. We believe that this is an intensive amount of work for relatively little value. AB 595 also institutes unreasonably high hurdles for mergers and acquisitions. As only one example, the measure expressly requires that regulators find in fact, that a merger proposal itself will lower prices before the merger or acquisition can be approved. Which consumer prices? Prices that doctors charge health plans, prices that hospital systems charge health plans, prices that drug companies charge health plans, or are we talking about premiums? If we're talking about premiums or other prices, the language fails to take into account the reality of the health care market. It fails to take into account potential increases in utilization, provider rates, government mandates, rising drug costs. All of these things together impact consumer prices in a short and long-term. So we believe that codifying unreasonable standards will make conditional approvals under this bill inevitable, thus placing the plans that are contracted provider groups and consumers and limbo. And actually, the conditional approval provisions in this bill are treated in a somewhat interesting way in one section of the bill. The regulator must take, make a series of findings that, again, from our perspective, we view as unrealistic in order to approve or conditionally approve a transaction. And in another section of the bill, conditional approvals are only allowed if the parties of the transaction agreed to prevent, not mitigate, but prevent things from happening that may or may not happen. So we have a question of how that sequence would unfold. Okay, my time's almost up. I just want to say that we appreciate the author's amendments which resolve one issue, but again, the bill applies to vast, vast majority of the market. And if there is a demonstrated issue with the merger, we are willing to have a discussion. A version of this bill was purposed last year in the Senate when a series of planning, carry of mergers were being proposed. Some of those mergers were blessed by public authorities, other mergers were not. So I bring that up because we do have a process in place that allows some to go forward and some not to go forward. And unless, it's a demonstrated problem that we are missing, we relatively, respectfully, believe that no action is required at this time. No further action. Thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Steffanie Watkins: Steffanie Watkins, on behalf of the Association of California Life and Health Insurance Companies. First and foremost, we would like to thank the author and sponsor for their willingness to hear our concerns with respect to the insurance code, and the interactions this bill would have had with the Holding Company Act, which is a national model that deals with mergers and acquisitions. Unfortunately, at this point, from many of the points that my colleague made. We are concerned about the potential standards that are in this bill, and whether or not most of our members are regulated at both the department and the insurance as well as the Department of Managed Health Care. So as we look at this, we look at the broader implications, and are somewhat concerned about the standards. And whether or not the standards can ever truly be met. Or if the departments would ever be able to affirmatively make those findings. So for those reasons, we remain opposed to the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Janice Rocco: rocco on behalf of the department of insurance. we are opposed to the amendments that were taken yesterday. prior to that, we certainly supported the intent of the bill, but we opposed yesterday's amendments and can discuss it further if anybody needs to.
[]
Juan Thomas: Thank you, Mr. Chair and Members. Juan Thomas, representing the California Medical Association. We don't have an official position on the bill as amended April 3rd. We want to thank the author for bringing this forward. We think this is an important issue. We have yet to put the bill through our internal review process. But I believe that we will have some significant concerns, but we look forward to working with the authors as the bill moves forward.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randall Hagar: mr. chair, members of the committee, randall karen hagar for the california psychiatric association this makes perfect sense. as people move out of these programs to retain their housing. that's really, one a good thing and two, it makes the most intensive outpatient services that we know how to provide available to more people. so it's a win win. we do support this bill, we ask your support.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jean Hurst: thank you, mr. chair and members. jean here today on behalf of the california state association of counties in strong support.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amanda Levy: amanda, california psychological association, support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Adair: Mary Adair, County Behavioral Health Directors, we're co-sponsors of this measure, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rosanna Carvacho: good afternoon. rosanna randall carvacho, on behalf of the alameda county board of supervisors again. we are very much in support of this and acknowledge that there are negotiations continuing, but think this is a step in the right direction to ensuring that the cci continues. and there is not this huge hole in the county's general fund that would have to be back-filled by cutting other programs. we thank the assembly member for his efforts on this and ask for your aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jean Hurst: Mr, Chairman and members. Jean Hurst here today, on behalf of three organizations, the California State Association of Counties, the County Welfare Directors, and the Urban Counties of California. These three organizations don't have a position on the bill, but do want to express significant appreciation for Assembly Member Ridley-Thomas's efforts here. And to let you know, that we are comfortable with the bill moving forward as negotiations with the Department of Finance continue. Thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 326, 'end': 339, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Baker: Jennifer Baker with the California Teachers' Association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Balla-Hawkins: david jonah balla-hawkins, the community college independent faculty union in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Ha: Brian Ha with California Federation of Teachers, in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Saleem Moinuddin: Saleem Moinuddin, with Region Seven of the California Community Colleges, strongly supports and urges you to support it as well, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Papazian: thank you, chair madina and members of the higher education committee. i'm mary david papazian, president of san jose state university and, there we go, and i'm delight- i just don't have purple on. but i'm delighted to be here in support of assembly bill 422. this legislation is important to our campus and the csu. but more importantly, it is important to the future health of every citizen in our state. san jose state university is among the handful of participating csu campuses in the dnp pilot program. i want to assure you that we are ready and eager to continue. let me very briefly explain what has been accomplished thus far during the pilot period established by the 2010 legislation. as you've heard, the csu established two pilot consortia, one each in northern and southern california. the northern california consortium is a partnership between my campus, san jose state university, and fresno state. the southern california consortium comprises csu's fullerton, long beach, and los angeles campuses. once chosen for the pilot, our faculty develop curriculum that was specifically designed, both to develop future nursing faculty members by embedding teaching pedagogue and strategies within the program and to train advance practice clinicians. in other words, our faculty created a curriculum aligned with the statutory goals of the 2010 authorizing legislation. the first cohort of dnp students enrolled in fall of 2012. by the end of that year, our program achieved national accreditation from both the commission on collegiate nursing education and the western association of schools and colleges. three cohorts of students have since graduated, and are having a significant impact. both in our academic nursing programs, and in clinical healthcare positions throughout the state of california. i am pleased to report that this program is working just as it was intended. one third of csu's dnp alumni have taken faculty positions in california, and nearly one in four are teaching at the csu. in fact, csu dnp graduates represented one in six nursing tenure track faculty hired through out the csu in 2014. the importance of growing our nursing faculty ranks cannot be overstated. the csu is facing an impending wave of faculty retirements. two-thirds, two-thirds of our tenured nursing faculty members are age 55 or older. only one in five, is younger than age 50. as these faculty members retire, csu's nursing faculty shortage will be exacerbated. ab 422 is our best opportunity to address this impending nursing faculty short fall, thereby insuring that we can continue to educate and train the nurses we will need to serve the health needs of our citizens. thus, on behalf of all of the csu's 19 campuses offering nursing programs, and indeed, all californians. i urge you to allow us to continue to offer the dnp degree by supporting assembly bill 422. thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 23, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 75, 'end': 94, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Boytim: Good afternoon, Chair Medina and members. My name is Dr. Michael Boytim. I'm the Associate Program Director of the Kaiser Permanente Cal State University Nurse Anesthesia program. The Kaiser Permanente Cal State University Nurse Anesthesia education program has a 45 year history. Since our founding in 1972, we have graduated over 2,000 students who have met a key workforce need throughout the state. Currently, our program is the highest ranked graduate program in the state and fourth in the nation. This joint program between Kaiser and the CSU system has educated over 50% of the practicing nurse anesthetists in the state, both within and outside of Kaiser Permanente. We also partner with other graduate programs at the University that graduate other advanced practice nurses, such as nurse practitioners, nurse midwives, and women's health practitioners. As an organization, Kaiser Permanente depends on these advanced practice nurses to maintain its status as a provider of high quality, accessible, and affordable healthcare in the state. Despite the success of this partnership, it is now in jeopardy. Our accrediting body, the Council and Accreditation of Nursing Anesthesia Education programs has mandated that all nursing anesthesia programs be taught at the doctoral level by 2022. If CSU does not have the authority to offer the DNP, this 45 year successful partnership will be terminated. Opportunities for growing this partnership to provide healthcare access are also at stake. Currently Kaiser Permenente is in conjunction with the CSU Southern California DNP Consortium in the process of expanding doctoral nursing education to the Coachella Valley and Riverside County at the Cal State San Bernardino Palm Desert campus. This is the first step in providing advance practice nurses to an area of great need. Offering access to high quality affordable health care to the medically underserved of the Coachella Valley, and surrounding rural areas. This program will provide the opportunity to educate a diverse pool of registered nurses from the area, many of whom are first generation college graduates to become doctoral prepared advanced practice nurses and stay in the area after graduation. I ask that you pass this bill and ensure that we continue this almost half century partnership that is meeting current workforce needs and aims to expand educational opportunities to address health care needs of the medically under served.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 28, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 57, 'end': 71, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amparo Diaz: Good afternoon Committee Members once again my name is Amparo Diaz I'm here on behalf of the California State Student Association. I would like to offer our support and concept and hope to have a position for this bill next month, thank you.
[{'start': 55, 'end': 66, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Margaret Brady: I'm Margaret Brady, and I'm a Professor of nursing at California State University Long Beach. And I'm also the California State University faculty coordinator for nursing. On behalf of the 19 nursing directors and their faculty, we urge you to vote yes for this, for AB 422. You've been provided with the evidence of what this program, the outcomes have done to increase the faculty that we have now. We urge you to vote yes.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Penny Weismuller: I'm Penny Weismuller, Professor at Cal State Fullerton and Director of the Southern California CSU, DMP consortium. I urge your yes vote on AB 422. It's my pleasure to serve a very diverse student body of nurses who come to the CSU. Many of them are undergraduate alumni, who come back to the CSU because they love us and the programs they received and their intention is to teach others that come for this diverse background. In order to improve the health care of Californian, we must have a diverse nursing professoriate, and of diverse nursing practitioners. AB 422 will allow us to fill this need. I urge your support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Baker: Jennifer Baker with the California Teachers Association also in support. I remember when CPEK was around, and the reality is there are so many systemic needs that all of our systems in higher ed have and so much research that needs to happen. That can help this body to be more effective in the work that you do, to ultimately help the students that California serves. So, we very much support this bill and look forward to it moving forward.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 89, 'end': 93, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Christian Lia: Christian Lia Head with the Student Center for Community Colleges in support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Saleem Moinuddin: Saleem Moinuddin with region 7 of the California Community Colleges in strong support of this bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Emily Altman: Good afternoon. Thank you for having me. My name is Emily Altman, and I'm a public health graduate student at UC Berkley. Thank you for having my today and thank you to Young Invincibles for your partnership in this important issue, and for the work that you do to ensure that young adult voices are represented in these discussions. I believe that food is a fundamental human right. And both my own research and my work on campus through the UC Berkley Basic Needs Security Committee focuses on food insecurity. Food insecurity impacts a striking number of students on college campuses, particularly in California. In the UC system alone, almost half or 48% of all undergraduate students and a quarter of all graduate students are food insecure. This means that one in every two undergraduate students eats a reduced quality of quantity diet mostly due to an inability to purchase foods. How can we expect a student who's constantly hungry to get good grades, balance a full course load, and work, pay rent, graduate, and be successful when they enter the workforce? There are many efforts on college campuses to address food insecurity Including food pantries and meal point donations. However these don't address the underlying root causes of food insecurity, such as the inability to select and purchase foods. Through my work I've spoken with a number of students and analysed surveys of many more to understand their experiences with food insecurity. Students who are feeling insecure talk about being negatively impacted, physically, emotionally, and academically. Those who do not receive CalFresh speak about the barriers to signing up, and those who do speak to its ability to lift them out of food insecurity, allowing them to flourish in school. I recently spoke with one student who's homeless and struggling to make ends meet. He exclusively shops for food at the dollar store and the day we met, had only a package of granola bars to eat for the day. He's beginning the process of applying for Cal Fresh but has struggled with the complicated nature of the application process. Making the application more accessible, and being able to buy food with Cal Fresh dollars on campus, would be hugely helpful for him and the other tens of thousands of students who are food insecure. The face of food insecurity is diverse and widespread. I consider myself to be a successful graduate student at a top University. And I attribute much of my success to the fact that I am on CalFresh. Without the extra $194 per month to spend on food, I would certainly struggle to pay my rent and make ends meet, while juggling a full course load, doing my research, and working two jobs. There's no question in my mind that continuing to find ways to simplify CalFresh is a necessary step towards supporting our students. I am proud to support AB 214, and ask that you join me and the other tens of thousands of food insecure students in California by also showing your support for this important bill, thank you.
[{'start': 52, 'end': 64, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Emily Hinton: Good afternoon. My name is Emily Hinton. I am a third year student at Sonoma State University majoring in philosophy and political science and minoring in criminal justice. I also serve as the Associated Student Body President. I sit on 13 committees and I'm taking 18 units and I serve as the voting member for our CSSA Board of Advisors. The students and the rest of the Sonoma State population see me as someone who is successful. As someone who is a leader, someone who has my life together. What they don't know is that over the summer before serving as their student body President this year I lived out of my car and the best week of my summer vacation was a week where all the ASI presidents had the opportunity to attend the Panetta Institute for Public Policy. And that wasn't my favorite week of the summer because of the experiences I had but because for a week long, I had a secure meal and didn't have to worry about where I was going to sleep that night. What students don't know is that I'm a first generation low-income college student, and that I work 20 extra hours a week as a full-time nanny and part-time at a yogurt shop. I've been homeless four times in my life. What they don't know is that I'm a sexual assault survivor and that I deal with mental illness. And some days it is extremely difficult to get out of bed. But I get out of bed and I serve as a their student body President, so I can advocate for affordable and accessible higher education, for those students who can't work three jobs as I do, and who can't get out of bed. So I'm here today to support AB 214 and I want to thank Dr. Rutherford for all of your efforts in this because it really does make a difference in the lives of students like myself. Thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1620, 'end': 1630, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Level: John Level, on behalf of the Association for L.A. Deputy Sheriffs. Association of Deputy District Attorneys, California Association of Code Enforcement Officers, California College and University Police Chiefs, California Narcotic Officers, LA County Professional Police Officers, LA Police Protective League, and Riverside Sheriffs Association. We believe that there is a clear public safety nexus to students being able to succeed, move on with their lives Hunger is an unacceptable impediment.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Aslanian: Good afternoon, Kevin Aslanian Coalition of California Welfare Rights Organizations. For the past two centuries I've seen a lot of hungry students, doing welfare rights. What this bill basically does is make sure that we adopt the option provided in federal law to make sure students do not go hungry and have a full stomach when they're studying, thank you. I urge an aye vote.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Esteban Vasquez: Hello everyone, my name's Esteban Vasquez. I'm a first generation low-income student at the University California Berkley. I'm here in partnership with Young Invincibles, a non-partisan, non-profit organization dedicated to expanding economic opportunity for young people, and to share my story and advocate for more robust resources for students who experience food insecurity. I experienced many challenges as a first-generation college student, and one of them was food insecurity. And coupled with the high cost of rent in the Bay Area and textbooks I found myself fortunate to even have a smoothie in the morning and very lucky if I had a meal in the afternoon. A lot of my friends also experienced food insecurity and currently at U.C. Berkley, 39% of undergraduates are food insecure and 23% of graduate students are food insecure. So many high needs students face challenges in getting approved and enrolled, and I've introduced CalFresh program to my friends, and they absolutely love the program, so I'm here today for you to please show your support for AB 214, thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gerson Liahut: hello, chair and distinguished members of the committee, my name is gerson mary liahut i'm the vice president of legislative affairs with the student senate for california community colleges. as a current homeless student who is going through food insecurity, i urge you your aye vote.
[{'start': 68, 'end': 86, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Austin Webster: Austin Webster with the Faculty Association of California Community Colleges in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Talar Alexanian: Hello Talar Alexanian with the University of California Student Association in full support of the bill, thank you.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Baker: good afternoon, baker with the california teacher association in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lizette Navarette: good afternoon lizette with the community college league of california. we have a support recommendation on this bill and look forward to supporting it as it moves forward, thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shanti Prasad: Hello Shanti Prasad with Alameda County Community Food Bank and California Hunger Action Coalition in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christopher Castrillo: mr chair members, castrillo on behalf of the california faculty association. we have a support recommendation on the bill. looking forward to adopting a formal support position on the bill. and appreciate the assembly members who sat first on this issue. thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicole Rice: Good afternoon, Chairman Medina and members, Nicole Rice with the California Manufacturers&Technology Association and we are here pleased to support AB 240. I think the historical contributions to California State and its many local economies by the aerospace industry is well documented and known. As we have identified in our letter in 2012, the investment was $64 billion in revenue statewide. So as the industry is now experiencing a new growth through innovation and technology, we feel that California needs to be ready to receive the opportunities, as well as those high-paying jobs that will come as a result of this new growth. AB 240 will allow for the creation of, or rather request the creation of a California Institute for Aerospace and in doing so, you can strengthen California's global stance, continue that stance as an aerospace leader. You will increase the opportunities for public private partnerships, and also enhance our competitiveness for future opportunities. For all those reasons, we support the bill.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 31, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 45, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : ... gerson thank gerson you, gerson thank gerson you. gerson good gerson afternoon gerson mr. gerson chair gerson and gerson members. gerson my gerson name gerson is gerson tia gerson nguyen gerson and gerson i'm gerson here gerson on gerson behalf gerson of gerson public gerson advocates gerson today. gerson we gerson would gerson like gerson to gerson thank gerson assemblymember gerson steinorth's gerson leadership gerson on gerson this gerson bill gerson and gerson his gerson efforts gerson to gerson combat gerson california's gerson pervasive gerson teacher gerson shortage gerson problem. gerson time gerson and gerson time gerson again gerson data gerson has gerson demonstrated gerson that gerson teacher gerson shortage gerson not gerson only gerson has gerson a gerson negative gerson impact gerson on gerson student gerson achievement,
[{'start': 4, 'end': 10, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 17, 'end': 23, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 29, 'end': 35, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 42, 'end': 48, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 54, 'end': 60, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 66, 'end': 72, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 83, 'end': 89, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 94, 'end': 100, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 107, 'end': 113, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 118, 'end': 124, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 134, 'end': 140, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 156, 'end': 162, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 166, 'end': 172, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 173, 'end': 190, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 191, 'end': 197, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 202, 'end': 208, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 213, 'end': 219, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 225, 'end': 231, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 235, 'end': 241, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 242, 'end': 248, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 249, 'end': 255, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 259, 'end': 265, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 273, 'end': 279, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 290, 'end': 296, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 304, 'end': 310, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 314, 'end': 320, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 327, 'end': 333, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 339, 'end': 345, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 349, 'end': 355, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 362, 'end': 368, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 384, 'end': 400, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 403, 'end': 409, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 421, 'end': 427, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 431, 'end': 437, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 438, 'end': 449, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 450, 'end': 461, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 466, 'end': 472, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 492, 'end': 498, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 502, 'end': 508, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 516, 'end': 522, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 536, 'end': 542, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 553, 'end': 559, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 568, 'end': 574, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 584, 'end': 590, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 600, 'end': 606, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 612, 'end': 618, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 623, 'end': 629, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 635, 'end': 641, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 648, 'end': 654, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 660, 'end': 666, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 671, 'end': 677, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 691, 'end': 697, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 703, 'end': 709, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 718, 'end': 724, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 734, 'end': 740, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 745, 'end': 751, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 757, 'end': 763, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 768, 'end': 774, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 777, 'end': 783, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 793, 'end': 799, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 807, 'end': 813, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 817, 'end': 823, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 832, 'end': 838, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Eddie Bernacchi: Madam Chair, members. Eddie Bernacchi, on behalf of the National Electrical Contractors Association and United Contractors, sponsors of the bill. I will keep it very brief. Our contractors have financial obligations of 100% when they're working on public works projects. When agencies hold more than 5% retention and only pay them less than 95% of the money that they're owed they have to go and borrow money from banks and pay interest on that. That drives up the cost of public works. We would urge your aye vote on this bill. It's an important public policy for us.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Valerie Nera: sorry i'm late, i apologize. valerie for the california chamber of commerce, we are in support of this bill. california is such a big state and i have members spread from every border, north, south, east, west, and they can't always get to these meetings when they need the information they'd like to be heard. they have some information to offer. i think it'd be very good for them, and very good for the regulators to hear what people in the farther reaches of the states think. so we actually ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : or known as DBVEs, within 30 days of initial invoice. That would be mirroring the federal prompt payment program.
[]
Noel Kramers: thank you. good morning, kramers with california farm bureau. california has passed numerous very high standards. last year we changed so that california farmers now have to pay overtime to their employees after 8 hours or 40 hours a week. we will be phasing in a $15 minimum wage. all of these standards, including the many environmental standards, that our farmers and ranchers meet add additional costs. and our farmers have to compete with out of state products. so we think that when our citizens and our legislature place standards that they should also agree to be purchasing from those who are meeting those high standards. and so this bill would ask the state to support those farmers and ranchers that are meeting those high standards and we respectfully request your aye vote.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dennis Albiani: Dennis Albiani on behalf of a number of Ag groups, the California Grain and Feed, the California Seed Association, Pacific Egg and Poultry, we support the provisions. I just want to point that across our policies, whether it's renewable energy, or other actions, we have a in-California preference, this would just extend those same policies to food and agricultural products.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tricia Garringer: thank you. good morning madam chair and members tricia with agricultural council of california. very much in support and thank the author for the bill.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jo Michael: madam chair and members. jo, for equality california, the nation's largest statewide lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender civil rights organization dedicated to creating a fair and just society. we are proud to sponsor this bill and we thank assembly member chiu for bringing it forward to follow the legislation in 2015 that paved the way for collecting data on sexual orientation and gender identity in california. which we were also the proud sponsor. as a result of long term systemic discrimination and societal bias, lgbt people face significant disparities in health and well being compared to the broader community. as the assembly member explained, these disparities include high rates of poverty, unemployment and under employment, homelessness, isolation, suicide, targeting for violence, and substance abuse. these problems are more pronounce for youth and seniors. communities of color and transgender and undocumented communities. collecting voluntarily provided data on sexual orientation and gender identity whenever other demographic data is collected is necessary to understand the full extent to which lgbt people are experiencing these disparities. whether government programs are reaching lgbt people in need of care and assistance and how programs might improve to better serve the lgbt community. i will leave it at that and i ask lisa to tell a bit more about the specific impacts of the data.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 260, 'end': 264, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1356, 'end': 1360, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lisa Cisneros: Thank you. Good morning. I'm Lisa Cisneros, and I'm an attorney and LGBT program director for California Rural Legal Assistance. CRLA provides free legal assistance to low income individuals through 19 field offices that we have located primarily in the central valley, along the central coast, and in rural communities in Southern California as well. Thank you Assemblyman Chiu for introducing this important legislation. In the past year the CRLA has developed a very robust LGBT program to protect the civil rights of low income LGBT people and their families in rural communities. And California has developed a very robust set of civil rights protections for these individuals we have focused primarily in two areas school related issues and employment discrimination. And in both of these areas data collection is crucial. In recent years many school districts throughout the state including in the Central Valley have started to collect LGBT student demographic data without much fanfare. Not all school districts are collecting this data in a consistent way. But where the data has been collected, it's been incredibly useful. And I have three examples of how that data has made a positive difference for LGBT students. First in general, many school administrators, district leaders are not fully aware of the extent of their LGBT student populations in their schools. For example, in Salinas, where I grew up, our school district, through the California Healthy Kid Survey Learned that it had an estimated 900 LGBT students in their district, through out the high schools and the middle schools as well. This blew the minds of many of the district board of trustee members. And it really opened up a new set of conversations about what the needs of this particular students are, and how to best address them. The second point that this data has helped us identify is that there appears to be a trend where a disproportionate number of LGBT students are in alternative schools compared to your traditional comprehensive or charter schools in the districts. And we are just, not all districts have this problem, but where it appears that at the surface that some districts do have this problem, we will need improved data collection to better understand the extent of these disparities and how to best address them. Lastly, in each of these districts that have collected the data and actually for all districts throughout the state, are mandated to develop what's called an L-Cap. A local control accountability plan. And these plans need to be adopted and renewed each year. And they're part of our state's new school finance system that is allocating more resources to high needs schools but also requiring greater accountability. So the LCAP plans need to address eight different state-wide priorities, including school climate. So in the districts where we have had LGBT student demographic data, we've been able to more effectively participate in the LCAP planning process to identify action steps by the school districts and resources to allocate. For example, in San Joaquin County and Stockton Unified with this data community members were able to persuade the school board to allocate greater resources for school counselors and for professional development and cultural competency trainings. So that teachers were better equipped to address any anti-LGBT related harassment or discrimination happening on school grounds. So, in addition to this important impact that this data can have in the school context, CRLA, we're also very interested in this data in employment as well. Over the years, we've handled a number of very serious egregious employment discrimination cases impacting LGBT people. Particularly transgender women in low wage jobs, farm work, retail work, restaurant work, and we've also anecdotally Learned that these women tend to spend more time unemployed. Better data collections through our agencies like the EDD and DFEH, as well will help us understand the extent of these problems. If there are some regions that do not have these problems that we would want to lift up and celebrate those communities that do have equal opportunity for LGBT people, and at the same time in the communities that are facing the challenges, we want to proactively address those challenges. Let local leadership know about that, and valley business leaders to tackle that problem. And this data collection is just going to allow us to be smarter on these important issues. Thank you for listening.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 374, 'end': 378, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3526, 'end': 3530, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Becca Cramer: becca jonah cramer from the aclu of california here in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Chen: kimberly with the california pan-ethnic health network in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amanda Wallner: Amanda Wallner with the California LGBT Health and Human Services Network in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jarrell Cook: Thank you to Assemblymember Cooley and to the new Members of the Committee. My name is Jarrell Cook and I'm here on behalf of the California Manufacturers and Technology Association in support of AB 12. Thank you. Good governance and being regulated well is critical to manufacturers, producer's and service providers across all the sectors of the state. And which is why we have identified AB 12 as one of our key manufacturing votes for growing the economy and building California's middle class. The look back mechanism that AB 12 creates is a common sense approach to good governance that has enjoyed bipartisan support from public policy experts, economists and lawmakers at the state and federal level. Here in California in 2011 the Little Hoover Commission endorsed the look back mechanism as one of it's recommendations to improve the California rule making process. At the federal level, again in 2011, then President Barack Obama embraced the look back mechanism in his Executive Order 13563, requiring federal agencies to conduct a retrospective review. Similar to what AB 12 would require, as part of his administration's commitment to improving regulation and regulatory review. And this is because good governance experts agree that one of the most effective ways to get effective regulation is to evaluate whether the rules we adopt are doing what we adopted them to do. There's no reason to be afraid to ask if what we are doing is working. By looking back, California is both able to identify successful programs as a model for new regulation, as well as identifying ineffective, inconsistent, contradictory, outmoded regulation. And alleviate the accumulation of regulation the burdens our businesses. Now, more than ever, California must be a leader in demonstrating how to govern well. AB 12 is a key step in assuring that California's regulatory framework secures our policy goals, ensures compliance, and encourages entrepreneurship and investment. And we respectfully request your support.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 34, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 87, 'end': 99, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 928, 'end': 940, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bill Gausewitz: my name is gausewitz, i'm an attorney with the firm of greenberg traurig. i have previously served in a variety of positions including as director of the office of administrative law. the current version of the administrative procedure act was adopted in 1979, and has been changed substantially since then. but one thing that has never been changed is that it does not contain any effective means for reviewing regulations after they're adopted. regulations in california are subjected to substantial review as they are proposed and adopted, and then they're largely forgotten. there are a couple of provisions in the apa that create essentially ineffective, they appear to call for look back, but in practice they dont work. in my legal practice i have, here is just one example. these are the regulations by the department of insurance governing the bail industry. they were adopted in 1953. and then they were readopted in 1977. both before the current apa was even in place. so they never even received the initial review that regulations received. they've been on the books without substantive change since then. and i'm not here to tell you that they're good or bad, but what this bill would do is require the agency that adopted them, and throughout the code of regulations, other agencies that have regulations that are similar. to review them and decide whether or not they still meet current needs. and so, i'm available if anybody has any questions.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matthew Allen: good morning, matthew becca allen, western growers association, we're pleased to support the bill.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marti Fisher: Marti Fisher, California Chamber of Commerce in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tricia Geringer: good morning, tricia agricultural council of california in support.
[]
Michael Young: madam chair. michael matthew young on behalf of the california labor federation. we are opposed to this bill and many of our unions have concerns about some of the provisions of the bill that may look fine on it's face but can have really detrimental effects to our workers and to our membership. first on the federal scene, we've seen sort of this prioritization of deregulation. deregulation of worker safety protections, deregulation of fiduciary rules that protect our workers in the financial sector, overtake our retirement security, deregulation on the healthcare side. and we feel that. they won't be able to go and utilize the same resources on a federal level that they had been in the past. so more and more often these workers are going to rely on state agencies to implement these regulations that are critical to their safety at the work place. so we don't feel like it's the place of the state agencies to take their critical resources and their limited resources and re-author and re-appropriate those resources to reviewing every single regulation that they have and stay at those sta agencies should be focused on implementing their core mission. like osha should be implementing health and safety regulations, not looking at every single rule in their rule book. and secondly, the oao they already have a mechanism in terms of prioritizing regulations to make sure that they are not duplicative, to make sure that they're consistent with current law. there are already mechanisms to review current regulations, to make sure that they meet these same standards. so we don't feel that this bill is necessary, and we also feel that it takes critical resources from our state agencies from doing their core mission, thank you.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stephanie Roberson: thank you very much. madame chair of the committee, members, stephanie michael roberson with the california nurses association also in opposition. we want to first thank the author for giving us the time to talk about this issue, prior to committee, and to your consultant to giving us some time, so we appreciate you opening that door. we also piggyback on what the representative said from the california labor federation with respect to registered nurses. just to give you an example with respect to boards and commissions, they already have the inherent authority to do this. for instance, not only do we go through rigorous sunset review committee, i don't know if any of you have seen those, i'm sure you have under the auspices of other committees. we go through very rigorous hearings, a supplemental review report process, and it is a top-down backward and forth. look at what we're doing on implementation of regulations, what we're doing on board function and processes and we have these conversations with senator hill and lady stella respectively at the bmp committee and it is very rigorous. so, we go through those hearings, the board goes through those hearings and we will come back with best supplemental report at the board rather comes with supplemental report and they have to go through these questions and be answerable to those committees. in addition to that process that looks at a lot of the issues that set forth in the bill, we also have a process by which members of the public can petition directly to boards. right now, we are looking at the atd standard, if it should be changed, beefed up, or not. that's not new regulation. that, the atd standard in hospitals dealing with error transmissible diseases is well founded, and we're looking at that. so, in addition to that, there is language in the bill that says that, to protect and have public protection the overlapping, duplicative standard is in the bill however there are no parameters as to decide what overlapping inconvenience duplicative is. so your going to have folks charged with doing this top down approach without any real parameters. just another example of what our board did proactively is they looked at the old practice regulations of 1974 they did that on their own. so in addition to us, as michael said looking at what's really important and on the top of the heap right now. making sure our members are protected. i've got members right now getting punched, kicked, stabbed, killed in facilities. we are looking that. we've got tough work place violence protections on the books right now. cal osha's already being squeezed. they don't even have enough folks to dispatch out to facilities when we get calls that our members are hurt. so we've got to prioritize. and in the realm that we're in right now with scarce resources, everybody's getting squeezed. we really need to take care of health, welfare, and public protection. so with that, we oppose the bill. and thank you for your indulgence. thank you very much. anybody else speaking in opposition today?
[{'start': 61, 'end': 87, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1026, 'end': 1030, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1040, 'end': 1046, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2297, 'end': 2304, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2598, 'end': 2606, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Caesar Diaz: Madam Chair, members, Caesar Diaz on behalf of the State Building and Construction Trades Council, regretfully oppose. There are a lot of OSHA regulations. We also work in refineries as well. We have process safety management regulations that are very important. Oftentimes they could look to be the good doer, but the entire industry's are vastly different when we're talking about chemical and industrial plants. So, there are many other reasons but for those we oppose.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Gibbons: Thank you and good morning. I'm Michelle Gibbons with the County Health Executives Association of. California. We represent local health departments throughout our state and we're here in strong support of AB725 today. Tobacco-related illnesses are the leading cause of preventable deaths in the United States. And according to the most recent data from the Centers for Disease Control, of the roughly 480,000 tobacco-related deaths per year, 41,000 of those results from second hand smoke. And studies have also shown some exposure to tobacco smoke in the outdoor area is just as harmful as the back of smoke in any indoor areas as well. And so local health departments are strongly support of that efforts to really improve the health of our communities. And we recognize that this State Parks and Beaches are often frequently, or frequented often especially by children and families. And so we applaud the member today for this measure, which will reduce secondhand smoking exposure to visitors. And we would strongly urge your aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: kyle jonah jones with sierra club california in support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julia Kingsley: Julia Kingsley with the Eco Consult representing Surf Rider foundation, Hill of the Bay and Alameda County Waste Management Authority in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Denis Quelos: good morning chair members, denis kyle quelos from marrowood the american heart association, american stroke association. we have a support if amended position we are working with the authors office and the author staff. and hopefully if the author takes those amendments, we'll come to support position. thank you very much.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dan Vink: Chairman Garcia and Vice Chair Gallagher, Members of the Committee. My name is Dan Vink. I'm the Executive Director of the South Valley Water Association. We are a public agency on the southern end of the Central Valley extending from just south of Fresno to Bakersfield. Our membership includes over 400,000 acres in a region that was ground zero for the drought impacts over the last several years in an area that will feel the most acute impacts under SGMA. We are here today in support of AB 176, introduced by Member Salas. This project was authorized last year by AB 935 with tremendous bipartisan support from the Legislature and from the Governor's Office. The agricultural productivity of the ... division farmers depends on their ability to obtain and convey sufficient water supplies to their farmers. This project provides a mechanism to deliver water in the driest of year types to those farmers. It has multiple benefits including water supply reliability, the reduction of local dependence on groundwater wells, and as a result, will help improve groundwater management and reduce subsidence impacts that we've seen most acutely after the drought years. Finally, it's important to note that this project is already in the design phase and is undergoing the SGMA analysis as we speak. It has also received more than $3 million in federal funding and could be ready for construction within 18 months with the addition of these funds. If it pleases the Committee, I'd like to introduce one of our member agency managers who would utilize the facilities directly, have him explain how that would benefit his district and answer any specific technical questions you would have. On my behalf, I'd like to thank you for your time and urge you to support AB 176.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 15, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 31, 'end': 40, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 79, 'end': 87, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 522, 'end': 527, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Eric Quinley: Thank you, Mister Chairman, Mister Vice Chairman, and other members of the Assembly. My name is Eric Quinley. I am the General Manager of Delano Earlimart Irrigation District. Delano Earlimart Irrigation District was formed in 1938 in Southern Tulare County in Northern Kern County, and now encompasses a total of over 56,000 acres of some of the most productive farmland in the entire world. The district is the largest of the class one federal Friant Division contractors within the Central Valley project. And for several decades has invested heavily in groundwater recharge and groundwater banking projects and facilities. This was a very, very important investment that has been realized most recently during the depths of the drought that we experienced in the State of California. And is also very important in light of the Sustainable Groundwater Management Act that will be coming, beginning in 2020. It's further underscored by many of the most recent climate change models that show that the states can experience less snowfall and more wet water precip as we move forward, so harnessing wet year supplies, and turning those into dry year sources, is very important as well. Our district, along with 27 Friant Division contractors is served by the Friant Kern Canal, which runs on the east side of the Southern San Joaquin Valley. This is a gravity fed system with large metal and concrete checked structures. Obviously gravity fed systems don't flow backwards very well unless they have a little bit of help. And so, one of the ways that the district along with others, have historically dealt with drought issues is with our banking programs. We've physically taken molecules back out of the ground and moved them back up into the system, historically by diesel driven motors. AB 176 provides appropriation for funds and builds, as Mr. Salas said, on AB 935 last year. It was recognized out of this body and through the Governor's strong signing statement that all the tools need to be on the table as the state moves forward in water management and this project provides one. I noted earlier that the diesel-driven temporary pumps would be removed, and electrically-driven, efficient pumps would be installed in their place. This would lead to greenhouse gas reductions specific to the project, which I know that this Committee's already taken up this morning. I thank you for the opportunity to speak on behalf of the bill. Be happy to answer any questions you may have.
[{'start': 96, 'end': 108, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1849, 'end': 1854, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lauren Noland-Hajik: Good morning Mr. Chair, Members of the Committee. Lauren Noland-Hajik, on behalf of the California Fresh Fruit Association in support and urge your aye vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 50, 'end': 69, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Brown: Good morning, Laura Brown, California Citrus Mutual, as well we give our strong support for AB 176.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alex Biering: good morning, alex denis biering on behalf of friant water authority in support. thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Kelly: and i am paul alex kelly, the executive director of caldesal, here to express my board and organization's support for ab 554 and thank and appreciate assemblymember cunningham for offering this important legislation. caldesal is a nonprofit organization unified voice in advocating for ocean and ground water desal, as well as salt management in california. and ab 554 would help advance desalination, both ocean and brackish groundwater cleanup in california by establishing goals statewide, much like recycled water. and water managers in the state of california do need flexibility, and local sourced, drought resilient water supplies are critical elements to diversified water supply portfolios. the state adopted an ocean plan amendment in 2015, taking leadership in providing the most environmentally protective rules anywhere, protecting marine life and ocean. so any desalination project in california would provide a local, reliable, drought-resilient water supply. and would also be the most environmentally protective project in the world. also key to this bill is a recognition that strong growth is needing in ground water clean up. many agencies throughout the state have ground water and brackish cleanups, for example the chino basin desalter as jpa of inland empire agencies, using groundwater brackets desal, as a way to cleanup the groundwater basin. and use a local reliable water supply. good water planning is like good financial planning, and that's diversification. just because it's raining doesn't mean you jump one to the other. so setting desalination goal for the state is an example of good policy and good planning. and setting a state desalination goal is also consistent with governor brown's california water action plan. and so caldesal strongly urges support of ab 554. and urges your yes vote.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 165, 'end': 175, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1718, 'end': 1723, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1763, 'end': 1771, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Evan Jacobs: evan on behalf of california water association. we urge the committee to support this bill. we think the desalination is a very important part of our drought resilient water supply portfolio.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sean Bothwell: Good morning. Morning Chair, Committee Members. My name is Sean Bothwell. I am the policy director for the California Coastkeeper Alliance, and on behalf of the alliance, we are here today in opposition of AB 554 for two reasons. First, we set goals because we want to strive to achieve them. Ocean desalination is the most expensive energy intensive water supply option available to California. As such, it should be California's and local community's option of last resort. And we should not be setting goals to be achieving this option of last resort. The second reason for opposing AB 554 is that by setting a desalination goal, one would expect that funding and resources would be diverted to meet this goal. And in fact, the analysis does a good job of highlighting this, quote, the ultimate effect of this legislation is to drive greater state funding towards desalination, end quote. This is a problem when we only have a limited amount of resources. Diverting funds to desal means that there's a smaller slice of the pie for storage projects, for water recycling, water conservation, storm water capture projects. California has already set statewide goals for conservation, storm water capture, and water recycling. But California is nowhere near meeting these actual worthwhile goals and setting desalination goals only makes it more difficult to achieve those more promising goals. It is not cost effective for us to revert resources and agency attention away from conservation, storm water capture, and water recycling, only to meet ocean desalination. For these reasons we oppose AB 554 and we ask for your no vote.
[{'start': 59, 'end': 72, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: Thank you. Good morning chair, Members of the Committee Kyle Jones with the Sierra Club California and also on behalf of Autobahn California today opposed to AB 554 because of the ocean desalination goals. Ocean desalination right now is costing about $2,000 an acre foot, which if this goal were only applied to ocean desalination, which I understand it's not, but that's a huge rate payer pressure in costs and conversely we've done a better job of getting water to the state with turf replacement. For example, metropolitan water districts turf replacement conservation program was able to get 80,000 acre feet of water with only a one time cost of 350 million. So, we think this is setting a goal that's just going to put the state in the wrong direction and force higher rate costs on local rate payers, and also harm the environment. While desal might be the most environmentally friendly in the state, or in the country, we still do have concerns with the ocean plant amendments that the Water Board passed. And there's still pressure for these plants to not use sub-surface intakes and not take care of the brine in a way that is necessarily the best option for the environment. And so, we must stay opposed to this bill for the ocean desalination plant.
[{'start': 56, 'end': 66, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Genevieve Abaddon: genevieve paul abaddon on behalf of clean water action and heal the bay in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Steve Carson: good morning, mr. speaker and members. my name is steve. and among other things, i'm the media relations director for the hooked on fishing, not on drugs event in chico, california. which is one of the largest, if not the largest, single day children's fishing events in the united states. i'm also the chairman of the butte county fish and game commission and an active member of the outdoor media, and was also a licensed dealer for over 25 years with a major sporting goods retailer in california and was a licensed dealer well back into the period when license sales were dramatically higher than they are now. and i can say with our event in chico, where we have many, many thousands of children showing up on one day. kids love fishing. and also growing up in los angeles area in the 1960s and 70s. i can categorically say that fishing saved my life. obviously there were a lot of things going on back in those days and i was blissfully distracted to the point of obsession and if even back then, a fishing license was about $5, once i turned 16. even that was a bit of a stretch for my family which did not fish at all. the rest of my members of my family did not fish. and today with it being actually the $47.01 number is a bit low, because if you do anything in your local area it probably costs more than that. that's an awful lot for a 16 or 17 year old especially if they're the only member of their family that fishes or if you have a large family group that's going on a camping trip or something like that, maybe they have three or four children in that age category. they may just stop not to do it at all. so we all the constituencies that i represent definitely support this bill and ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 50, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
George Osborn: mr. chairman, members, george for the california sportfishing league. we're in very strong support of this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyra Ross: Good morning, Kyra Ross on behalf of the Cities of Burbank and Glendale. As the author noted, we believe that this would be a very helpful working group and ultimately improve the conditions of the LA River and in our region. So, strongly support of the bill.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
George Osborn: Thank you. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, members. George Osborne representing the California Sport Fishing League in support of AB 986. The California Sport Fishing League supports all efforts to increase California sport fishing. We're going to thank Assemblymember Gallagher for bring this bill forward. We believe it'll increase participation in a wonderful outdoor sport while honoring veterans, especially disabled veterans for serving their country. As to the 12 month fishing license provision of AB 986, CSL is in strong support for a switch from the annual license that expires at the end of the year to a 12 month license that goes for a full 12 months. As the assemblymember said, we believe that that will actually increase license sales. More than 12 states have already made that switch and are benefiting from that. I think even Mexico now has a 12 month license that's good for 12 months from the time of purchase that they sell for $39. We believe that we're adding value to the product by having it last for a full 12 months. And I think if GM were to make a car and add a feature to that car and charge the same price while adding value, they would probably project an increase in sales for that vehicle, not a decrease. I am a Vietnam War Veteran who served as a United States Marine. When I came home from Vietnam, I went fishing with my mom and my brother. I grew up fishing, and that was grounding when I got back. Fishing provided a secure, safe space for me to process back into society. Fishing provided normal back into my life. When men and women come home from combat and suddenly shift from hyper vigilance to a peacetime environment, the contrast is stark, it's quite jarring. We should do everything we can to help veterans ease back into society. Most veterans eventually make that transition, but for many it is very difficult. There is nothing that California can do to replace that which is taken from any veteran who experiences the ravages of combat. But in the case of AB 986, we can help that transition for many veterans by making access to sport fishing more affordable for the veterans, while we believe increasing participation in the sport. Overall, which will result in more license sales to veterans, family members, and friends who go fishing with them. That will mean even more dollars invested into vital programs at the Department of Fish and Wildlife. I know there are some questions about the DFW funding going forward. The Governor's addressed some of those in his proposed budget. I'm happy to address that if it's the Committee's pleasure, or any other questions you might have, I respectfully ask for your aye vote and thank you.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 62, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 265, 'end': 274, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dana Nichol: good morning dana genevieve nichol with p conte and associates, representing the american gi forum. am vets, american legion, california association of county veteran service officers, the military officers association of america, and the vietnam veterans of america all in strong support. and we have to thank the assemblymen for carrying this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roy Griffith: Thank you. Roy Griffith on behalf of California Rifle and Pistol Association and the NRA, and as a retired game warden, we strongly support this important bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bob Reed: all right. good morning mr. chair and members, bob dana reed with reed government relations, on behalf of el dorado irrigation district in support of the measure. we know that the water and wastewater systems in california accounts for about 20% of all electricity use in the state, on the aggregate. it also accounts for 30% of the natural gas use for non-generation natural gas uses. so it's an important sector to look at in terms of achieving the state's greenhouse gas emissions reductions targets. it's also important to support these types of expenditures in support of another other state policies and laws, for example the human right to water law state policy looks to provide affordable water for californians. and also most recently, senator wolk's sb 555, which requires water loss reductions and targets to be established for our sector. so we think that this is important, to provide access to these monies to assist our systems in reducing greenhouse gas reduction targets.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 60, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 754, 'end': 758, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Wendy Ritter-Bush: Wendy Ritter-Bush with the Association of California Water Agencies or ACWA. We really appreciate the author introducing this bill, taking amendments to add more specificity. We think this is an important component. We're often asked on other policy issues, why the cost of water is increasing for average folks in the state and in particular disadvantaged communities. And things like this where we have an opportunity to improve efficiency and deliverability and cost really go a long way towards keeping water within the reach of most Californians.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gale Delahant: Gale Delahant with Western Grower's Association. Honestly I can't add much to the testimony this morning and I appreciate your support for the bill and ask you to move it out of Committee.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Helen Rothdowden: Helen Rothdowden with Nexus Water. We support this. We ask that the bill, and we will work with the author, on a possible amendment to ensure that on-site recycled water systems are also covered on this bill. This is another avenue where we feel that we could really make a difference. With Nexus we actually use the energy generated from cleaning the water to heat water in the water heater and reduce energy by about 30%. So we would ask that we will continue working with the author, but we do support the measure. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ashley Ames: Thank you.>>Welcome, and the floor is yours. Thank you, good morning Mr Chair and Members of the Committee. I'm Ashley Ames with the Legislative Analysts Office. And I'm here this morning to give you an overview of some of the past bond measures in the natural resources area and their implementation. You should have a handout that the sergeant just passed out and I will refer to that throughout this presentation. First, I can provide a general overview of how the state uses bonds and how they're paid for. Second, I'll discuss some of the recent bonds that have been passed since 2000 and used in the resources area. And finally, I'll provide a summary of the most recent bond, the Proposition 1 Water Bond that was passed in 2014. So turning to page one just provides some of the highlights of state bonds and how we use them. Typically use for larger projects that have a service life over many years and, so the bonds are used to pay for to provide the funds upfront and they are then repaid overtime with interest. This has two benefits, the first is that can be used to cover the higher cost of major projects that can be difficult to pay for all at once and secondly because the projects themselves, have service over many years. And so it's reasonable for both current and future tax payers to help fund the cost of the project. The second is the total cost of the bonds does include interest payments on the bonds. So the state makes annual principle and interest payments and those together for debt service. In general the state does pay more in the long run by using bond funds because of the added cost of the interest. For each $1 borrowed we estimate it's about $1.30 in total debt service when adjusted for inflation over the life of the bond. But once again, we have those benefits of having the funds upfront and spreading the costs over the lifetime of the project, which is why bonds are typically used. Finally, the general fund pays for most of the general obligation debt service. So that's a major general fund expense in the resources area in the 2017-18 budget, it's about $1 billion. And that reflects about 36% of total general fund expenditures in the resource area. Turning to page two. As you can see the state has passed several bond measures over recent years, all of them for various purposes, however most of the bond allocations have been appropriated, that is they have been already committed to specific programs or projects. Of the bonds that have been passed before 2014, about 93% of the allocations remain available for future appropriation by Legislature. Most of that is within Proposition 13 and Proposition 84. And those purposes that they can be used for under Proposition 84 are mostly integrative regional water management, some flood control projects, and some of the parks projects. And under Proposition 13, it's various water projects and programs, and various categories under that bond. Then in 2014 the seat passed Proposition 1, which provided $7.5 billion of that, about $1.8 billion remains available for future appropriation. And since that's the more reason bond passed by the state and has the most funding still available for resources projects, I'm going to go into a little bit more detail on that one. So if you turn to page three. You can see the total of the 7.5 billion for various water-related activities. There's a wide variety of activities that are allocated for under the bond. And this includes water storage, water shed protection, restoration, ground water sustainability and flood management. It's administered by six state departments and 10 state conservancies who are responsible for the project selection. Primarily the funds are channeled to projects through competitive grant process. The Legislature is prohibited from funding specific projects that can indicate the direction and the priorities for some of the categories. The bond also includes specific requirements for some categories. Some examples of those include a requirement for a local match for projects, and some funding for disadvantaged communities. So looking at the table, at the specific allocations. You can see the first item, for the water storage projects to the Water Commission. That's actually continuous appropriation totaling 2.7 billion. And so this means that it does not have to go through the normal State budget process to spin these funds. But for all of the other funding provided the Legislature generally allocates money annually to those projects. So the Legislature has appropriated about 3 billion, which has initiated most of the activity categories. And for activities in prior years, the administration did provide a multi-year roll-out plan for those future appropriations. However, the Legislature does maintain authority to modify that plan through the annual budget act. The 2017-18 budget, in addition to that, proposes an appropriation of $421 million. That continues some of the previous activities and includes some changes for small technical changes. Finally, the budget does anticipate an initial appropriation for the water storage funding and. Estimating that the water Commission will allocate about 416 million, ongoing. And so that's sort of the high-level overview, but we're happy to take any questions that you have.
[{'start': 112, 'end': 123, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matthew Allen: good afternoon, madam chair and members of the committee, i'm matthew jonah allen, western growers association, also in support of the bill.
[{'start': 62, 'end': 81, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cynthia Corey: Chairwoman and members, Cynthia Corey, California Farm Bureau. Thank you for your support.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian White: Good afternoon, Mr Chair and members. Brian White here on behalf of the Mosquito and Vector Control Association of. California. We represent more than 50 public health agencies who work closely with the Department of Public Health, and other State agencies, such as the Department of Pesticide Regulation. And we work closely with these folks to ensure that the public understands the complexities and the seriousness of potential diseases that are caused by mosquitoes. A lot of the public doesn't understand of the merging vectors in mosquito, potential diseases that are out there. It's our job as a Mosquito Vector Control Districts to explain to the public what these actual diseases may cause. And what the good news of the education outreach and level raise of public awareness that we've had with West Nile virus, the public is aware of that. But there are emerging diseases that as Assemblymember Caballero mentioned. Of course, everyone has heard about Zika. But there are some ones that folks have not heard about, and it's caused by a non-native mosquito aedes aegypti. And they cause such things as chikungunya and dengue fever. These are things that the public is starting to get known about. And we want to make the public more well known about that. But there are tools out there that we're using right now that just aren't as effective. There's traditional tools, such as manned aircraft. Of course, there's transportation vehicles. There's folks using backpacks with applications. Those aren't just as cost effective or as strategic, that could be used as precision based tools such as unmanned aircraft. And that's the reason why we want to pursue this path, we've worked with state agencies to come up with a potential language that would address this, that would not conflict with federal law. This is actually designed to move in conjunction with federal law, if and when the Federal Aviation Administration allows this. Right now, it's done on a case-by-case basis. We're trying to get ahead of the game, get ahead of public health while still keeping in mind public safety. With me, I have two experts here who can actually tell you exactly what they're doing in the field and they'll be able to answer any questions. Thank you.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 906, 'end': 915, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Joel Buettner: thank you very much. my name is buettner, i'm with the placer mosquito and vector control district. and for the past, about year and a half, our district has conducted a pilot project utilizing unmanned aircraft to conduct surveillance activities for mosquito control. so what we're doing is we're looking for water. it's much easier to go out and survey fields, and look for irrigation, and so forth without having to make an impact on the ground and also save time and effort for our man staff. we're working on systems to deploy and retrieve mosquito collecting traps that would give us a better idea as to where the risk areas are, to better kind of hone in on the target areas for potential applications down the road. and we're working on actually even landing on water and looking for the immature mosquitoes directly with some of this technology. so these are the beginning steps that are leading towards, kind of that fold up point of drone technology for public health with applications being kind of that endpoint, and with this bill that would allow us to kind of complete that path and best utilize this technology.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gary Goodman: hi, my name is gary matthew goodman, i'm the manager at the sacramento yolo mosquito and vector control district here. and similarly to what joel has done, we've employed drone technology for surveillance aspects of things. but the last couple of years, we've actually done some pilot projects with actual application. in meeting the requirements from ffa and of course, dpr, we've actually hired a contractor that has the commercial pilot's license to be able to try to figure out how these types of applications by drone would be effective and efficient moving forward. and so we've actually proven that, and shown that, making those types of applications reduces our drift which conceivably makes us more accurate in terms of where our applications are happening. which could conceivably lead to less pesticide applications that are being made out into the field. we've been able to do it more efficiently in terms of faster and having less time spent by our technicians, by either walking it using ground rigs or by atv. so the drone, because it is flying at the tenth foot above the property moves much more efficiently than an atv or somebody that was walking would be. so we really shown already with some of these pilot projects that this kind of technology really would enhance vector control, and that would allow us then to be able to try to help control some of these diseases such as west nile virus and the potential for zika, not just in southern california but as these invasive species are starting to move forward. so our districts have already implemented and will continue to implement ipm strategies moving forward. that's always something that's on the forefront of what it is that we want to do. we only want to use pesticides when we absolutely have to. but we are seeing, as brian mentioned, different species of mosquitoes that are starting to invade into california, and that's then bringing diseases. and so just in the last 20 years within the united states, you've had west nile virus introductions, you've had outbreaks of dengue fever, you've had outbreaks of chikungunya that are right on our doorsteps, and now of course, zika. so within the last 20 years, you've had four major diseases that have an impact on our citizens. and so being able to expand the technology use of what it is, that would be at our fingertips, to be able to use helps us fight those diseases much faster and have a greater impact on public health.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 141, 'end': 145, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1800, 'end': 1805, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Earl Withican: I'm Earl Withican. I own a piece of property in a food desert area of Sacramento called Oak Park, I am an incentive zone contractor for the last two years. Previous to the establishment of a community garden on my vacant property, I was paying $800 a year for trash removal and hazard weed abatement. That cost has been eliminated by developing the property and turning it over to a nonprofit for a community garden. And, any incentive we can provide to convince other vacant property owners to make this transition and provide fresh produce and vegetables for individual families and for resale in our urban areas is, I strongly encourage.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Standard: My name is Randy Standard, I'm the Executive Director of Oak Park Sol, which is the non profit that hosts the community garden on Earl's property. Let's try. I'm new at this. Anyways my name's Randy Standard, I'm the Executive Director of Oak Parks Soul, we're the non profit that hosts the community garden that Earl owns. So I guess I would speak to, definitely about the fresh produce, the access to food and that sort of stuff being extremely important, but I guess what I would highlight is something kind of some of the other things that come out of that. Through Earl offering the property, we've actually created a nonprofit that bloomed up out of that community garden that wouldn't otherwise have been there. Out of that property, specifically over the last two years, we've hosted 27 free cooking classes for kids for about over 300 people, hosting I think 11 community events for over 400 people over the last year.  So I think what we get in addition to the produce, is really is the community benefit and really that relationship building and the experience. And that translates where we've got 95% of our population living in urban areas. With very few of them actually living and being able to understand the agricultural acts that are happening out in our more rural areas. So it's really important, I think, that we provide this opportunity to educate our urban population, both gets that experience, and that allows them the ability to be able to understand, appreciate, and value our kind of rural, agricultural brothers and sisters, that are out there doing work. So I guess there's just multiple benefits to this type of stuff, thanks.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 130, 'end': 134, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 193, 'end': 207, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 313, 'end': 317, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 570, 'end': 574, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Beth Smoker: and my name is beth gary smoker. i represent sacramento food policy council, sacramento urban ag coalition, and pan, and all of which were partnered with assembly member ting and other core urban ag folks to pass the bill ab 551 a few years ago. obviously, the benefits are clear and have been proven based on their experience and so this bill will allow other municipalities the experience, the opportunity to have similar experiences by pushing out the date. thanks. yeah, and from experience in sacramento, it took us over three years to adopt our ordinances here. so it's a slow process, so again, we just need more time for others to be able to be involved. thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 170, 'end': 174, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Karen Lange: good afternoon, karen on behalf of mayor edwin lee and the city and county of san francisco in support. thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 41, 'end': 50, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Marianne Warren: Good afternoon Madam Chair and members. Marianne Warren, Danboro Counties, also in support.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kim Glasard: I'm Kim Glasard with Organic, Director of Organic Sacramento, and we're very much in support of this bill and this extension. Thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robin Crock: hi. i'm robin beth crock with valley vision. we're a civic leadership organization here in sacramento that works on a lot of different areas that affect quality of life. urban agriculture is definitely one of those. we are very much in support of this bill. you've heard from other people and you'll hear from more about the incredible benefits of urban agriculture, especially in terms of addressing food deserts. i'd also like to bring up that throughout the state of california there's 78,000 of agricultural operations that are run by their principles. as of the 2012 census of those 78,000, 34% of them are run by operators who are over the age of 65. only 4% are run by operators under the age of 35. so we are losing farmers in this state and along with that, it means we start losing farmland. these programs, programs like center for land based learning, california farm academy, has the ability to connect new farmers with land often. it is in urban areas and they get that experience which, over time, they can then translate into other areas and larger operations. so we're very much in as i said in favor of this and hope that you will vote to extend the time so that cities and counties have time to create these ordinances and implement them. thank you.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chanowk Yisrael: My name is Chanowk Yisrael, and I am the founder of the Yisrael Family Urban Farm in Oak Park. And we're transforming the hood for good using urban agriculture to engage, employ and empower communities. We are very, very strongly in support of this bill because, just to give you a picture of my neighborhood, when you walk through the neighborhood it's littered with fast food restaurants, empty lots. Many of those empty lots have syringes, drug paraphernalia, illegal dumping. All of those types of things. And so, with those lots and being able to go to some of these property owners and say, hey let us use these lots to turn them into agricultural producing or urban farms, we can sell our own produce. It cleans up the neighborhood. And also, we have a youth mentorship program which is called Project GOOD, which means Growing Our Own Destiny. And then I can take young people from within the neighborhoods and I can show them the beauty of actually puting something in the soil with their hands, and growing it up and then been able to sell that, or distribute it to their own neighbors. So with the 10 year extension, we're just getting started on the work that we can do in our communities to kind of bring light to darkness. And so with this 10 year extension I think that we'll be able to really bring some change to these food deserts. Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 56, 'end': 63, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jessica Denning: Hi, that was Katrina Schultz and she has a bio dynamic farm working with Raphael Garden in Fair Oaks that means zero poisons, organics, pyrethrans and stuff she doesn't use anything that's poison. So I'm Jessica Denning and my family has had a five acre, it's called Fairy Blossom Farm now under my niece, since 1954 in Fair Oaks. And it was all cow pastures in five acres when we moved in. But now all the neighbors see us a park. And everyone needs nature and community and we've been sharing our produce and so with neighbors for all these years. It'll help my niece to be able, young couples really have trouble buying a house and land now. And it'll help her to take over, to have the urban AG zone. Because if you can put out animals, or you could rent it to somebody, then that handles your fire control. Otherwise, you have to mow the field all summer long. And I'm also West Coast Director of Moms across America where we strongly support this. We are supporting fresh, local, organic agriculture and healthy children and families. And I'm Treasure of Sacramento Community Guild here with Diane everyday and Bob Mcfarland. Thank you.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 28, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 204, 'end': 219, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1098, 'end': 1112, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1117, 'end': 1130, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Anna Caballero: good afternoon, mr. ting. my apologies on behalf of the agriculture committee. we're waiting for one more person to show up so we have a quorum. so then we can pass on our rules.  so with your indulgence, we'll get to it in just a minute. good afternoon, everyone. welcome to the agriculture committee in room 126. it's my pleasure to welcome you here today. my name is anna robin caballero and i'm the chair. very proud to be chairing this committee. and mr. mathis, would you like to say a few words?
[{'start': 20, 'end': 24, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 369, 'end': 389, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 459, 'end': 465, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jonathan Feldman: feldman with the california police chiefs association. i want to thank senator glazer, both for his work prior to today's hearing, and for agreeing to help us out on short notice thank the committee staff, republican consultant, and abc for all their work leading up to the hearing today. as the senator said, sb 378 creates a valuable tool for abc and local law enforcement and closes an enforcement gap that we've been having problems with. it creates a symbiotic relationship between abc and the locals, protects due process rights, and we request your support. happy to answer any questions. thank you.
[{'start': 79, 'end': 85, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sarah Cooley: My name is Sarah Cooley, I'm with Alcohol Justice. We strongly support this. As you heard earlier today, many times our communities, residents, and neighborhoods struggle with bad actors who have licences such as this one, and the current ties up in terms of processes and protestations are considerable. So we would really support this because it will greatly enable them to get the well-being back in their neighborhoods.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Casey String: Good morning Senator and staff. My name is Casey String. I work and reside in the City of San Marcos and the County of San Diego. I've been working on a substance abuse prevention policy in the community for over 10 years. And I'm a member of the California Alcohol Policy Alliance. We believe this new law will help safeguard public health and safety and reduce the number of problem alcohol retailers in California. Existing law provides that the Department of Alcohol Beverage Control has exclusive authority to revoke the license of problem retailers such as those making underage sales, disturbing neighbors, or engaging in other illegal behavior. However, there is a need for the emergency orders that SB 384 will create to immediately suspend, limit, or condition a license to protect against immediate threat to health and safety. CAPA also supports SB 378 because there are over 90,000 alcohol licenses in California, and approximately only 125 ABC officers in the field. Thus, ABC enforcement often allows problem retailers to continue operation long after the community raises concerns. Providing the new tool of rapid revocation of a problem license will provide strong incentive for retailers to not allow problems from starting or continuing. Thank you.
[{'start': 43, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Fred Jones: and fred jonah jones, california council on alcohol problems in support. thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jerry Sanchez: all right, thank you for having me. so i'm jerry with the california bicycle coalition. as senator stern mentioned, i'm sponsoring in full support of the bill. the city of california has set ambitious goals to increase bicycling in the coming years. several state agencies, including caltrans and their resources board have adopted plans aiming to double or triple bicycle trips statewide in the next five to 15 years. to reach those goals, the state must make a major commitment to encouraging bicycling in which we should start with state agency staff. every may or bike month, state agencies compete to have the greatest number of staff commute the most miles to work by bike. caltrans and calepa consistently rank as the top two employers in sacramento for may bike commuters. in addition, caltrans and the department of public health, chp and most recently dts, have invested in a small but very popular fleet of bike share bikes for employees to use for short trips around town during work hours. this is a great option to increase not only commute trips by bike but other trips to meetings, for errands. we applaud senator stern's vision to expand the dgs program to state employees statewide. and believe it would send a strong message of california's committment to encouraging bicycling statewide. thank you.
[{'start': 43, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 99, 'end': 104, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1130, 'end': 1135, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jarrell Cook: jarrell fred cook for the california manufacturers & technology association, we are here in support of this bill because it meets our long-standing goal to improve california's regulatory climate and ensure good governance. this bill does so by ensuring that regulations that have been enacted do what they're intend to do, and that future regulation is informed and based on best practices. this bill follows a recommendation in 2011 by the little hoover commission, as well as a february 2017 recommendation by the legislative analyst's office. and the reason why can be best summed up by the former chief economist to president obama, michael greenstone, when he states that the single greatest problem with the current economic system, or with our current regulatory system, is that most regulations are subject to a cost benefit analysis only in advance of their implementation. this is the point when the least is known, and any analysis must rest on many unverifiable and potentially controversial assumptions. this bill cuts through our intuitions and beliefs about what works and gives us the foundation to regulate intelligently and with evidence based solutions, again, i want to emphasize that this is a non partisan, or bipartisan approach, it's not pro or anti regulation. if regulations are working, what this bill provides us is models to continue to regulate well, and if they are not working, it provides us the opportunity to fix them and meet our important public policy goals, that is how we govern well in california, so i respectfully request your aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 631, 'end': 636, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 638, 'end': 656, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Marti Fisher: Hi, Marti Fisher on behalf of the California Chamber of Commerce, also here in support. One thing I want to point out about this bill is it does not require changes to be made to the regulations so that there's still an opportunity to go through rule making on that. It creates the opportunity to see how the regulations are actually working and it creates a review process, and this is really important, because a lot of times these regulations get implemented, we go through a very arduous process to establish the regulations, and then we don't look again at how they're working, even when we suspect that certain provisions may or may not be ideal. This gives us a chance to go back and look at that and makes some changes as appropriate, so we support the bill and urge your support, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matthew Allen: Good morning, Matthew Allen, Western Growers Association, also pleased to support the bill.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Young: Good morning Mister Chair and Members, Michael Young with the California Labor Federation. We are unfortunately opposed to this bill. The OAL already has a process for reviewing regulations and making sure that they're consistent with current law, making sure that they're working, making sure that they're effective. The APA already has standards for implementing these regulations to again, make sure they're non-duplicative, to making sure they're consistent with current law. They already have a process to making sure to evaluate the economic impact on small businesses, on industries altogether, that's transparent, that takes into consideration input from the Legislature, input from labor, input from employers, input from the community. The processes in place are, in our view, sufficient. What this bill would do would take the limited resources the state agencies already had to enforce their court mission and re-purpose those resources to reviewing every regulation ever passed. We feel that that's a tremendous burden on state agencies. So, for example, instead of the labor agency focused on ways of protecting workers or instead of OSHA making sure that our workplaces are safe, they're going to have to retool those limited resources to reviewing every single reg and doing the job that the OAL has already done. In our view, this bill is overburdensome. And it's a bit duplicative of the practices that are already in place. And lastly with the sort of deregulation mandate from the federal government, we don't feel that California should be taking the position that regulations are bad. What this bill does ask if that state agencies free to list all the complaints for every regulation. It just sends a bad tone that regulations aren't doing what they're supposed to be doing. And in fact they are saving workers lives, they're protecting workers. They're being effective and efficient and these processes that are already in place are again, sufficient. So our view, again, this bill is duplicative, it's overburdensome and we urge a no vote.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1148, 'end': 1152, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jeremy Smith: Thank you Mr. Chair and members, the Committee. Jeremy Smith here on behalf of the State Building and Construction Trades Council, also in opposition. I want to apologize to the Chair Staff, Members of the Committee, Senator Morrell. I did not get a letter in on behalf of my organization in time for this Committee. I am sorry for that, but we do have to come up here and say a few words in opposition. I stand with Mister, the gentleman from the Labor Federation and what he said and just a couple more points, first of all. Less regulatory burden is what I heard during the presentation. To us what that means is more chances for workers to be injured on the job, or to be made sick at a workplace. We believe that regulations should be done properly, vetted through stakeholder process at any agency. Ample opportunity to weigh in to make sure that all voices are heard, pro and con. But once they are in, and they are shown to be working, using valuable staff time to go back and take state agency personnel out of the field to look at regulations just puts more workers in danger. I wish it were different. I wish there was, at Cal OSHA for example, I wish we had 1,000 field inspectors. But we have 200 on a good day for 17 million workers. That's just one example. Taking folks out of the field that are keeping work places safe to go back and look at regulations, unfortunately, it's just untenable right now. And I like to finally just conclude by saying nothing was said today about the underground economy. In the construction industry, most small businesses or most contractors or small businesses recent data shows one in six California construction workers are employed in the underground economy. We don't pass laws here. We don't introduce bills. You don't introduce bills. We don't do regulations at agencies for the good employers. We do it for the bad employers. And the underground economy is a big problem in the state. And until we can get a handle on that and make sure that all employers are doing right by their workers, we feel like taking folks out of the field to look regulations is difficult. So again, I do apologize for not getting a letter in, but we are in opposition.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 60, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 225, 'end': 232, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 417, 'end': 423, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bob Giroux: Mr. Chairman and members, Bob Giroux on behalf of the International Union of Painters and Allied Trades. We are one of 33 different unions that either have a project labor agreement or a card check neutrality agreement on this project, we'd like to thank Mayor Butts and the City of Inglewood for their forethought in ensuring that this project, which is the largest single privately funded public works project in the United States at this point at $3 billion. The City Council and the mayor of Inglewood ensured that 30% of the jobs on this project, and after the stadium, and music venue, and office spaces open, are going to be local employed individuals, and we're excited about the project, it's transforming the City of Inglewood. And, in fact, for those new homes Mr. Bradford talked about, we are adding a second fire station and other infrastructure for the city.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 261, 'end': 266, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 776, 'end': 784, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jeremy Smith: Thank you, Mr. Chair and Members of the Committee, Jeremy Smith here on behalf of the State Building and Construction Trades Council, for the reasons stated by the previous speaker, we are also in support.
[{'start': 51, 'end': 63, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Caldwell: caldwell on behalf of the american resort development association, which represents the time share industry, while our members have worked well with bre, they prefer the stand alone department, the fact is time share industry is heavily regulated in california. it's imperative that the regulator have all the necessary resources to properly review projects in a timely fashion.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Megan Rose: hi, i'm megan jarrell rose with leadingage california in support, thanks.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nate Albie: thank you for having me senators. my name is nate, i'm a member of a nonprofit called the legacy business foundation and i'm one of the owners of the stud bar in san francisco, which is the oldest lgbt performance venue in the united states. i wanted to talk to you today about what local control could mean for businesses like mine and the thousands of artists and performers that we employ. when we talk about arts, we often tend to think about operas and ballets, which are often inaccessible to every day californians, our uniquely california culture, the music that we actually listen to in our cars and our homes, comes from local clubs and venues. our blues and jazz clubs gave us etta james, our honky tonks california country and the southern california beach bars are where our surf rock comes from. without these venues giving paying gigs to young artists, california wouldn't be the entertainment capital of the world that it is today. unfortunately, nightlife which is often a labor of love even in the best of times, is hurting lately. every day we're hearing about our historic clubs that are permanently closing their doors. my 50 year old venue right now is struggling to pay rent that tripled this year. and we make 85% of our gross income from 11:30 pm to 1:30 am at night, so extending our hours to 4 am just a few days a week could actually save our business. so i believe the vast majority of businesses that serve drinks in california should probably keep closing at 2 am, but a state that is the fifth biggest economy in the world and a leader in entertainment, should have the flexible tools that states like alabama and florida already have. allowing late or last call for specific bars or specific commercial districts, or even extending hours for special events like local festivals could bring us in line with other world class destinations and that's good for art, and it's good for culture, and it's good for california. thank you.
[{'start': 45, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 688, 'end': 698, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Greg Hayes: yes, hi, greg with kp public affairs here on behalf of the california restaurant association. restaurants are a critical part of the travel and tourism industry here in california, which as the previous witness stated $4.6 billion in local tax revenue from this. and increasingly, we're not just competing for individual tourists when it comes to this type of night life and entertainment consideration, it's also large events which we're competing for on a global scale, as well as against other cities in the united states. this type of flexibility in our major metropolitan areas will enhance our ability to attract those types of.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeremy Seagull: My name is Jeremy Seagull I'm here on behalf of the California Music and Culture Association as well as the San Francisco Bar Owner's Alliance. Both of these organizations are in support of the bill and believe that this bill, is a vital step in allowing local jurisdictions to determine where appropriate, whether or not to allow licensed establishments to apply for extended operating hours.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Lang: good morning, mr. chair. karen megan lang on behalf of san francisco mayor edwin lee. he feels very confident that the local control measures included in the bill will make the bill safe for everyone. he urges your vote today, thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 75, 'end': 84, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nicolo Deluca: nicolo karen deluca here on behalf of oakland mayor libby schaaf, want to thank the senator for this legislation, respectfully ask for your aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 52, 'end': 64, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alejandra Duran: Alejandra Duran with the Waterman Group on behalf of Uber in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Carroll: good morning, i'm kevin nicolo carroll. i'm the executive director of the hotel council of san francisco on behalf of the hotel council, the sf travel association and the san francisco chamber of commerce. i speak for all three associations, i'm on the board of two of them. we support this bill and encourage your support as well. thank you very much.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Lovell: Mr. Chair, Members of the Committee, my name is John Lovell, and I'm here on behalf of the California College and University Police Chiefs Association. We protect about 3 million people on the campuses that we are sworn to protect, 3 million students and employees. We have the dubious distinction of having a disproportionate amount of alcohol related activity, some of which crosses the line to criminal activity, some of which results in tragedy. We are respectfully opposed to this bill. There was a very eloquent narrative by the proponents about local control. Missing from that narrative, however, is a serious examination of the impact of a decision by a local jurisdiction to permit a 4:00 am closing time, and any discussion of the implications of that for other communities. Sometimes a little bit of history is worth a lot of argument. When I was a college student in upstate New York, the bars in Ithaca, where I went to college, closed at 1:00 AM. In neighboring counties, the bars were open 'til four. And what you had was, it was even a phrase in college, going around the horn. When the bars closed at 1:00, then everyone went around the horn to the bars that stayed open until 4:00. And there were, over the course of my four years in college, a number of accidents, some fatalities. And a plethora of arrests. If anything, the problem of impaired driving today is greater than it was in the 1960s, because you now have the phenomenon of concurrent use of controlled substances and alcohol and to put that in context. In Colorado, 80% of the fatal crashes involving use of cannabis also involved alcohol. So you have that problem. Now, normally in drunk driving enforcement you have certain high intensity times. One of them is when the bars close at 2:00. Everybody's emptying from the bars, people are a little inebriated. They're not being responsible. What this bill will do, the unintended consequence, it will create two peak drunk driving risk times at night, at 2:00 and at 4:00. Not to mention the alcohol tourism you're going to get, where people go from one city to a city where the bars stay open until four. Now, this bill has also been framed in the context of urban nightlife, and those are serious issues, to be treated with respect. However, the law is so broad that, let me just give you an example. The City of Manteca could decide, three members of the City Council, hey, we're going to let our bar stay open till four in the morning. And then they're going to market that throughout the Central Valley, so think about people driving from Turlock or Stockton, after their bars close. And alcohol tourism is going to be a serious problem. You're going to see an increase in drunk driving. You're going to see two different times in the evening, where you're going to have a peek drunk driving risk time. And think about that four am closing time, people who leave at four are now going to be driving into very early commuter traffic as well. This is a bill that I think merits serious scrutiny. The nightlife issue is serious. However, it's premature and the submitting of the safeguards are illusory. If any of you have ever participated in an ABC protest hearing to protest a liquor or a bar in your community, you know that you're ability to protest that is largely illusory. And this measure builds on a flawed ABC protest system. So the safeguards talked about, although they exist on paper, are not safeguards in real life. We respectfully oppose.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Zaldivar: Yes, sir. My name is Richard Zaldivar, Mr. Chair and Members of the Committee. I am the Executive Director and the founder of The Wall Las Memorias Project in Los Angeles. We do HIV prevention and work with the LGBT community, mental health, and substance abuse. I am also the chair of the California Alcohol Policy Alliance. I'm here today to testify in strong opposition to this Senate Bill. While Senate Bill 384 may be an important policy change for the Senator and the special interests, and there's a lot of special interests who stand to gain financially from selling alcohol two more hours every night. It will be a disaster for the public, the state, the local governments, who will continue to pay billions of dollars tabs for binge drinking, vehicle craft injuries, emergency room admissions, and alcoholic-related assault and injury. Local control today means, that alcohol producers, retailers, Food and Beverage Industry groups have mastered the art of convincing the local governments that relaxing alcohol controls is a public convenience and necessity. As stated, if you allow bars to remain open until 4 am, only those who make a living selling alcohol will benefit at the expense of tax payers, governments who have to clean up the mess of alcohol related harm. It is negligent for any elected official to propose something that would undoubtedly cause more harm and more expense to our neighborhoods, to our communities. Perhaps for some bars and restaurants two more hours of service will be profitable, but the cost in police and emergency care, Highway Patrol, public transportation will greatly exceed any small bar and restaurant economic benefit. The term local control here is misused by Senate Bill 384 advocates. When the public health community says, local control, it means not letting the State prance stricter protections on local level. I want to give you an example. If this measure was to go forward, that means conceivably that the bars in Los Angeles County could stay open until 4:00 in the morning. And so people from Orange County would drive from Los Angeles County and have a great party until 4:00 in the morning. They drive back to the local cities and municipalities, and we are faced now with public safety issues and possibly public harm. Without State protections, power over health regulations often revert not to the community, but to the wealthy businesses, in this case big alcohol and large entertainment interests. Note that the emphasis on the State as a whole, this version of local control leaves one jurisdiction vulnerable to harm caused by actions by another, and we just heard that example here. This problem is exacerbated by the fact that many municipalities in California lack adequate late night transit options, placing intoxicated and exhausted drivers on the road right as the morning commute gets going. Public safety researchers have observed just this pattern before. When comparing Detroit to Windsor, Ontario, the Canadian city just across the border, they found traffic collision patterns consistent with the idea that Detroit's later closing times encouraged Windsor residents to cross the border. I also want to call If you see the analysis in your packet, where the Senator said there's no evidence that later hours cause drunk driving. But yet, in 2010 the US Community Prevention Services task force conducted a review of available studies. And recommended against extending hours of alcohol sales and service. The task force went on to say that there was evidence. Showing that increasing hours of sale by two or more hours, found increases in vehicle crash injuries, emergency room admissions and alcohol related assault and injury. Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee, I'm very passionate about the work, and some of you know me. About the work that we do, many people in our communities don't have the opportunity to be here. Like the big business and special interests that are here today. But they don't want more alcohol in their community. They've had enough. And with the question about where are healthcare system is going in the future. The burden of taking care of our community and having to pay for services is going to come back to the individual family members. So I encourage you a no vote today on this issue.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shelly Martin: Good morning Senators and Staff. My name is Shelly Martin, I live in Riverside County. My current position is with the MFI Recovery Centers. I actually work in the prevention end of that. I work to try to keep kids from starting to drink so that they aren't becoming alcoholics later on and having life problems from that. Prior to that I worked for Congressman Ruiz in the 36th District. I'm well acquainted with the interests and needs of our area. When you strip away the window dressing the bill was created by a San Francisco based law maker, who wants to keep bars open in San Francisco to compete. But legislation designed for one city should not be prescribed for the rest of California. The author will tell you that SB 384 does not prescribe times for the rest of California. That there is local control suggesting each community will be able to choose what is best for them. Yet the term local control is being misused by 384 advocates. When the public health community says local control, it means not letting the State preempt stricter protections on the local level. If SB 384 were a local control bill in the public health sense. It would facilitate local communities in setting last call times earlier than the State mandated 2 AM time. All this talk about local control is about business, not community control. This is not about your voters being in control. City conditional use permit processes that once empowered residents to have some control over how and where alcohol was served and sold in their communities have been circumvented by the industry who show up with legal terms at hearing after hearing. Drag it out and outlast concerned residents who just can't keep up. This is about an alcohol industry, vis-a-vis restaurant owners, bar owners being in control. Local is a relative term. A decision by one urban center to extend drinking hours could attract commuter drinkers from neighboring communities. Placing them on the road after a night of drinking. A study comparing Detroit with neighboring Windsor, Ontario found that more cars with Ontario plates were getting in collisions in Detroit when Detroit had a later last call time than Windsor. We have a casino in our local area. It is the main draw for nightlife in the Hammond area that could likely extend their alcohol sales to 4 AM if SB 384 moves forward. Not only would this mean a lot of impaired drivers traveling significant distances home. But our Hemet bars because we are an impoverished area could seek to extend their license. This is unlikely to be kept to just a few urban centers. This bill encourages a race to the bottom. Where neighboring cities extend their hours to keep up. At the behest of their bar and restaurant owners, developers, the hospitality and alcohol industries, and some legislators tout this type of change in alcohol regulation as a boom for economic development and tax revenue. But the evidence shows otherwise. This policy change will likely raise alcohol related harm, and burden local communities with the cost from responding to that harm. Outlying communities that did not choose to extend their hours will be left with the tab. The harms and response costs will not likely stick within city boundaries. Extending bar hours raises public safety concerns, endangers public health, and pits law enforcement and communities against the well resourced industries that stand to profit from increasing alcohol availability. I urge you to vote no today.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 362, 'end': 366, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Fred Jones: mr. chair, senators, fred kevin jones on behalf of the california council on alcohol problems in opposition. may i beg the chair's indulgences for a couple of comments, or?
[{'start': 21, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Patty Hoyt: hoyt with adapt san ramon valley and the california alcohol policy alliance. and we strongly oppose a 4 am bar bill for all of the reasons stated.
[]
Jamie Rich: Jamie Rich, with ADAPT La Morinda, and the California Alcohol Policy Alliance, and we ask that you oppose this 4 AM bar bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jorge Castillo: Jorge Castillo with the Los Angeles Drug and Alcohol Policy Alliance. We oppose SB 384. Los Angeles currently spends $2.2 billion a year to manage alcohol related crime and health issues. Six people die each year in Los Angeles due to alcohol. I mean, I'm sorry, six people die each day due to alcohol-related harm in Los Angeles. Unfortunately, the Alcoholic Beverage Control Department is functioning on a broken system. They're understaffed, and they are not receptive to community input. And in Los Angeles, they have six agents to manage 8,000 licenses. We're strongly opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Cooley: Sarah Cooley, with the San Rafael Drug and Alcohol Coalition, in Marine County, also strongly in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Caldwell: good morning. mr. chairman, members,  i'm john fred caldwell and on behalf of the california hotel and lodging association high end boutique hotels are a fast growing segment of the hotel industry as more brands and independent hoteliers seek to differentiate themselves and cater to new and changing demographics. but as of today if a wine grower, brewer, or alcohol manufacturer wanted to invest in these boutique hotels, they would be unable to qualify for an alcohol license if the property hadn't over unless, unless property had over a hundred rooms. which is significantly more rooms than the typical boutique hotel. amending the exemption to 50 rooms, as this bill does, will lead to the development of more boutique properties around the state. at the same time, as the authors mentioned, the bill keeps in place the same limitations that have been law for 30 years. california hotel lodging association believes this bill means more of these boutique hotels, create more jobs, and as well bring in more transient occupancy tax to your local governments.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 59, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Gavin McHugh: Mr. Chairman and members, Gavin McHugh on behalf of the Distilled Spirits Council. We see this as a modest improvement in current law, with plenty of the same safeguards there, and we urge an aye vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ivan Altamura: mr. chair and members, ivan john altamura with capital advocacy on behalf of louis vuitton moet hennessy.  our hotel management division,  louis vuitton moet hennessy is very diversified company that, as you know worldwide, has interest in fashion, in wine and spirit, in clothing, in other retailers, and one of the things that they also have an interest in is hotel management and they specialize in these types of boutique hotels. so, we support the author for his efforts to open up this niche market i echo the comments of the other witnesses in support and ask that you support the bill.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Beth Capell: Beth Capell, on behalf of Health Access California. We certainly care very much about whether patients get the drugs they need and whether they can afford the cost. The legislation that prohibited discrimination in drug formularies was our legislation. The legislation that we sponsored that Mr. Gordon carried. It also kept out-of-pocket costs at $250 per drug, because we care very much about what the individual consumer pays. And we're very pleased with the recent amendments that make sure that the generic drug has a lower co-pay. We think that's an important improvement in the bill. We also care about the cost to the health system. For those of us who are under age 65, outpatient prescription drugs are 20% of the premium dollar. When you add in prescription drugs that are administered in a doctors' office like chemotherapy or in a hospital, the percentage of the premium dollar is even higher. So, the coupons that steers a consumer from a lower cost generic drug to a high cost brand name drug have impacts on consumers because the premiums go up. And as premiums go up, the share of premiums that consumers pay goes up and so do their deductibles and copays. 10 years ago, no one in this room had heard of a four tier drug formulary. Today, they're quite common. We need to we have been before you before talking about prescription drug cost. We think this an important element of discussion and we're happy to be here and support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 296, 'end': 302, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sara Flocks: mr. chair members, sara jonah flocks of the california labor federation. our unions have seen that prescription drug prices are one of the fastest growing drivers of our health care spending. and we have done a number of things to try to control those costs. one of them is making sure that we have generic substitution. that our members are taking therapeutically equivalent generics. another is that we actually waive copays, make sure that our members don't pay copays for certain drugs to increase medication adherence. and we are very aware of all the dollars that we spend on per prescription drugs, because those are dollars coming out of our members' wages. one of the things that undermines our efforts to be able to control cost and keep our members healthy is the use of payment coupons. and i just want to give one example when l put this bill out to a number of trust fund administrators that we work with, i was flooded with examples of the problems of drug coupons. but the one example was, i had a trust fund administrator say to me, we've been paying for vimovo for months and months and months. and i asked him, well what's the problem with vimovo? he's like, "in 2013, the cost of vimovo was $159. two years later, it cost over $1,600 to the trust fund, it went up over 600%." that's because in 2013 horizon pharma bought the vimovo from astrazeneca and started aggressively using payment coupons to get people to take this drug. vimovo treats arthritis. we want to make sure that our members get their arthritis drugs. but it is a combination of an said. so basically a leave and an acid reflux drug that you can buy the generic, over the counter, for $40 of the cost to the trust fund. but we had members who are getting payment coupons at costco, from magazines, online and so they instead rather that paying 20 bucks for the copay would get the copay waved they get from vimovo, we would pay $1600. that is $1560 that we were spending on an unnecessary drug. so that is money coming out of member's pockets that we could be spending on other things. and so we think this is a very smart approach, a very moderate approach, to ensure that when there's a therapeutically equivalent drug that is a generic that's lower cost. prescription drug companies can't use payment coupons to get our members hooked on the brand name, thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 29, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nick Louizos: Yeah. Nick Louizos with the California Association of Health Plans. Support the bill. Support it moving forward. We are assessing the impact of the new amendments. Want to continue discussion with the author and his staff. Make sure it's the most effective bill as possible. Thank you.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Teresa Stark: teresa sara stark, kaiser permanente, in support. i want to thank the author for taking on this issue in his leadership. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Winger: John Winger on behalf of America's Health Insurance Plans and Health Scripts. We were also in support of the bill and are going to assess the amendments. Also been authorized to express support by PCMA, the Pharmaceutical Care Management Association, thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Orack: Michelle Orack, on behalf of Molina Healthcare, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Sarkissian: karen teresa sarkissian with the california chamber of commerce, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Autumn Ogden: I'm an in-betweener. I'm Autumn Ogden-Smith with the American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network. We originally had strong concerns with the bill when it, first came out. That we've worked diligently with the author and the staff, and we appreciate the amendments, and they do remove all of our concerns. So, thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 43, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kristin Hare: kristin karen hare-larkin, california rheumatology alliance. similar to acs, can we had some concerns with the original bill, but thank the author and his staff for working with us. and we have removed our opposition and gone to neutral, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 25, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Joan Werblin: i was just trying to figure where the voice was. good afternoon. my name is joan kristin werblin. i am a nurse, i'm retired, i am a specialist in diabetes. i taught with the medical school and at the hospital at ucd. currently i am a volunteer i am the vice chair of the california health collaborative and i'm also the chair of the board of directors of the california chronic care coalition. i look at this issue and maybe perhaps a little bit different perspective than many of you, for 37 years i worked with diabetes patients at the university. and i saw the results of people not being able to afford something as basic and simple as a bottle of insulin. i have no knowledge of what goes on when people who they've talked about misused the coupons, misused the way they have co-pays. but i do have knowledge and i have seen what happens, when coupons are available for patients. it's interesting the difference in cost, when you use a coupon or when you don't. if you don't have access to insurance, and not everyone has access to insurance, or to any of the funding programs. the reality is that millions of people in california rely on discount, or vouchers and these are people that you all will probably never see. but, i saw them quite frequently. they look to assistance programs to bring down the cost of their drugs. these programs help them as access, life saving treatments, such us continuing with medication for people who are on oncology meds. or perhaps management medications such as those for diabetes they also improve the quality of life such as a disfiguring cystic acne. and it's not just people with chronic diseases that use these coupons, we're concerned about the impact this is going to have. on our low income families and on our seniors, who very often use coupons. most californians are seeing dramatic increases in their premiums and in their co-pays. since this bill was submitted, and we submitted our letter of opposition. we realize the author has made some changes, but i don't think it's quite there yet. we're aware of the ways that we can help perhaps provide a fair and balanced approach. i have a question to ask, perhaps it's two questions. how does this bill help patients and how does it actually lower the cost to the patient? that is my real concern, so at these time we're going to stay with our opposition.
[{'start': 76, 'end': 96, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Veronica Lebeau: Veronica LeBeau from the American Liver Foundation, and it was well worth the wait to represent our liver patient community and oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jerry Jeffe: jerry joan jeffe, representing the california hepatitis c task force, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jarrell Cook: jarrell, california manufacturers &technology association, in strong opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicholas Rothman: nicholas jerry rothman, california state naacp, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jimmy Jackson: Jimmy Jackson, Biocom, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Carpenter: Mike Carpenter, California Life Sciences Association, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Fred Note: Thank you. I'm Fred Note representing PhRMA, in opposition and we appreciate the recent amendments. Thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 38, 'end': 43, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rebecca Gonzales: Rebecca Gonzales National Association of Social Workers California chapter. We represent 10,000 professional social workers in California and we fully support this bill. The minor fee increase is certainly worth it in our eyes for shoring up this program, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amanda Levy: Amanda Levy, California Psychological Association one of the affected provider groups in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Steve Hanzelik: thank you, mr. chairman and members of the committee. my name's hanzelik, when i first moved to california, i was pretty much at rock bottom, i was all the way down. anyway, i heard about this boxing program at transitions, okay, so i went down there and made an appointment. and it was the longest 24 hours of my life because you have to wait 24 hours before you can actually go in there and become a patient, before they give you the medication. so you're actually sick during that 24 hours and it's a pretty bad sickness, anyway, there's so many people out there that need the help, they're having a hard time getting there. for one, their transportations, they almost have to be found to get there. another thing, we put a stigma on people that they're addicted to drugs but it was doctors that addicted them to the drugs. so i know, which just sounds terrible. that, we need to, god it's just, anyway i've moved way up since i started the program. i've come a long way, it's been about seven years. i've stayed in the program for that long. i now have my own place. i'm paying taxes. i have transportation. i have a really good job. i have job support sitting back here. and it's just really important that more people are educated into the program, more people get into the program. and it does work, i'm living proof, i didn't think i'd be this far, believe me. and it's one penny, okay, just one cent, there's a wall in the transition office that has pennies on it. each one of those pennies represents a person that has died from an opioid overdose and that wall is almost full so i do i truly believe that instead of sticking a wall up penny to the wall, if we could put a penny in the bank and and used it to help develop more education, more opportunity for people to, to, to see, hear and learn about the program and the medication itself. medication truly works. i'm living proof. i'm here. so it and more people, more people could be here. but that's what i let, it's a terrible thing, but what do you think of the? a life is worth a lot more than a penny and that's what they're tackling through the wall, it's a penny. a penny could save their life instead of blowing one, all right. thanks.
[{'start': 64, 'end': 72, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Kan: dr. david nicholas kan, president-elect to the california society of addiction medicine, in support of the bill.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sherry Daley: sherry david daley with the california consortium of addiction programs and professionals, no californian should die while waiting for treatment, i urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stephen Maulhardt: Stephen Maulhardt representing two things. I work for Aegis Treatment Centers. We operate 30 clinics treating about 9500 patients for opioid addiction. We support, we look forward to working with the author on some tweaks we'd like to see. I'm also the Legislative Chair of the California Association of Alcohol and Drug Program Executives, CADPE, we also support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Peter Kellis: peter on behalf of the california hospice and palliative care association again. i'd like to be very clear that the hospice programs in california are probably the last  participants who would like to stand in the way between the goals of the bill and where the author intends to go, and we appreciate the time that the author spent talking with us about the concerns the hospice industries have. but having said that, let me briefly describe why they're kind of stuck in this place of opposing the bill. there are over 300 hospice programs in this state. about one-third of them are not for profit. a number of them are volunteer hospices. i think most of you know the concept of hospice, which is to provide a team of individuals to the home or the place where a terminally ill individual is in the last days of life, usually the last two weeks of life. hospice is paid in a capitated manner. so that they are at risk for all of the costs that are born in providing this team to care for the terminally ill. in asking the hospice association, can you tell me what percentage of prescription drugs that you provide and furnish to the terminally ill are opioids. i was unable to be given an exact number but i was told in excess of 90%. so if that's the case and they overwhelmingly dispense opioids, and in fact frequently the first experience a terminally ill individual has with the hospice program is being provided liquid opioids in some way shape or form. so having said that, if there's going to be a tax on opioids and hospices overwhelmingly dispense opioids, and hospices are paid in a capitated manner, where they are at risk for all costs. the fact that there would be a cost that would be passed down through the supply chain is almost inescapable. we understand where the author's made mention of trying to find a pathway to address whether it be cancer or hospice, we'd like to try to establish something to identify that if there's any way shape or form. but hospice is not a high margin program. and even having the capacity to find an administrative mechanism to utilize a coupon system or something may be challenging to some but we're happy to work with the author to see if there's a pathway but they have to oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Sarkissian: Karen Sarkissian with the California Chamber of Commerce, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Perry: Randy Perry with Aaron Read and Associates on behalf of Teva Pharmaceuticals, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 17, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mike Carpenter: mike sherry carpenter representing the california life sciences association, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cathy Fam: My name is ... I am the interpreter today for Miss Cathy Fam. Good afternoon, my name is Cathy Fam. I immigrated to the United States from Vietnam in 1989. I work as a manicurist at Era Salon in Marin County.  I've worked in nail salons for over 20 years. I started working in nail salons because I had friends and family members in the business, and I knew I could learn the skills to do a good job. I didn't know though that I would end up working with harmful chemicals.  At work, I often experience headaches and skin rashes that I believe may be related to the products I used. Many of my coworkers experience similar symptoms. Some of them even have worse conditions such as frequent eyes and nose inflammation. They said that must be the result of long-term exposure to chemicals in nail salon products. I believe it's important for my coworkers and for myself to be able to find out what ingredients are in the products we use when we provide nail services. I think ingredients should be listed on labels that professional cosmetics like nail polishes. This could make easier to show customers if they ask me about a polish. If I got sick from a product, I could take the labelled bottle with me and show the Doctor. That could help the Doctor figure out what's wrong with me. Thanks to the California Healthy Nail Salon Collaborative, nail salon owners and workers like me, are learning more and more about the products we use. We are learning how to protect ourself and choose safer nail products, but we need ingredient information to do that, and that's why AB 1575 is so important. Please vote yes on AB 1575. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 51, 'end': 60, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 89, 'end': 98, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Katherine Porter: thank you very much. hello, my name is katherine mike porter, policy director with the california healthy nail salon collaborative we're one of the sponsors of ab 1575 which calls for more transparency of the chemical ingredients in professional cosmetic products. the california healthy nails salon collaborative is a coalition of environmental health and justice and worker rights organizations and individual nail salon workers and owners, like cathy fam that's here with us today. through community leadership, programs, policy advocacy, and other activities, we work to improve the health, safety, and rights for the predominantly vietnamese immigrant women workforce in nail salons. everyday, for long hours, nail and hair salon workers, barbers, estheticians use solvents, glues, polishes, straighteners, and other beauty care products. nail and hair salon workers are predominately women of reproductive age and many of those products contain chemicals suspected or causing cancer, reproductive, respiratory, neurological, or other harm and the exposures that they experience at work for many hours are those on top of their personal exposures like we all experience, in the morning when we wash our hair, we put on lotion, we put on makeup, we use deodorant. so these folks are not only experiencing the exposures that you all do, they're also experiencing this seven to eight hour, five to six day a week level of exposures. studies show that women in the salon professions are at greater risk of cancer than the general population. this is especially alarming for african american salon professionals as african american women generally experience more aggressive forms of cancer. hair and nail salon professionals may also be at increased risk for certain reproductive harm, such as low birth weight babies and respiratory problems. although manufacturers are legally required to list ingredients on the label of cosmetics sold at the retail level, they have no such legal obligation when it comes to professional cosmetics and this lack of transparency hampers folks like cathy pham's and other beauty professionals' ability to make informed choices, and to advise their customers about the products that are being used. ab 1575 will fill and improve this labeling policy gap by requiring that manufactures list ingredients on professional cosmetic labels and on their websites, as well as provide reference to where salon workers and owners can get information on health impacts of potentially hazardous ingredients. earlier today, i heard assembly member thurmond testify about his own bill, and he said that his bill calls for erring on the side of caution. i think the same thing as with this bill, we don't believe that there's too much information for this group of workers. whether it be safety data sheets, or whether it be ingredients on labels, or ingredients on websites. more information is erring on the side of caution when it comes to the health of this group of professionals. we're cosponsors and support ab 1575 because we believe knowledge is power. ab 1575 represents an important step in ensuring that women and men in the hair, nail, barber, and esthetician professions can better protect their health and the health of their customers while at work. we urge a yes vote on ab 1575, thank you.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 60, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2085, 'end': 2095, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2570, 'end': 2578, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Shannon Smith-Crowley: shannon katherine smith-crowley representing the american congress of obstetricians and gynecologists in support
[{'start': 0, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Thuy Minh: good afternoon, my name is thuy shannon minh. i'm a nail salon worker from oakland, california. today, i am here to support ab 1575 bill, thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Montu Pham: hello, my name montu thuy pham, i am a nail salon worker from oakland, california. today, i am here to support ab 1575 bill, thank you, very much.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathryn Alcantar: Hello, Kathryn Alcantar with the Center for Environmental Health here in support. Representing the Change Coalition as well, Natural Resources Defense Council, and Physicians for Social Responsibility Los Angeles, thank you.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vivian Ericson: thank you. vivian montu ericson on behalf of breast cancer prevention partners here in support of the bill thank you, very much.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Locke: Good evening, Michael Locke with Asian Health Services, we're a community health center in Alameda County, and we support AB 1575
[{'start': 14, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Delil Lam: hi, i am lam, i am a nail salon worker, i support ab 1575.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tai Chen: Good afternoon, my name Tai Chen, I am a worker at nail salon in Oakland. Today, come here to support the bill AB 1575, thank you so much. Thank you.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Chen: kimberly, of the california pan-ethnic health network, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sara Flocks: Sara Flocks, California Labor Federation, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bethany Nyguyen: Thank you. Bethany Nyguyen, nail technician, and in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nina Tran: Hi, Nina Tran, I'm a manicurist and also a nail salon owner and I support of the bill, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sara Fann: Thank you. Sara Fann, a daughter of a manicurist who was in the business for 25 years, in strong support. Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Emmel: melissa vivian emmel on behalf of the california products stewardship council here, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nourbese Flint: thank you. flint, i'm for black women for wellness, co-sponsor, in support. thank you.
[]
Yum Lee: My name is Yum Lee, I am ..., I'm support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Allayaud: Bill Allayaud, Environmental Working Group, in support, thank you
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katherine Porter: i'm katherine melissa porter, again, voicing support of our other co-sponsor women's choices for the earth and physicians for social responsibility from the san francisco bay area.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Doug Schoon: Hello Chair, Committee Members, I actually have some of my notes written up I'd like to give to the Sergeant in Arms, if you could distribute these for me. Just one page comments that I'm making today.  My name is Doug Schoon, and I'm the beauty industry scientist that's representing the Professional Beauty Association today. I'm a very strong advocate of product education. I'm an educator in the nail industry, and I've written several books that teach professionals how to work safely with salon chemicals. The PBA has asked me to speak on their behalf because we agree with the need to protect and safe guard salon workers. But opposed to AB 1575 because it will not help salon workers, it will only lead to confusion and it's duplicative and I don't think many understand some of the issues related here today. So I want to take a moment to explain a few things to you, if I may. First, AB 1575 cites the Sherman Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Law, but it ignores the more applicable Federal OSHA workers right to know and understand regulations. In 2012, OSHA established a standard of right to understand. It outlined specific safety data sheets and information that needs to be on these as far as also training and employee requirements. Safety data sheets must include hazard identification, ingredients with specific hazards, first aid measures, applicable exposure limits, appropriate personal protective equipment, safe handling, storage, disposal guidelines as well as emergency contact information, relative exposure, expected symptoms if overexposure should occur. Secondly AB 1575 misrepresents the DTSC's safer cosmetic product list of candidate chemicals which is not intended to be a list of chemicals that are harmful to health as suggested. This is an attempt to turn the candidate chemicals list into something that is not. The DTSC clearly states and I quote, the DTSC publication of the candidate chemical list imposes no requirements on manufacturers of products that contain candidate chemicals. And they go on to say, again quoting, the candidate chemical list is not a list of chemicals of concern. This is the bill that's putting the cart in for the horse by categorizing ingredients in reality, that have not yet been categorized by the DTSC. Now perfect example is this titanium dioxide which is the most widely used commodity colored pigment on the planet. AB 1575 mischaracterizes titanium dioxide as a carcinogen in nail polish. Proposition 65 is one of the strictest standards in the world and it clearly states that titanium dioxide is a risk only when unbound, airborne, and respirable. This cannot occur with nail polishes since titanium dioxide is bound in a liquid suspension which quickly transforms into a solid film the titanium dioxide is bound not airborne and certainly not respire-able. So lastly imposing a state specific California only label requirement on global brands just doesn't make sense. So the PDA and myself we urge the Committee to reject this bill and I thank you very much for your time.
[{'start': 96, 'end': 116, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 213, 'end': 224, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tom Myers: Thank you, good afternoon Mr. Chair, Mr. Vice chairmen, Members of the Committee. My name is Tom Myers and I'm the general council for the personal care products council. We're the leading trade Association for the cosmetics and personal care industry. We're approximately 600 member companies that manufacture and distribute vast majority of cosmetics marketed in the United States today. On behalf of the council I'm here to express our opposition to Assembly bill 1575 which would impose what we believe is an unnecessary state specific labeling and warning requirement on professionally used cosmetic products. Our reasons for opposing this bill are as follows. First cosmetic products sold and used in professional settings already have- provide disclosures of potential hazards via the OSHA mandated safety data sheet which you have just heard about. I would also point out rather than go into that argument any further is that our companies often provide SDS information in multiple languages not just English in recognition of the diversity of the workplace professionals that use our products. Second, trained and licensed professionals. Salon employees are professionally trained and licensed by the State of California as you again have just heard. Third, and a very important one is the diversion argument. One of the primary arguments against mandatory labeling of professional use products is the issue of diversion to an unintended market. Essentially deversion occurs when the product that's supposed to be going to professional setting ends up in a retail setting also known as gray market product. For the cosmetics industry, ingredient labeling helps distinguish retail product from professional used product. It's an easy way for retailers to recognize if the product has been diverted and then keep it off the shelves. Without the ingredient label such a product cannot be sold at retail is considered misbranded under the Sherman Act. And finally our most and biggest subjection to the bill has to do with the warning label for candidate chemicals. The Saver Consumer Product Act which was enacted by this Legislator under that DTSC developed this list of candidate chemicals. This list contains over 2,4000 chemicals including all 800 plus chemicals on the Prop 65 list. But these chemicals are not designated as chemicals of concern for regulation under the act. They're simply the universe of potential chemicals to look at. There is no other criteria for these, for the warning to be honest list if your honest list the warning would apply even Prop 65 has exposure requirements and safe harbor levels attach to it. So a such a warning with unnecessarily alarm consumers about a harm that may not even exist. So for the foregoing reasons and because of some of the excessive penalties associated with this bill we respectfully oppose AB 1575 and we urge you to vote no. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 93, 'end': 102, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 792, 'end': 796, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sherry Daley: Hi, Sherry Daley with the California Consortium of Addiction Programs and Professionals, in support with the amendments. Thank you. Thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert Harris: Robert Harris on behalf of the California Society of Addiction Medicine. We thank the authors so kindly and the Committee staff for working out these amendments. And so we move our opposition, we'll reconsider our position on the bill. Thank you. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sam Rodriguez: i'm sam katherine rodriguez on behalf of the united food and commercial workers representing 116,000 members of the state of california. with my partner and colleague and friend aaron moreno for the california growth association. we have a joint statement it's very brief. ab 1461 it requires employees involved in preparation of storage and of raw foods to obtain a food handler card. it will provide a half protection for consumers using these large unregulated food fulfillment meal delivery enterprises. in recent years, these businesses have entered into the market delivering raw ingredients need to be curated to prepare recipes. however, there is no guarantee that these meals have been invented with the proper health and safety measures in place at every step of the food handling and packaging chain. this has raised public health and environmental safety concerns among consumers and public health officials alike. the state has a compelling interest to ensure that these operators are on full compliance of existing state and county food and safety laws. the food handler card will provide employees of these businesses. a reasonable level of training and food safety practices to reduce the potential for the spreading of food-borne illness. i respectfully ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 178, 'end': 190, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Aaron Moreno: Hey, my name is Aaron Moreno on behalf of the California Grocers Association. In partnership with our friends at UFCW, I want to express our support for this measure for the reasons stated by Mr. Rodriguez.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 196, 'end': 205, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Justin Franz: good afternoon, mr. chair, justin sam franz here on behalf of instacart. instacart is based in san francisco, but it's in all of your communities. instacart is an online app on your phone. you can order groceries from a participating grocery store that instacart has arranged partnership with. for instance, they say for many of the grocery stores that are ufcw members work at as well. what we do is we go in, we shop for you, and then we bring those goods to your home. there's a fee involved with that, convenience fee or delivery fee, and that provides a service that allows customers to access groceries at the grocery store in an easy way. as laura mentioned we have concerns with the way the bill is crafted. under the current food handler program there are a litany of exemptions. one of those exemptions i should point out are the members of ufcw and the grocery store employees, the sponsors of this bill. we have asked that in order to make certain that we are not the target of this legislation, that two amendments or two exemptions be included in the bill. one would be, food facility does not include the following, an online website or mobile application that enables individuals to place delivery orders and two, that food handlers should not include a third party individual who utilizes online website or mobile application. in other words, if we are not talking about the insta-cart or the other food delivery online app-based platforms in this bill, why can't we not then be included in the exemptions that all ready exist for food handling and for those reasons we're respectfully opposing unless amended.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 649, 'end': 654, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Duncan Mcfetridge: mr. chairman and members, mcfetridge representing blue apron. we want to thank the authors for joining us at the facility last week and reaching out to the company. we have concerns. it's still not clear to us what exactly the deficiency is here. both the sponsors and the author outlined concerns about training requirements. we are regulated not as a food facility, rather a commercial food processing establishment, which under that category is heavily regulated by the federal sherman act, which regulates food processors, which blue apron is, and the californian department of public health. we have a laundry list of requirements that far exceed what is required under the food handlers certificate. so we see this as being, you know, redundant and superfluous and unnecessary to the business. moreover, we frankly don't see how this language, as crafted, even touches us. so for those reasons we wanted to just outline our concerns to the committee.
[]
Dave Gordon: Chair and members, I'm Dave Gordon, I work as the County Superintendent of Schools in Sacramento, I was previously. The Superintendent of the Elk Grove Unified School District, the largest district in the county. And in Sacramento county we have over 240,000 students, many of them are among the most needy in the state and we have right now only 2 school based health centers in the whole county and we have none in our two most impoverished districts. So this bill would give us an opportunity to expand badly needed services. And particularly from the standpoint that in some of our poorest communities, parents use the school as the Community Center. It's the place they go, it has the people they trust. Working there, the teachers are probably the most trusted people in the whole system. And if we could add the presence of heath workers commissions to the school team, our experience is the parents will much more likely to utilize the services. And we could potentially head off many, many, many illnesses and conditions like mental health conditions from worsening and cost in this much more down the road so we certainly in full support of the bill and urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Emil: good afternoon, emil on behalf of the california academy of child and adolescent psychiatry, here in support.
[]
Donald Lyman: thank you, i'm dr. donald justin lyman, i am one of the two proponents for proposition 64, and author of the pro comments on the ballot initiative itself. i'm also representing the physicians for cannabis reform, a national group. i represent them here in california. when we wrote this proposition, we recognized we were setting up a brand new industry, and it's difficult to do that in a proposition when you're advised that you can't exceed two pages. so when we got to 60, we knew we were in trouble. so what we have set up here in the proposition is a skeleton and the skeleton is intended to be something upon which we can improve, mature, make it workable with further acts of this body, the legislature, and the regulatory process. so, what's happening today is appropriate, it is expected. this is a work in progress,we also know that today's product mix in the marijuana industry is about 20% edibles and other things and it's about 80% smoke. within five years we expect that will be reversed and it will be about 80% edibles and other things and 20% smoke. and in that progression from here to there, the labelling of commercial package products becomes very important. so the action today to state parameters for that labeling is very appropriate, very appropriate for your consideration. i find that what we have produced here in this bill is appropriate and acceptable, and i support it.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
George Miller: Mr. Chairman, George Miller on behalf of Made by Science I really can't add anything to that, just respectfully ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rob Purty: good afternoon, my name is rob. i'm a board member with the valley fever americas foundation. five years ago i was diagnosed with valley fever also known as coccidioidomycosis or cocci as we call it. i was diagnosed with cocci meningitis, the meningitis form of the disease, which currently has about a 30% morality rate. so this is a very important piece of legislature to me, personally. my experience with valley fever, i've been put through the ringer. there are currently four types of medication used to threat valley fever orally and i've been on all of them, as well as the liquid form of the medication which is called amphotericin b. that medication is actually administered to me, what they call intrathecally, meaning they literally inject a syringe of the medicine into my brain. the little bump on my head, my unicorn horn is a port and people going for this type of treatment only in kern county and they going from a range of two to three times a week too. i am currently going in every third week for this type of treatment. that will probably continue for the rest of my life finding a cure. so the valley fever americas foundation was brought into being for the purpose of developing a vaccine. as matter of fact there's a history of working together between the foundation, as well as other organizations in california and the legislature for a vaccine project that occurred a while back. unfortunately that didn't work out, so we've kind of moved on to other things. we now advocate for awareness as well as a vaccine and also a cure. so ab 1279 is a great common sense piece of legislation that focuses on accurate tracking and capturing accurate numbers on valley fever. so a bit of more information on mr. salas' opening remarks. last week, i was part of the press conference with the kern county health department releasing in the information on valley fever. close to 2,000 new cases last year, of those cases, they estimate about a 100 cases a year on average into 0 to 15% age group. those numbers are slightly different than the state numbers, but in my communications with local hospitals that are treating children, they see close to 500 cases in the central valley with children. so there's a definite discrepancy in the numbers between what is being reported at the state and county level and what the actual medical professionals are saying. so i think this bill goes a long way towards correcting that issue as well as using the best option available, which is awareness. so i would like to thank you for your time and respectfully request a vote, an aye vote, excuse me.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1730, 'end': 1735, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Art Rodriguez: Hello, thank you, my name is Art Rodriguez and I'm from Tulare County. Originally, I had thought I was going to come here and explain to you how my dad 10 years ago contracted Valley fever and hasn't been able to work since he has to live with taking pain medications and not knowing which day he's going to be able to go out to the park with his grandkids, my kids, but it just came to me as were sitting here the lady that was supposed to be here today taking his spot, her name is Julie. Julie Solis and her husband, yesterday ended up getting too ill that they had to admit him into the hospital and gave a call to me to come out here and share this testimony with you guys. She's been working diligently on advocating and teaching and educating folks on her own time knowing the struggles that you have to go through when you have something like this, but I want to read what she managed to put together for me to day, just kind of threw it together, but I think it's very meaningful. My husband Juan Carlos Solis was diagnosed after six months of being misdiagnosed. The cocci disseminated, I mean it had disseminated to his brain. He has been living with chronic cocci meningitis for over eight years. We lost our homes, vehicles, possessions, due to the cost of keeping my husband alive. His bills have surpassed $1 million and he's only 42. He has less than 1% chance that he will live past two years, but he has been beating his odds but is suffering daily due to cocci meningitis. I started advocating when I noticed a lack of Valley Fever awareness and the increase of illnesses. I do not want others to suffer my family's fate. So I began advocating and sharing Valley Fever information. I know to much to keep cocci a secret. Everyone deserves to know that one of the greatest hurdles we face is reporting is not accurate. California does not have guidelines and reporting data base for Valley Fever. As of now, all the numbers are estimates and approximations. Everyone deserves to be counted with the passage of AB 1279. It will be difficult for the medical community to continue discounting Vallet Fever as a rare or orphan disease. The goal of AB 1279 is to take account of all of the ill and target resources. My husband is only 42 years old and his brain size and activity is of an 80 year old. Since we have little research Valley Fever is widely known, is not widely known. Doctors can't properly treat it. We do continue using off-label medications to treat this. And they have horrible side effects. AB 1279 is meant to establish the validity of devastating disease. My husband probably because I know what it says later and it's hard for me not to. My husband probably won't grow old with me. The odds are stacked against him as the Valley Fever is embedded in his brain. He is currently hospitalized due to this Valley Fever. The pressure is on his brain has come too great so he will be relieved through a medical procedure. I think they open the skull. My husband has been tortured by Valley Fever and the meds are killing him slowly but what choice do we have? Die fast without meds or die slowly with meds, he chose to die slowly. So, twice a day he swallows his medications that cause horrible side effects including skin cancer. He can't even use the restroom without gloves due to the squima cells carcinomas, skin cancer, and open wounds that cover his arms, hands, neck, face, ears, head. Valley fever destroys countless lives not only is the patient affected but their families too. Have you ever heard your child ask you is daddy going to die? I have and it's traumatizing. To all who bear witness to this destruction the Valley Fever causes, support AB 1239 because everyone deserves to be counted. Thank you.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 484, 'end': 489, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 491, 'end': 502, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1001, 'end': 1018, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Karen Lang: Hi, Mr. Chair, and members. Karen Lang, on behalf of the Curran County Board of Supervisors. For all the reasons outline, we ask for your aye vote today, thank you.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Janet Coffman: Thank you very much Mr. Chairman. It's a pleasure to be here with all of you today. I am Janet Coffman. I have a PhD in Health Services Research and a Master's in Public Policy from U.C. Berkley. I am on the faculty at the Phillip R. Lee Institute for health policy studies and the health force center at the University of California San Francisco and as was mentioned I serve as the lead investigator on the team that is evaluating the California community para medicine pilot projects and we issued our first report in January. First a little background on community para-medicine and this is also known as mobile integrated health and it is an innovative model of care that is being implemented and tested in most states across the United States. Utilizes the new week of the abilities of paramedics and emergency medical system as well as their availability 24 hours a day, seven days a week to provide alternatives to ambulance transport and ED visits that are tailored to meet the need of local communities, and to supplement other services available in the communities. Community paramedicine aligns with the aims of healthcare reform to improve patients experience, improve community health status and decrease the cost of care. Community Paramedics receives additional training beyond that required for paramedic licensure. And they provide care outside their traditional role which under California law is restricted to responding to 911 calls, transporting patients to an acute care hospital emergency department and performing inter facility transfers. And under the pilot project all of the community paramedics had to have first obtained their paramedic licensure. EMTs, advanced EMTs do not participate. And not only have obtained the paramedic licensure, but to have had approximately four years of experience in the field. So in the California project, all our experienced paramedics they all underwent a two-part training. One, a training in fundamentals of community paramedicine, and then a second set of training that was tailored to the community paramedicine concept being tested in their jurisdiction. In the current community para medicine projects are being conducted under a health workforce pilot project and this is a statutorially authorized program that's overseen by the office of statewide health planning and development. The project is sponsored by the California emergency medical services authority. And the evaluation includes 13 projects that are testing six community paramedicine concepts. Four of which are addressed in AB 1650. And the four concepts that AB 1650 addresses are short term home-based follow up care for persons recently discharged from a hospital due to a chronic condition such as heart failure or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. And the goal is to decrease their hospital re-admissions within 30 days and to generally improve their ability to manage their chronic illness. A second, and that's being tested in five sites. Two sites are testing frequent emergency medical services user concepts. And these projects provide case management services to persons who call 911 frequently, and frequent visitors to the ED. And the goal here is to reduce their use of EMS system by connecting them with primary care behavioral house, substance use disorder, social service, housing services. Services that more directly meet the needs that are driving them to call 911 or go to the ED. Third one site is testing directly observed therapy for tuberculosis. And this is a collaboration between the local EMS agency and the local public health department to provide directly observed therapy to people with Tuberculosis. And for those of you who may not familiar with tuberculosis, this involves dispensing medication. And observing patients taking their medication to ensure that the treatment is as effective as possible. And it involves taking treatment and a prescribed schedule over a period of multiple months. It's a complex treatment and the goal is to stop. You know, not only to cure the tuberculosis in that patient but also to stop the spread of tuberculosis. Which is a highly contagious disease. There's also one project that's testing a hospice concept. And in this case in response to 911 calls. In cases in which the patient, the family, if the person is in a residential facility, the residential facility has called 911. So 911 system has been activated, paramedics have been summoned. And the goal here is for the paramedics to collaborate with the hospice agency, nurses, the patients and family members to treat the patients in their home where that's possible. And to honor the patient's wishes and to avoid transporting to the ED unless that's what the patient wants. And unless the hospice nurse and the patient family have made a determination that that's in the patient's best interest. So it's really a collaboration. There are also several projects that are testing transport to alternate destination, to a mental health crisis center. And to urgent care centers. But I won't talk much about those because they are not addressed by AB 1650. I should mention, too, that there are 13 projects that were included the evaluation. A 14th project was approved and added in February 2017, that's in San Francisco. That's testing alternate transport directly sobering Center for chronic inebriates. And so we have results from the first 19 months of the projects. The first project started in June of 2015. And of the 13 included in the evaluation the last one got up and running in October 2015. And I'll need to move more quickly. So what did we find? We found from the post-discharge projects that hospital re-admissions within 30 days of discharge decreased significantly for all five projects. To somewhat lesser extent for one but, all five were successful. Both of the frequent EMS User Projects achieved a 50 percent reduction in numbers of 911 calls, ambulance transports and E.D. visits. That the tuberculosis project, the community paramedics works effectively with the Physician in charge of Public Health. The public health nurses in community health workers to administer treatment nearly 100% of the time. And that the community paramedics successfully work with hospice nurses to reduce the number of ambulance transports to ED's by approximately 50%. We estimate that the hospice frequent 911 caller and post-discharge projects achieve savings to health systems or hospitals by decreasing admissions or ED visits. The majority of these savings accrue to Medicare and MediCal. Because the majority of the folks enrolled in these projects either had Medicare or MediCal coverage. A couple other comments while I still have the floor. It's about how the projects are designed and implemented. They're designed to supplement existing services such as hospice and home health. And not to substitute with them. And as we've done our evaluation, and I think Jimmy and Brian can attest. As we've done our site visits that we've asked questions about this to see are you really doing this in a way that supplements and complements. And as far as we can tell, no personnel were displaced, that this really is a complement. That for example some of the post discharge projects are targeting people who do not have coverage for home health services. So as wonderful as home health is these are people for whom that's not an option. Or they're filling a gap. They're visiting people, say, within 72 hours of discharge, that's their protocol. To fill a gap and, for whatever reason, in the communities involved, home health is not able to respond that quickly. And so this is a gap filling service for those folks who are eligible for home health coverage. To have somebody out there in the home or on the phone checking with them to make sure they have their meds. Make sure they have their follow-up Doctor appointment scheduled. And so just I think in closing, since we're running low on time, to emphasize that. Two things that we feel is really reflected in these projects, the collaboration, the filling gaps in the community. And also that this really does I think improve outcomes for individuals and for society.
[{'start': 89, 'end': 102, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 6945, 'end': 6950, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6955, 'end': 6960, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ross Elliot: thank you mr. chairman and honorable members of the committee. the california ambulance ass- i'm sorry. my name is ross donald elliot, i'm the executive director of california ambulance association. the california ambulance association is pleased to sponsor this bill. and be part of the movement to advance medical care in california. our association has vested interest in the development of community paramedicine because it improves patient outcomes. and also because three of our member companies are participants in the community paramedic pilot project. i find medical transport is in ventura county and perform three components of the pilot project. they were involved in the frequent 911 user. the direct observation treatment the tuberculosis care with public health. and then coordinating care with their local hospice provider. another of our members butte county ems participated. they're in northern california and perform post discharge follow up. and medic ambulance from solano also perform post discharge follow up. and joining us today are actual community paramedics from medic ambulance, mr. james pearson and mr. brian meddor. they can provide a great deal of insight and details and enlighten us about the practical aspects of community medicine. we're aware that some groups are opposed to ab 1650. and i believe the opposition is either based on the fear of change, or they don't yet fully understand the concept of how community para medicine will work. the beauty of community paramedicine, as proposed in ab 1650, is that it fills gaps in the existing healthcare services as identified by the local communities. the pilot projects were effective because they were not other professionals, not doctors, not nurses or not social workers. weren't performing the services that the community needed. so no one was displaced because the community paramedic projects filled gaps in existing methods of providing care. by filling the gaps, the patients had better outcomes. the community paramedic concept does a win win for stakeholders and for patients. and although community paramedicine is fairly new to california, the concept of community paramedicine certainly has been successfully implemented in other parts of the world and other states. i'll just give you a list of the states where,
[{'start': 115, 'end': 133, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1113, 'end': 1126, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1135, 'end': 1147, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Connie Delgado: Sorry, hi, good afternoon, Connie Delgado with the California Hospital Association pleased to be here in support and we want to thank the Assembly Member for his approach on this bill.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Keller: keller, with the california association paramedical services, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stephanie Robertson: thank you mr. chair and members of the committee, stephanie ross robertson on behalf of the california nurses association, with respectful opposition to the vice chairman's bill. we appreciate, however, his open door to us on this very issue but we still remain opposed. there are some inadequacies in the project. even with additional training, community paramedics, specifically in butte county, were not adequate in assessing post-discharge needs of patients with congestive heart failure. they had an increase in hospital admission, and there was a similar program by trained rns who had a decrease in re-admissions by 23%. the post discharge patients in the project had an increase in ed visits when compared to a national study of post discharge states. there were three states involved in that and one of the states was california. the pilot project has unfortunately information and the demographics, some biased information in the patient data that was gathered. for instance, the demographics of the patients were overwhelmingly white english speaking males. with respect to post discharge and of the 922 studied, there were an additional 2,975 people that were not enrolled but eligible. 823 of those people did not offer consent. folks not enrolled were most likely to be african american or hispanic and also preferred to receive health information in a language other than english. from the look of the data, the information was reported to ucsf but not included in the final evaluation. that there were over 236 return visits to the ed in the post discharged 30-day period. 129 resulted in readmission and 107 were discharged from the ed and then went home. that's 25% of return visits to the system. the evaluation doesn't factor in cost savings, and it doesn't seem to include increased costs associated with putting patients in observation. at in low, observation doubled 127%, that was an increase of 42.78 increase in observation days. the obs rates reflect the fact that patients are coming back to the hospital. in addition, labor costs were not included in the cost savings associated with post discharge. we believe tb and hostice projects as well. so we can't fully conclude that there are cost savings in this project. nurses per our practice act defines the independent practice of nursing and my members implement medical orders but the practice is not dependent on physician orders. this bill is a scope of practice bill, to allow emts, paramedics, to perform primary care functions that is not within their scope of practice and training. as their scope under the auspices of emsa is to perform very necessary and critically important emergency pre-hospital care. we don't believe that a public policy case has been made to allow this to continue. the current project is not complete, and further study of this issue, we believe, is not necessary and unwarranted at best. we respectfully urge a no vote on this bill, thank you for your time.
[{'start': 50, 'end': 74, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Peter Callis: peter stephanie callis, on behalf of the hospice association. we have a slightly different position. if i might get a minute or two? thank you. peter stephanie callis on behalf of the california hospice and palliative care association, their position is not fully opposed. it's opposed unless amended to the bill. specifically, their concern is not about being usurped or replaced, it's about the insertion of non hospice personnel into the care of an individual who is elected hospice and is under the plan of care of a designated hospice team. so for that reason, where subsection 1802 2c to come out of the bill, they would remove their opposition. that is a section of a bill that includes hospice patients. we've spent quite a bit of time working with the authors as well. we appreciate the opportunity and we'll continue to work with him. but specifically when a patient elects hospice, they have given up curative care. the median length of stay in hospice in california is roughly 17 days. so for all practical purposes, this is near the end of an individual's life. in order to provide hospice care prior to performing that care, the hospice team which is comprised of a physician, nurses, home health aids, chaplains, counselors, social workers, and volunteers all form a plan of care that's individualized for each patient. they are concerned about having the insertion or the interaction of a non hospice individual even under the best of intents with hospice patients. some of the question about diverting from the emergency room can be addressed by having ems simply ask if a patient or caller is on hospice, and then the hospice team could be contacted. additionally, because the hospice team is comprised of volunteers, if there's an interest to support and participate there is nothing to prohibit emts from volunteering to be on hospice teams. so for these reasons, the hospice association must oppose the bill based on the inclusion of hospice patients within it. but are happy to work with the author and would remove their opposition if that amendment is accepted.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 144, 'end': 166, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Linda Nguy: linda, with western center on law and poverty in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jim Keddy: I'm Jim Keddy with Youth Forward, here in support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Gillar: good afternoon, thank you, my name is chris and i'm the director of program operations for reed chair medical services and also the president of the california association of air medical services. calams represents all of the private air ambulance services within the state and we're the sponsor of ab 583. we'd like to thank dr. wood for bringing this to the community today for your consideration and without his support and your support, we would be unable to continue to provide these life saving emergency services. like to thank dr. wood for coming out recently in visiting one of our bases and seeing what the infrastructure looks like and the requirements to maintain those services and encourage anybody else to come one to your local bases and do the same. thank you again for your aye vote in this important bill for our services.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 330, 'end': 334, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 539, 'end': 543, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mira Morton: Mira Morton here today on behalf of the California Children's Hospital Association, pleased to support the measure.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Steve Cumming: Steve Cumming, Mercy Air Services in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jackie Marshall: jackie peter marshall, phi air medical out of susanville in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Sample: sample phi redding base in support.
[]
Brian Cross: Brian Cross flight paramedic with Reed Chair medical services, out of Stockton and in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Troy Jones: Troy Jones, PHI Medical Redding in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Holly: holly, phi air medical sonora, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erin Cox: Erin Cox, Business Operations Manager for PHI, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erin Nice: erin jackie nice, program director phi air medical, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ross Fay: i'm ross erin fay, with calstar and calaims board member, in support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Connie Delgado: Good afternoon, Connie Delgado with the California Hospital Association, in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Doug Flanders: doug ross flanders with air methods corporation, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christopher Hall: Christopher Hall with PHI Air Medical, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : good doug afternoon, doug marianne doug warner, doug dameron doug counties doug association, doug in doug support.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 9, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 21, 'end': 46, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 48, 'end': 60, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 93, 'end': 97, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 101, 'end': 105, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Chez: Hi, I'm Dr. Michael Chez. I'm a pediatric epilepsy specialist here in town at Sacramento at Sutter. I wanted to just say that I've been involved directly with the research. One of two sites in Northern California besides San Francisco that has actually done research with the medication that we've been hearing about as part of this bill that may be FDA approved. These have been undergoing double-blind, placebo-controlled FDA trials under the guidance of the FDA and the DEA's support. And my understanding, besides having been a researcher in the area, is that FDA and DEA will go ahead and if the efficacy is there, change the scheduling for this product. We have seen patients improve with 75% improved seizure control on these trials. The national data has been presented at national meetings. The FDA has got the data and will probably make a decision within the next year. This is for diseases like Lennox-Gastaut syndrome and Dravet Syndrome which can be thousands of seizures a week and patients can actually die of these diseases due to their seizure complications. It's an orphan drug type of disease and one that having something new in our armament is very wonderful especially with the type of reduction in seizures that this medicine has been able to provide. And again, these are meeting FDA criteria for effectiveness. So we're very optimistic this will be approved and we just want to be able to be able to write the prescriptions. And the drug has no scientific addictive or recreational drug use properties that we can tell with the research that's been done to animals and humans to date.
[{'start': 12, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Hollowell: My name's Rebecca Hollowell. I'm the Assistant Director at the Epilepsy Foundation of Greater Los Angeles. The epilepsy's are diseases of the brain characterized by seizures. There's so many different types of seizures, so many different types of epilepsy, so many treatments, there's still no cure. There's still a lot of side effects to medication. One-third of the population is still living with uncontrolled seizures. As Dr. Chez said, seizures can be fatal. For many, fortunately they're not. But we have 350,000 Californians with epilepsy and 93,000 of those are children. And having access to a new medication, CB derived, FDA approved just would be really helpful and potentially save some lives. So I appreciate your support.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 430, 'end': 434, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Liz Helms: Liz Helms, California Chronic Care Coalition in support
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pamela Kahn: good afternoon. as dr. arambula said, my name is pamela  kahn, and i am the president-elect of the california school nurses organization, which consists of about 1,500 school nurses from throughout the state. we are the proud sponsors of ab 882. the need for a comprehensive school program, health program is clear. both federal and state laws mandate that services be provided in the schools. the ratios of school nurses to students that we have in california far exceed the recommended ratios of our national organisation and last year, the american academy of pediatrics issued a policy from the council on school health which stated that there should be a school nurse at every school site. as public health nurses, we provide preventive and early intervention services as well as disease management for the many children with diabetes, asthma, allergies, mental health issues and seizure disorders, just to name a few. we also work with parents and the community to provide the health and social services that are necessarily for our medically complex, medically fragile and nursing dependent students to remain in school and achieve at their maximum level. we believe that it is imperative that a comprehensive approach be undertaken to ensure that all children have access to the health services that federal laws. the idea, section 504 of the rehab act, and the california education code have mandated be provided in the schools. if we are to be successful in this, school administrators must recognize the increasing number of children who have physical, mental, and behavioral issues that require the supports, services, and programs that are provided, and can uniquely only be provided by school nurses. we believe the most efficacious approach to addressing the aforementioned issues is through the convening of the task force that will evaluate the services and programs necessary to serve our students. a task force that is comprised of those most interested and most invested in the continued success of our students. we believe ab-882 has the potential to address in a holistic fashion, the current obstacles to providing needed services and to formulate recommendations and solutions that promote the educational outcomes for our students. our most vulnerable students are dependent upon these solutions to ensure that they are able to attend school, are healthy and are ready to learn. we ask for your aye vote on ab 882. thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 31, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 49, 'end': 60, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Vanessa Forsythe: hi, my name is vanessa pamela forsythe. i am here representing california school nurses organization. i am a school nurse and president of our section, san diego imperial. i have about 1,200 students. i am one of the few nurses in my district that has a five-day assignment. they're all middle schoolers. and i have a school-based health center that's attached to my site. so i see about 40 students a day, and i'm assessing them, a lot of the times it's emotional health issues, physical, as well as needing resources. so identify the need for resources, referrals directly to the school based health center. communicating with parents, teachers, we do have ieps for students where we do get some reimbursement for our services because that's required by the federal government but what's lacking is for the students who are in the general ed population, the students with 504 who might have diabetes. and i think this is a significant bill because it brings together different groups who are interested in the same thing, providing school health for students in a manner that they will be able to stay in school. and that's kind of what we're all about. thank you. and so asking for your support of ab 882.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lisa Eisenberg: lisa, with the california school based health alliance in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jaqualla Payne: jaqualla vanessa payne, credentialed school nurse, representing california school nurse organization, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carol Foray: Carol Foray, retired school nurse and CSNO member, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Elizabeth Thorne: Elizabeth Thorne, California School Nurse Alliance, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debby Ruskin: debby jaqualla ruskin, credentialed school nurse, santa cruz county school nurse alliance, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tyra Ruiz: i'm ruiz, i'm a credentialed school nurse with california school nurse organization, in support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marilyn Glinksa: Marilyn Glinksa, Central Valley Section President-elect CSNO, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 56, 'end': 60, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sandy Chavez: Sandy Chavez, school nurse with the CSNO.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lisa Eisenberg: good afternoon. again, my name is eisenberg. i'm with the california school-based health alliance. we're a proud sponsor of this bill. we have been the leading voice bringing together health and education stakeholders in california for over 20 years and we are excited to sponsor this bill, which we believe is the natural next step in strengthening the collaboration between the department of education and the department of health care services. i'm not going to reiterate the need for school-based health in our schools. i am going to emphasize that schools are in the front line of dealing with many of the health issues that we see as a state in our young people. research has shown that when students have access to health services on their campus, they are more likely to receive consistent medical, behavioral, and dental care, have increased follow up rates after screenings that identify health issues, and are less likely to go to their emergency room or be hospitalized. there has been growing acknowledgement for the need of coordination between the department of health care services and the department of education and i want to emphasize that this bill does not change the role of the department of health care services in managing the school medicaid programs that schools enroll in to help fund some of their health services. this adds infrastructure and capacity within the department of education to help be a really, a good partner and support for the department of health care services in supporting our schools that enroll in these medicaid programs. as the assembly member mentioned, there is a change that will expand the ability for schools to participate in these medicaid and increase their reimbursement and because of this change, this will allow schools to provide services for not just their special education students, but their general education students. and we think this is really the opportunity to strengthen the expertise within the department of education, and the collaboration, and partnership with the department of health care services to meet the needs of these students, that will be able to seek reimbursement for these services. again, we believe this is the right opportunity, the right time to capitalize and strengthen cd's infrastructure. we thank you for hearing this bill, and your time and attention, and we urge your support.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Victoria Flores: good afternoon, committee members. my name is victoria debby flores. i serve as the director of student support and health services in the sacramento city unified school district and i have a department full of school nurses, and school social workers, health aids, coordinators so we're the health folks. and we really consider ourself meducators, i heard this term the other day and i loved it. i'm really integrating physical and mental healthcare into education, and really helping to address these barriers to learning that exist for our students. and we heard about asthma today, right? but we deal with really complicated diabetes or mental health issues, and that's what we're trying to help our students overcome. many districts have developed departments similar to mine in response to, really, their students' needs. and by establishing an office of school-based health, the state would really be modeling, and also legitimizing the similar infrastructure that the districts have already developed. and let me say that we need the support, and guidance, and advocacy for meducation. we really envision this office as building a bridge between cde and the california department of health care services. and i've got lots of examples, but i'll just give you a few. so additional resources for billing new and existing medi-cal services, we need help with barriers to service provision, helping to get those things out of the way, and really helping us to improve our compliance with our medi-cal reimbursement programs, and really be coming the needed technical advisors, building effective practices that work for our schools and our districts. and that's really where i'm excited about this bill. i believe in that principle that when you provide people with the right tools and resources, they do amazing work for you. and with the right tools and resources, and support through an office of school-based health, we can better coordinate our efforts at the state level and make an even bigger difference in the lives of our students. therefore, i respectfully ask for you aye vote in support of ab 834.
[{'start': 46, 'end': 67, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Toni Trigueiro: toni on behalf of 325,000 members of the california teachers association, we support this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Janice Canalen: Janice Canalen, Children's Defense Fund California, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christine Smith: smith, california partnership to end domestic violence, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathy Rabun: rabun, the california state pta, the parent teacher association, and we're in strong support of this bill.
[]
Victor Christy: victor victoria christy, california health plus advocates, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lydia Bourne: lydia victor bourne, representing california school nurses organization, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Gonzales: rebecca, national association of social workers, california chapter, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Chen: Kimberly Chen with the California Pan Ethnic Health Network, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Immel: melissa lydia immel, on behalf of the california academy of child and adolescent psychiatry, here in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alena Wall: good afternoon mr. chair and committee members. my name is alena. i'm the executive director with the center for well-being, where healthcare non-profit committed to defeating chronic disease in the north bay. we're located in sonoma county. where one in five children are suffering from asthma. i'm in district two. and i'm pleased to see that you are considering ab 391. which will increase support services for low income residents through a trusted resource community health workers. we have to center, have a team of team of 60 bilingual bicultural community heath workers, who deliver critical health information to our most vulnerable residents. we have married our asthma and prevention efforts with tobacco control initiatives through our chws. 88 multi unit housing sites out of 124 in sonoma county, have passed voluntary policies to go smoke free, reducing asthma triggers. this is just one of the many accomplishment of these residents leaders. the centers committee health workers are trained to educate their own neighbors. especially hard to reach residents about asthma triggers, diabetes, obesity, tobacco and more. the adoption of the medicaid preventive services law will scale up our community health worker model by providing sustainable resources for trained chws. a career pipeline for some while reaching our most vulnerable residents to reduce local asthma rates. thank you for your consideration. we look forward to joining you in this effort to strengthen quality care and prove health outcomes and advance health equity.
[{'start': 59, 'end': 64, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Chen: Kimberly Chen with the California PAN-Ethnic Health Network. One of the sponsors of the bill and in proud support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Betsy Armstrong: Betsy Armstrong with the County Health Executives Association representing local health departments in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mira Morton: Mira Morton here on behalf of the California Children's hospital Association here in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Lange: Karen Lange on behalf of Mayor Edwin Lee in the City and County of San Francisco in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 31, 'end': 40, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Janice Canalen: janice melissa canalen, children's defense fund, california, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sashary Zaroyan: Sashary Zaroyan, on behalf of California Coverage and Health initiatives, in strong support.
[]
Lisa Eisenberg: lisa janice eisenberg with the california school-based health alliance, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Victor Christy: Victor Christy with California Health Plus Advocates, representing 1200 community health centers in California, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Louis Romero: Good afternoon Chairman and members of the board. My name is Louis Romero. I'm the Executive Director of. My organization has been operating in the border region of the imperial valley Coachella for the last 30 years. We have see the effects of the exclusion of data in our area specifically because California's approach, in particular, environmental protection has stopped at the border. That's not our reality. We're a suburban community to Mexicali over a million in population, which is across our, our Mexican neighbors. As the Assembly Member has mentioned, that AB-1059 addresses some of those critical data gaps. There's been a lot of learned essence that have come out, that have identified additional data gaps that have to do with water, with traffic density, air and other. We feel that as a result of AB1059, not only the Imperial area but the entire Border Region, including San Ysidro have now been identified as a disadvantaged community and we know how important that is to our area, particular as we talk about climate investment. And we feel that a lot of these agencies from the Area Resources Board and other agencies that are making investments to improve the quality of life, to improve air pollution have been improved as a result of the bill. So this bill will definitely continue to fill those data gaps. So thank you for-
[{'start': 61, 'end': 73, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Humberto Lugo: good afternoon, chairman quirk and the members of the board. my name's humberto. and i'm a member of the environmental justice network. it's a statewide. so i'm the lead coordinator for that. and i also lead the ivan air monitoring network that consists of over 40 monitors providing real-time data to community members in the california mexico border region. this network was developed to protect the health of community residents at the border region. we developed this air monitoring because the border region lacks that data. that's a lot of data, which the area, like my colleagues here mentioned, it's in non attainment for ozone and pm 2.5. so currently the regulatory monitoring is not capturing accurate air pollution data or it's missing data from the the regions. so ab 891 would require the carb and  to from the two monitoring studies along the two border counties of imperial and san diego. carb would also be required to collect additional data to refine data gaps and to improve indicators such as traffic density, pm 2.5 concentrations. these are particular matter. also, concentrations, toxin research facilities and waterways that flow north through california. this information is useful to incorporate in future versions of viral screening. on behalf of our community residents, i urge you to support ab891.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 30, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 71, 'end': 79, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vivian Ericson: Vivian Ericson with the Breast Cancer Prevention Partners, in support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Allio: And Bill Allio, Environmental Working Group, in support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Parra: Laura Parra on behalf of the Pest Control Operators of California in support of the bill. We're the sponsors, and we just really hope this program continues for the consumer protection. And also to ensure that these four counties are able to provide those fumigations, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susan Saylor: Chairmen and Members of the Committee, thank you for this opportunity. Susan Saylor, Executive Officer for the Structural Pest Control Board, here in support for the bill on behalf of the Structural Pest Control Board Members. If you have questions, I'll answer them for you.
[{'start': 71, 'end': 83, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : oh jonah well, jonah motion's jonah been jonah made. jonah all jonah right, jonah then jonah [inaudible]-
[{'start': 3, 'end': 8, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 15, 'end': 20, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 30, 'end': 35, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 41, 'end': 46, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 53, 'end': 58, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 63, 'end': 68, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 76, 'end': 81, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 87, 'end': 92, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Melissa Romero: thank you chair and members, melissa jonah romero with the environmental group of californians against waste. so first of all i really want to thank assemblymember david chiu for continuing his leadership on this issue. so about 40% of food in the united states never gets eaten. and this uneaten food puts a tremendous strain on our nation's natural resources and economy. food is the single most prevalent item in california's waste stream with about five and half million tons of food land filled each year. so some of this is actually still perfectly edible at the time that it was disposed at. and this is happening at the same time that we have about 6 million californians for the food and secure including one in four children. so the most effective way to deal with food waste is to prevent it from becoming waste in the first place. so last year there was a report put out by refed called a roadmap to reduce us food waste by 20%. and they actually recognize standardizing food date labels as the number one cost effective way to reduce food waste. so inconsistent, unclear food date labels leave many consumers and stores to misinterpret these dates. and throw out perfectly wholesome food every single day. ab 954 promotes the widespread use of uniform phrases for food date labels which are already currently being implemented by major trade associations as part of an industry led initiative to reduce food waste. so this bill simplifies date labeling by promoting standardized language to communicate quality and safety using just two labels. in turn it creates a foundation for educating consumers on the meaning of these labels leading to less prematurely wasted food. and i also wanted to mention that i was asked to extend the support of nrdc, the natural resources defense council. thank you for your consideration.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 164, 'end': 174, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Hewitt: mr. chairman, members of the committee, john on behalf of the grocery manufacturers association. happy to be here today to just update the committee on our process and our commitment that we started last january 2016 with our trade partner alliance. and coming up with the task force to address solution of food waste specifically. we set out a pretty aggressive agenda last year as i sat before this committee. said what we were going to do and we did what we said we were going to do. specifically our trade partnership task force got together retailers, consumers, fresh produce, nonfood folks the whole gamete got together studied the issue. consumer came up with the language and i'm jumping for brevity here through what would happen over the last 12 months. came together with a set of recommendations mr. chiu as has acknowledged what those two teams were best of you.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 813, 'end': 817, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Emily Rusch: Great, my name is Emily Rusch, I'm the Executive Director of CALPIRG, the California Public Interest Research Group. I'm here today in support of AB 587. We want to see the State implement succesful strategies to negotiate the best prices possible for the prescription drugs that we were paying with state tax dollars. We were the sponsors of the original bill SB 1315 back in 2002, to give the Department of General Services the authority to undertake both purchasing of prescription drugs. And now 15 years later The need for successful strategies to ensure that our state agencies and that local governments, when they choose to, are able to get the best prices possible by pooling together their buying power. This is all more important with the skyrocketing price of prescription drugs that we're seeing today. I won't go through the numbers that Assemblymember Chiu already went through, but I would just note that this bill, I think, is a great step forward. It's actually codifying a set of practices that Department of General Services has started to undertake recently with Health and Human Services. And it will increase the legislative oversight over the work that's being done, again, by giving a couple of seats there for legislative appointees and requiring a report back annually for the next five years. And we encourage your aye vote.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 867, 'end': 871, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rand Martin : mr. chair and members, rand melissa martin on behalf of the aids healthcare foundation. we have a modest interest in this issue, as you may be aware from last year's ballot. we are very supportive of this bill. our interest has always been in making sure that we can get control of drug prices so that it impacts how much we're spending from our state coffers on prescription drugs. this is the kind of bill that goes to the heart of that to make sure that everybody is transparent about what their costs are, as much as the law will allow. but sharing information among state agencies, and hopefully taking advantage of what each state agency knows on what they're doing relative to drug pricing, and can replicate that in their own state agencies. we urge your support for this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 42, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Beth Capell: Beth Capell for Health Access, the other, there's a drug effectiveness research program that California participated in until we had the bad budget years when we had the horrendous deficits. And we ceased to participate in a lot of multi-state activities that might have been cost effective in the long run. But when you're facing a $38 billion deficit, you don't always get the choices to make the wisest decisions.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maribel Medina: Thank you, Assemblymember Wood, Committee Members for the opportunity to speak today. And thank you, Ms Burke for introducing this important legislation that will help connect Californians who are ready to accept treatment for substance use and metal health to the services they need when they need them. My name Maribel Medina, I am the President California Alliance of Information and Referral System and I'm also the Executive Director of 201 California. We've been hearing all afternoon about the importance of effective and especially responsive services for people suffering from mental illness and substance use. And I think that, it's especially important to understand that the point at which they are reaching out for help is the most critical point. We heard earlier from some positions related to AB 1136 about the need to have responsiveness, and engagement at the point when someone is reaching out. And this bill, AB 844 will ensure that this is available 24/7 for people that speak any language in California, and also receive the service from trained professionals. In Los Angeles, where we have provided over 70,000 referrals to people reaching out for these types of services, we know that 3% of these calls are coming in after hours and over weekends. So it's critically important to make sure that system navigation services, those services that connect individuals seeking treatment, seeking assistance, are provided on a 24/7 basis. And that they're provided by people who know how to work with this population. The services that we are advocating for today, the system navigation services are really critical as a connecting glue for all of the services that are going to be funded by Alma. So I asked today for your support, we are definitely ready and capable of providing these services today through series of collaborations and also through its existent services, so I urge your aye vote today.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 30, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 104, 'end': 109, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 313, 'end': 327, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robynne Rose-Haymer: good afternoon mr. chair committee members my name is robynne rand rose-haymer and i'm the director of workforce development for goodwill industries sacramento valley and northern nevada incorporated. i'm here today in support of ab 844 because of three reasons. the first is, it calls for a demonstrated track record of success. as a program operator in the workforce development space, it's vitally important that you have experts engage in this work. currently, there aren't provisions requiring that and 844 would fill that gap. additionally, this bill would require there to be in language capability. for people who are seeking services, it's incredibly important for them to be able to speak to someone in their native language so they're not forced to struggle over a language barrier in order to receive services. and finally just in time provision. when someone wants services and needs them, they should be able to receive them. this is a critical issue when it comes to workforce development in particular and also mental health services. the banker's hours are not the times when people figure out that they need help, so if someone decides in the middle of the night that they want to reach out this bill will provision to be able to do so. so i'll leave you in closing with the immediacy of help, when they're ready to receive it, and successful connection at the time is the route to success. thank you very much for your time.
[{'start': 54, 'end': 78, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Meg Storer: Good afternoon, Meg Storer, 211 San Diego, and we are in full support. Thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Abersi: good afternoon, abersi, goodwill industries and we are in support.
[]
Melvin Harshaw: little late, my name is melvin robynne harshaw, i'm representing the national association of social workers and we support this bill.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Heather Leutwyler: Thank you Mr Chair and members, and thank you Assemblywoman Waldron for your support of our bill. My name is Dr Heather Leutwyler, I am an assistant Professor of nursing at UCSF, and I come to you with more than a decade of experience caring for people with serious mental illness, and doing research with this population. I'd like to tell you the story of Earl, a gentleman with schizophrenia that I interviewed during my dissertation work. When I met Earl, he was 61 years old, and had been released from prison five months ago after serving an 18 year sentence. During our interview, he described how ultimately, his untreated mental illness led him to prison, and how effective case management and treatment while in prison was helping with the transition out of prison and back into the community. Prior to going prison, Earl made repeated failed attempts to receive consistent psychiatric care. He explains that he was basically on his own. He ran out of medication and began self medicating with alcohol, heroin, and cocaine. He became homeless, then he committed a crime that led him to prison. As he spent time in prison, his symptoms worsened until he was eventually transferred to a state psychiatric facility, where he began to receive consistent psychiatric care. And slowly began to feel better. He was eventually released from prison and was linked up with a case-management program, as well as a psychiatrist upon his release. Earl described how he felt living out in our community with these supports in place. He said, I'm in a beautiful spot, my case-management program helps get a little more structure in my life. It helps me cope with staying clean and sober, so I am not self-medicating. Earl went on to describe the role that case managers play in his life. He said, we talk once a week about anything I want to talk about. We meet every Friday at 11. She tells me what she thinks I should be doing or I shouldn't be doing. She asked me a lot of questions about how I feel. She's kind of like a psychiatrist. I missed a few days and she asked why, I said I feel depressed. She said, when you feel depressed, come here and we'll work through it. Earl ended our interview with an important insight that I think can be a guide for our care of people with serious mental illness. Every time I go out on the street, I see somebody talking to themselves. They need to reach out to someone, that's going to be understanding, that's going to help them feel real comfortable and cared for. There's an opening there to make a better person out of that person. Earl is a great example of some of the main points in our bill which are, jail based screening and diagnosis to identify population early in their involvement in the criminal justice system. Integrated mental health and substance use treatment that begins in jail and continues out in the community. Transitional case management that similarly extends from jail to the community. And a robust, data driven evaluation process to ensure that we're doing is effective, thank you.
[{'start': 60, 'end': 67, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 112, 'end': 129, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 357, 'end': 361, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 453, 'end': 457, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 826, 'end': 830, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1443, 'end': 1447, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1711, 'end': 1715, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2169, 'end': 2173, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2574, 'end': 2578, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Curt Child: Mr. Chair and members, Curt Child, Disability Rights California. We're very pleased to be able to sponsor this bill. I just want to make one point on top of what Mr. Kalra has made, I think, perfectly clear about what the effect of this bill is. We want to be clear that this change is not intended to any way lower or increase the standard of review in these death cases. Instead, it's really intended to replace a confusing and outdated standard that the Supreme Court rejected some years ago in determining causation in negligence cases. So this now updates the citation statute to do that very same thing. This really came out of a report that was referred to in your Committee analysis that we had done looking at really hundreds of citations and deaths within facilities. And we ultimately determined that the move toward clarifying this standard will indeed go a long ways to making sure that the citations are properly classed when they're applied by the department. So, with that, we urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 166, 'end': 171, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Hester Kleinstecker: Thank you, Hester Kleinstecker with the Office of the State Longterm Care Ombudsman. We believe this bill will provide increased protections for long-term care residents and we wholeheartedly support the bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barbara Glaser: Chairmen and members, Barbara Glaser with the California Hospital Association. We have had an oppose unless amended on this bill on AB 1335. But we've been working with the author, his staff, and the sponsors. And with the amendments proposed, we are removing our opposition and want to thank them for their work.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Uma Zykofsky: Good afternoon, Chairman Wood and Committee Members. Thank you for your time today. I am Uma Zykofsky. I'm Behavioral Health Director for Sacramento County, and I'm here today to support in support of AB 1372. Thank you to Assemblymember Levine for showing leadership on this important issue for all counties. Crisis stabilization units serve a critical part of our crisis response and continue mental healthcare across all counties from prevention to inpatient stays. Services at crisis stabilization units are provided to people in acute distress associated with mental health issues such as suicidal behavior, psychosis, and other mood disorders. They're unpredictable when they come in, and they receive a really full evaluation at that point of entry. They reduce unnecessary stays in psychiatric hospitals, reduce the number and expense to emergency rooms, and divert inappropriate incarcerations. Crisis stabilization teams work at these facilities to stabilize individuals. With specialists working to provide, either an appropriate outpatient or inpatient treatment referral, depending on the specific needs of individuals. These treatment teams work very closely with the consumers who are in crisis, who are built to rebuild their coping skills, reduce symptoms, and empower self-care. Statewide counties have faced delays, or lack of bed availability for different age groups, as well as both, in terms of age, and co-ocurring conditions that sometimes present themselves. This bill gives crisis stabilization units more flexibility in caring for individuals in a psychiatric crisis, by allowing them to continue to provide care and support beyond the current 23 hour and 59 minute limitation. The bill helps further these efforts by allowing a certified CSU, crisis stabilization unit to extend the time frame for providing the care on a case by case basis, and a pending a referral to another level of care. AB 1372 requires each county mental health plan that accesses this flexibility, created by this bill, to establish specific treatment protocols. Documentation standards, and administrative procedures, consistent with best practices and other evidence based medicine. To provide treatment to individuals who are provided this crisis stabilization service for more than 24 hours. And so these reasons that we are in support of AB 1372, thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 29, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 89, 'end': 101, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 238, 'end': 244, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jean Hurst: Mr. Chair and members, Jean Hurst here today on behalf of the California State Association of Counties, in support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julianna Vores: mr. chair and members, julianna melvin vores, on behalf of the urban counties of california, in support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Lungun: Mr. Chair and members, Brian Lungun, on behalf of the National Alliance on Mental Illness, in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anna Hasselblad: great, i will keep my remarks very, very brief. good afternoon, my name is hasselblad, and i am with the steinberg institute. ab 1315 is the institute's top priority, and i respectfully ask for your aye vote. i defer my time to our experts for their testimony and available for questions.
[{'start': 75, 'end': 85, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Daniela Guarnizo: Mr Chair, members, my name is Daniela Guarnizo, and today I'm here to share my experience with mental health illness, and why I believe early intervention with have improved my life greatly. My symptoms started at a really young age. I was seven years old and I was crying myself to sleep every night not knowing why. Without any knowledge of what was going on, I thought this was completely normal. And that every human being, including my brother, my mom and dad did this at night as a way of a lullaby to fall asleep. When I moved to the United States at the age of 10, my symptoms got worse really, really quickly. I started to isolate myself. I became very irritable, times where I didn't know why, or didn't understand, I started having suicidal ideations, and became completely isolated from my peers. When I began my eighth grade, I was completely isolated to the point that my classmates thought I was mute. I remember one specific point where I was talking to one of my teachers and one of my peers was standing behind me, and he was surprised that I was talking. And his remarks were, wait? You talk? That day was the one day that I really felt that something was wrong with me, that my behavior was not normal, that I wasn't reacting how most of my peers were reacting to their experiences. But nothing was going on around me in the sense that no one was noticing something was wrong. When I started seeking help, I was just told don't worry about it, you are just shy. Don't worry about it, you're an immigrant. You're just getting acculturated to a new country, a new language. You're just getting used to everything. After these remarks happened a few years I decided to take my life for the first time in the eigth grade. In high school, I became a very good student, I was very good in that sense. I was never acted up in class, always followed English instructions, but at home I always became irritable. My mom would tell me, do the dishes and I was just like, no I don't want to do it, and I didn't know why, and I would just start crying. And I feel that this was the first symptom of the misdiagnosis. At the age of 18 I was diagnosed with major depressive disorder, by later on I was diagnosed with bipolar disorder. At the age of 22 was when this diagnosis happened, after I had my first bipolar episode. I was erratic, I was happy, I was social for the first time in my life, I thought I was healthy, I thought I was well. But I also was driving recklessly, I was engaging in relationships that I shouldn't have. For the first time ever I started drinking, but I felt great. My thoughts were racing, ideas were flowing, things were getting done, I was actually active, an internship, full time student, a job working everything was fine. I was working out and then three months later I crashed. I crashed in the sense that I had the worst. Depressive episode I've had in my life. At the age of 22, I tried to take my life for the second time. After being hospitalized for two weeks, I finally received the right diagnosis of bipolar disorder. It took a total of 15 years from my first symptoms, and 6 months later from my first episode. Because the diagnosis happened in December, my episode was in summer. I am here talking to all of you, because I believe that early intervention would have prevented this episode to the level that it got. It would have been better for doctors to notice what was going on, because my psychiatrist told me that day, what happened? Why didn't anyone else notice, your symptoms were so clear. So all that I can say maybe they didn't have the treatment, maybe programs like the one I'm advocating here today didn't exist. So today I'm asking all of you to take this into consideration, to think about my story. That is very similar to the story of so many other Californians today, who do not have access to programs that can prevent this very severe episodes from happening. And to the point that it can be not one episode, but two, but three, but four, to the point that it's going to prevent, the right development of their lives. Thank you so much.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tara Needham: hi, my name is tara, i'm a clinical psychologist and assistant professor at uc davis medical center. i am also the executive director of the early psychosis programs there. i've had the pressure of working at the forefront of clinical service and research, related to early intervention and prevention for serious mental illness for about 17 years. today i'm very happy to be here and talk about why this is so important. many people say that the onset of psychosis is like falling off a cliff. an analogy that can phase a devastating outcome, we don't typically fall off cliffs and survive. i've heard this sort of analogy used many, many times. and if you think about the previous experiences that many people have had, you can understand why they think this way. before the onset of the medications we have today, many individuals with psychotic symptoms experience significant side effects. and there was little focus on therapy to improve their functioning, or support their family to maintain important social connections. people were often institutionalized, and after the end of institutions, they ended up homeless, and we all know too well the devastating outcomes of homelessness. our outpatients mental health system was not equiped to handle their long standing and pervasive needs. if these were the available treatments psychosis would seem like a cliff, like a deep dive from which thereis no return. in this day and age, research and common sense, allow us to change this narrative from failure, to one of recovery and fulfillment, when we think about prevention and early intervention. in sacramento county alone, with our population, we would expect to see over 630 new cases of psychosis per year. with an average age of onset around 18, 19, 20 years old, that's 630 individuals who are facing a drastic change in their life. 630 families who are questioning what to do and how to help. sacramento county is very lucky, we have the clinic at uc davis. whose mission it is to put these young people and their families back on the path to wellness and hope. each year, we serve over 175 individuals in the early stages of psychosis. we provide accurate diagnoses, evidence-based treatment, support for work or school, and support for their families. we do not see psychosis as a cliff that you fall off of. it is a disease of the brain, and with good treatment you get back to living your life. many of our clients are still in school and our goal is to keep them there. it may take some time, it will take hard work, but recovery is possible. and this is consistent with us and international research, that shows better outcomes and lower costs associated with this kind of care. we have clients attending university of california schools, working full time, completing graduate degrees, raising their children. their family members have knowledge and know how to support their loved ones. the goal of this bill, ab 1315, is to find ways to bring these evidence-based practices to more youth, more families, and more communities in california. out of 58 counties, only 24 have early psychosis programs. in sacramento, we regularly get calls from counties without programs. this morning i walked into a phone call from modesto, for a family who had no place to send their son. this is unacceptable, this is not fair. why would we ask those families to struggle to find care if their children had cancer or diabetes? we would not ask that, why would we ask this for mental healthcare? why do we ignore this problem? on average, individuals and families struggle with psychosis for one and a half years before they are diagnosed and treated. for optimal outcomes, research consistently shows that it should be less than three months. and ab 1315 will help california get closer to the sensible and necessary goal. we should strive in every way to make early psychosis care available across our state. no one should worry that the onset of psychosis is a cliff their child might fall off of. thank you so much for your support.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matt Jorgensen: Hi there, I'm Matt Jorgensen, founder of Josephine, an organization that provides food safety, and business education, along with a marketing platform, and insurance for home cooks across California. I'm here on behalf of those cooks, thousands of whom operate in formal businesses selling their homemade food, and thousands of others who can't afford the risk of using their talents for extra income. On behalf of those cooks I urge you to consider this, the majority of reported foodborne illness comes from permitted commercial food establishments, not homes. I've spoken at length to Assembly Member Tyler Lindholm, who, in Wyoming, passed the most sweeping food freedom act in the country a few years ago. And he reports that in the last  few years there's been a remarkable uptick in the number of homemade food operators coming out of the shadows, and the black market, to sell in farmer's markets and other forums. That law actually allows folks to sell directly, without inspections and permits, but he reports that public health departments have actually reported a decrease in homemade food as a source of food safety issues. And Assembly Member Lindholm called several of your offices that expressed public health concerns this morning, and is willing to talk to others. Secondly, informal food producers are pervasive across California. Thousands of tamale vendors, folks operating bake sales and informal catering, these folks are operating in the shadows without access to food safety guidelines, resources, or clear limits on what can be produced safely at home. These are stay-at-home parents, ESL immigrants, retirees, and the disabled, and folks running shared kitchens and commissary kitchens estimate that there are 30 informal operators for every one that's able to make it into an incubator kitchen. Lastly, this bill represents a year long collaboration with CCDEH, the California Conference of Directors of Environmental Health. Their leadership and directors around the state, the same folks currently promoting restaurants, food trucks, and home kitchens as part of cottage food class B permits, have worked with us because they see the need for a new option, rather than simply saying no to folks that will stay underground. This bill adapts many of the public health safeguards of other restricted food facilities, and gives local jurisdictions full discretion over whether to operate this new permit type. We've taken every amendment from CCDEH, and other health stakeholders that have come to the table, and many reasonable amendments from labor and justice groups concerned about empowering home cooks, as long as these amendments don't limit home cooks from accessing a variety of resources. That's why over the last week, this wasn't captured in Committee analysis, but we've received new support from Roots of Change, Slow Food California, numerous public health professors, and former environmental health inspectors, workforce development centers, numerous mayors and council members across the state, including Oakland Mayor Libby Schaaf. We've also received 25,000 petition signatures from your constituents in support of this new option. We're urging you to continue the dialogue on what we know is a major piece of new legislation, rather than perpetuating a status quo that isn't working for many cooks and families, and leaves a massively growing economy underground. Let's consider a proactive, adaptive approach to public health that stands to benefit thousands of Californians in which local jurisdictions can choose whether or not to implement, thank you for considering continuing the dialogue on AB 626.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 604, 'end': 618, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1156, 'end': 1164, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3062, 'end': 3074, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark Herbert: My name is Mark Herbert, California Director for Small Business Majority, we are a small business education and advocacy organization. We believe entrepreneurship is an incredibly powerful tool in creating economic mobility and opportunity, I'll keep my remarks pretty brief. But we know here in California, two-thirds of all new jobs are created by small businesses, and the businesses creating most of those jobs are the businesses that have between 1 and 4 employees. So these are folks who are coming out of the freelance economy, who are starting their own businesses, who have taken the plunge to figure out how they can pursue the American dream. And we see this as a framework for creating a pipeline through to entrepreneurship, and we really see this as an opportunity for folks to take the plunge, to take the risk, to be entrepreneurs, and to contribute to their local communities and their local economies. We also know that when you invest in a local small business, you get a 76% return on that local's investment with a greater economic impact in your local community, so we encourage you to support this bill. We think it has tremendous promise for California self employed folks, as well as California entrepreneurs.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marissa Reles: Hi, my name is Marissa Reles, I am a single mom from Stockton, and I was prosecuted and charged on criminal charges from selling food out of my home.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Dimock: michael julianna dimock, roots of change, wanted to clarify our support is with amendments.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bela Matyas: Good afternoon, Mr. Chair, and members of the Assembly Health Committee. My name is Dr. Bela Matyas. I'm the Health Officer and the Director of Public Health for Solano County in California and I represent the California Conference of Local Health Officers, as well as the Health Officers Association of. California. Both of these organizations and public health professionals on the front lines, generally, all recommend a no position on AB 626 because this bill effectively represents a substantial step backwards for protecting our public. As noted, only Wyoming permits this type of business. No one, the consensus throughout the rest of the country is that this is a very bad idea. At the current time, in the commercial food sector we find we have a substantial infrastructure and a lot of regulation, because it's needed. In spite of all of that, there continue to be outbreaks. Now, most of the outbreaks in the commercial food sector relate to food handler contamination of food and we've done very, very good job of controlling the administrative risks, things like cross contamination, improper storage, etc. The problem with home-prepared hazardous foods is that all those risks return. The types of changes needed in order to make handling of food safe in a kitchen, effectively turn it into a commercial venture because the types of equipment needed are just not available for domestic use. The consequence is those that cross-contamination risks and other types of administration risks, administrative control risks return. In addition, personal hygiene risks are amplified because in the home environment, apart from having individual hygiene-related issues, you've also got, potentially, children and pets entering the kitchen. It's an uncontrolled environment, and there is simply no way to control the risks of exposure of pathogens to the food. In addition, it's virtually impossible to perform the necessary enforcement in a home environment. We already have significant outbreaks related to hazardous home-cooked foods. Contrary to the experience noted earlier, our experience here in California is very clear that the majority of cases of food-borne illness are caused by home-prepared foods and a sizeable share of outbreaks are caused by home-prepared foods as well. In Solano County, just recently we had an outbreak by a caterer, well-trained, but prepared food at home, where he could not maintain the proper conditions for control, resulting in eight illnesses, two requiring ER visit, and one fatality. The other issue to note with regard with local permitting is that there are several reasons why this is not a good idea, from our perspective. Food handling guidelines are national in scope. Home-cooked foods cross county lines, as do the illnesses caused by outbreaks, so that a locality that would not permit this would still suffer from a neighboring locality that does permit it and it legitimizes a dangerous practice. Individuals who perform this type of cooking in the home will assume that it's appropriate for them to do it. It's been noted that with this type of cooking already occurs, it's a source of a lot of illness. And the point I would try to make is that, unlike many small businesses, the preparation of food places the consumers of food at very specific risks and our job in public health is to protect people from those risks.
[{'start': 88, 'end': 99, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Gibbons: good afternoon, chair and members, i would ask that you take our comments as one. my name is michelle and i represent the local health departments. i'm with the county health executives association of. california. we, regretfully, must oppose ab 626 and i've asked our technical expert, cynthia bartas, a county-registered environmental health specialist, to provide her expertise on the public health risks associated with the bill and we would respectfully urge your no vote.
[{'start': 93, 'end': 101, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 287, 'end': 301, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Christina Oatfield: hi, my name is christina michael oatfield. i used to run an underground supper club at my home. i also worked for an organization called the sustainable economies law center, which unfortunately opposes this bill. unless it's amended to address our concerns, that uber-for-food-style tech platforms may come to dominate this industry. this bill is actually sponsored by a for-profit tech platform, thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kat DeBurgh: Thank you, Kat DeBurgh, Health Officers' Association of California in opposition.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jolena Voorhis: Mr. Chair, members, Jolena Voorhis on behalf of the Urban Counties of California in opposition.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tracy Rhine: rhine, rural county representatives of california in opposition.
[]
Jean Hurst: Jean Hurst, here today on behalf of the California State Association of Counties and the Board of Supervisors of Santa Clara County in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lauren Michaels: Good afternoon, Lauren Michaels, on behalf of the California Police Chiefs Association. Happy to be here in support of AB 823. By requiring a universal symbol to be stamp or marked on each serving of an edible marijuana product, AB 823 will protect against unintentional consumption. Potentially limiting cannabis overdoses, underage use, or even unwanted adult consumption. Unfortunately, law enforcement stories from states that have already legalized marijuana, including Colorado, involve a number of instances where employees, especially in the tourism industry, in hotels and rental car companies, have consumed recreational cannabis products left behind by tourists, not knowing that they contain cannabis. This has resulted to trips to the emergency room and serious health consequences. While Proposition 64 included a number of packaging and labeling provisions, it failed to ensure that edible products would be recognized as such once they leave the product packaging. For these reasons, we're happy to support AB 823 and urge an aye vote.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lauren Michaels: thank you, lauren christina michaels, on behalf of the california police chiefs association, in support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shaun Rundle: Mr. Chair and members, Shaun Rundle with the California Peace Officers Association, or CPOA. Our legislative Committee recently reviewed and approved the amended language to the bill, so while our support letter may have missed the analysis, I'm here today to voice our request for your aye vote on AB 1090 and, as the member mentioned, discuss what our officers are finding. Our Association of over 19,000 peace officers agree that extending these prohibitions in the bill to situations where students, or youth, may not be present is another step to ensure safe and healthy communities. Because our officers are seeing numerous times that possession and consumption of marijuana does happen on or near the grounds of a school, or a youth center, mostly a school during off hours. And so we agree with the assertion of our colleagues at the District Attorneys Association, as noted in the analysis, that this often leads to paraphernalia often being left behind, but it also could lead to instances of careless damage to the school and other property, as is often reported where paraphernalia is often found. So we feel that AB 1090 strikes a reasonable approach to curtailing these potential disruptions and echoes the desire of all communities and the peace officers who took an oath to protect them, to ensure the health and safety of the communities around the state where students are, but shouldn't be exposed to marijuana effects, so we urge your support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tiffany Mathews: Tiffany Mathews, with the California District Attorneys Association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Glenn Backes: Good afternoon, Glenn Backes for Drug Policy Alliance. We had a process problem. I only was able to alert the author's office on Thursday that we had concerns about the bill. And provided a letter to Committee on Friday, so we were late. And the author's office since then has spoken with us about trying to work together going forward. But I do think it's important to express why Drug Policy Alliance has strong concerns with this bill. Current law does provide that it's an infraction to consume cannabis in any public place. And it's a misdemeanor to consume cannabis on a school grounds when students are present. That's already the law. We're concerned that by removing the language that says, when children are present, and adding the 1,000-foot radius from a school, that it may not have been the author's intention to create a misdemeanor for using marijuana in the middle of the night for an adult when no one is present anywhere within 1,000 feet of a school. So we'll work with the author going forward. But to be clear, Adult Use of Marijuana Act said that you cannot increase penalties for marijuana use. You may decrease penalties for marijuana use. To widen this to say within 1,000 feet of a school at any time of day or night is a misdemeanor, may, in fact, be legally impermissible. But Leg counsel drafted it, and it's going through Committee. And we'll work with the author going forward. But that's how strong our concern is, that it may, in fact, be an illegal amendment to voter initiative. I'm not familiar with the tobacco codes. I don't believe that it's likely that there's a misdemeanor for leaving cigarette butts on school grounds. I think it's unlikely that people go to jail for that. We don't want people to go to jail for using marijuana in the middle of the night within 1,000 feet as the crow flies from a school grounds. Many cities in California, that's everywhere, there's no place in many urban areas that aren't within 1,000 feet of a school. So it's a very strong concern to be using jail penalties for behavior that doesn't harm anyone. So given that, it is unnecessary, as it's already an infraction or a misdemeanor to use on school grounds. It's a misdemeanor when students are present. And the current law provides for a misdemeanor when students are present. This is unnecessary and perhaps illegal, for these reasons, we oppose.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 21, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Natasha Minsker: natasha on behalf of the aclu of california. we have communicated our opposition to the author's office. i apologize that our letter didn't make it into the committee analysis. we do believe that there's some misunderstanding about what the current bill does and that that's a part of the problem here. this is a public safety bill, and so i think that the broad scope of the current law, as it relates to marijuana consumption and possession, may have missed some of the analysis. and the issue here, in particular, is that the 1,000 foot radius applies not just to schools, but childcare centers, right? so the home i live in now, before we moved in, this private home was used as a childcare facility. and so the 1,000 foot rule would apply to all of our neighbors. 1,000 foot circle radius around our home, now suddenly being in a zone where they are not allowed to consume marijuana, even in the dead of night when there are no children present. similarly, there are childcare centers all over the place, in private homes, in churches, and other facilities. and so it is literally not possible in urban areas to find a place that is 1,000 foot from one of the designated zones. we believe that current law as drafted in prop 64 already carefully balances the issues of concern for student access to marijuana. and provides sufficient penalties to prevent access. and that this bill is missing the mark largely, i think, because of confusion. but we would urge a no vote, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Charlotte Furtado: Hi, my name is Charlotte Furtado and my daughter is Ella Furtado. She has a hearing aid in her left ear, Ella has unilateral hearing loss and what that means it's similar to her daughter where it's one side. But for them when they're in class it's like we're in a crowded restaurant, we're in a bar, and trying to maintain a conversation, or hear their teacher is nearly impossible without the hearing aid. My daughter has a hearing aid, because I happen to have some money in my bank account when she was born. If she lost her hearing aid tomorrow, I would have to drain my savings to buy it. She jumped in the pool this year and I freaked out, because she had the hearing aid in. And immediately I'm like, all of our money is gone. Any days that I forget her hearing aid, she struggles in school. We see it in behavior, we see it and she's exhausted. She will throw a fit. And when I think about the hundreds of children in our state who don't have hearing aids, and can't access their education, it just breaks my heart. So that's why I'm here today. Ella, would you like to say something? How about you, Aubrey? Aubrey has a funny story she might want to share. You do? Okay.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 52, 'end': 64, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 105, 'end': 109, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1054, 'end': 1058, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1108, 'end': 1114, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1116, 'end': 1122, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Scott Sadler: good afternoon. sadler, on behalf of children's choice for hearing and talking, in support of the bill.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Perry: randy lauren perry with aaron reed and associates, on behalf of the california children's hospital association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Alley : Good afternoon, I'm Jennifer Alley with the California Association of Health Plans who represent 49 member plans that provide coverage to 28 million Californians. This bill creates a mandate requiring hearing aids for minors that exceeds the essential health benefits. The CHBRP analysis indicates, the California Health Benefit Review Board's analysis confirms that this bill does exceed the current EHBs, and that the State fund is liable for 5.5 million, and that premiums will go up by $18.7 million. While this issue is sympathetic, this is the wrong time to deviate from the existing process of selecting the essential health benefits. Health plans are required to cover a package of essential health benefits, selected by the state government. Under existing federal rules, if the state mandate exceeds the EHP selected by the Legislature, the state is responsible for paying the subsidy costs associated with the new benefit. If this mandate exceeds the EHBs, the state general fund is at risk for the additional cost. And as I've already stated, that's $5.5 million. Despite the ongoing debate in Washington, moving forward with the mandate that will exceed the EHBs at this time is unwise. There is still a degree of uncertainty regarding the future of the healthcare system. California must roll up our sleeves and work to make smart decisions about how to continue the gains and coverage that we've already secured. In addition, federal regulators can and will likely propose changes that could negatively impact the market. Potentially it could include modifications to subsidies to help support coverage obtained through Covered California. It is also not clear how much weakening of the individual mandate at the Federal level will impact premiums. At this time of uncertainty new state laws should support affordability and not new costs into the insurance system. Maintaining affordable premiums is critical to promoting access to coverage. Thank you, and we respectfully ask for your no vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 34, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Winger: Yeah John Winger on behalf of America's Health Insurance Plans, also oppose would like to align our comments with CAHP and ACLHIC. Thank you.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Sarkissian: Karen Sarkissian with the California Chamber of Commerce, also opposed due to the cost impacts of the mandate, thank you
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Daniel Mirda: so my name is dr. daniel randy mirda. i have been a practicing oncologist and hematologist in northern california for over 30 years, with training at stanford and ucsf. i am president of the association of northern california oncologists or anco. and in cooperation with the medical oncologists association of southern california, moas. we represent over 1,000 oncologists, hematologists in the community, at the universities and in foundations like kaiser. on behalf of anco's members and moas, i urge your support for ab 1107. guidelines are agreed upon evidence-based treatment plans for a specific diagnosis that have been formulated by committees of experts from universities around the country. the preeminent set of guidelines in oncology have been published by the national comprehensive cancer network or nccn since 1996 for over 20 years. these guidelines are nationally and internationally respected and are highly trusted and recognized by physicians and many health plans. because they are developed by national experts donating over 26,000 hours yearly of volunteer service. their names, affiliations, potential conflicts of interest of these experts are disclosed publicly at the beginning of each guideline for each disease. nccn does not accept pharmaceutical support in development of these guidelines. a pathway is a subset, occasionally a single choice from a guideline. many practices, including my own review national guidelines for specific diagnoses. and select one or a smaller subset of the guideline recommended treatment plans for our patients with that diagnosis. for more than 20 years, pathways have been recognized as an important method by which the quality of care can be improved. by insuring evidence-based care, standardizing therapies and processes, and decreasing treatment errors. practices including my own are able to select pathways from available guidelines, because we can consider the expertise of the committee that developed those guidelines. and review the underlying rationale for their treatment recommendations. in other words, transparency of the guideline is essential to selection of the pathways. that is why ab 1107's requirements for pathway transparency is so important to physicians. as a physician, we are concerned by the recent foray of health plans as designers of treatment pathways. and not being transparent on how these pathways are decided and by who. we understand that they are voluntary. we are concerned about the payers of oncology care having undue influence over these treatment decisions. we are concerned how the pathways were chosen from among essentially equivalent treatments, but with varying costs and side effects. currently, as a physician, we make choices based on what is best for our patients characteristics, understanding side effects, outcomes, affordability, etc. at our board meeting, a presentation by health plans for pathway programs was unwilling to share committee members' rationale for treatment decisions it called proprietary. so health plans are proposing pathways, and thereby limiting choices on a national level. and i would hope that california would be a leader, to ensure transparency of pathway programs by insurers. this bill allows doctors to have the information we need to provide the best care for our patients. it's important to physicians and our cancer patients, that you should support ab 1107.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicette Short: Thank you, Nicette Short, on behalf of ANCO and MOAS, and the Oncology associations in the state. And just, my testimony, just what I want to reiterate is kind of what the bill does, and frankly, a little bit about what it doesn't do. The bill allows doctors to ensure that they have the needed information, when making decisions on how to treat cancer. The bill is not a mandate on health plans and the analysis is clear about that. The bill only goes into effect when the plan takes the first step. They have to choose to develop their own oncology pathway, and suggest a treatment plan for their doctors to use. If the doctor feels that they need more information, that doctor can request just a little bit more information. The science, how they look at that science, and who was around the table making those decisions, that's really what the bill does. Nothing in the bill keeps a plan from developing their own pathway. All it says is if they do, they have to share some of that information with their in-network physicians. The amendments that we've taken make it clear, that that information that the physician receives cannot be shared with anyone else. Not the public, not stakeholders, not interest groups. The information is only offered to in-network physicians upon request, and then they are forbidden from sharing it with anyone else. The goal of the bill is to help doctors treat cancer patients, using the best science available. And is attempting to make doctors and health plans better partners in doing that. We also want to echo the author's appreciation of the Committee Chair and staff for their hard work. And lots of conversations and back and forth on the amendments, including those from last night. And we also appreciate the dialogue we've been able to have with some of the plans. And commit to continuing that dialogue as we move, hopefully, through the process. Happy to answer any questions.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 39, 'end': 43, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 48, 'end': 52, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alicia Sanchez: alicia daniel sanchez representing the california medical association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Winger: Thank you, Mr. Chair and members. John Winger on behalf of Anthem Blue Cross, respectfully here in opposition to AB 1107. As way of background for some of the new members of the Committee. Anthem began developing voluntary clinical care pathways for cancer treatment back in July, 2014. Due to medical innovation and the wide variety of cancer treatment options. Research shows that up to one in three people treated with chemotherapy do not receive a treatment plan that is consistent with current medical evidence and best practices. In order to address this disparity, Anthem has developed its Cancer Care Quality Program in collaboration with oncologists, pharmacists, and others. Anthem's voluntary pathways are based on medical evidence that analyzes outcomes related to clinical benefit. Both survival and quality of life, toxicity, and strength of national guideline recommendations. Costs are considered only when clinical outcomes among therapies are equivalent. These voluntary pathways are peer-reviewed by external advisors, that consist of roughly a dozen geographically-diverse physicians. Who are actively treating cancer patients, and work in academic and community oncology groups. Anthem evaluates clinical data, performance status and planned treatment pathways within the program. Those metrics, along with newly introduced treatments, are evaluated on a quarterly basis. To ensure these voluntary pathways are constantly up to date with the best, most effective clinical treatment guidelines. Anthem's pathways are value-based treatment options based on evidence, national clinical guidelines, and treatment outcomes. If any of our in-network doctors disagree, and choose not to follow our recommended pathway. Then they can continue to be fully reimbursed for the treatment pathway they decide to use. In regards to AB 1107, Anthem has two fundamental objections to the bill. First, AB 1107 singles out clinical care pathways developed by health plans as needing additional oversight standards. And ignores pathways that are developed by drug distributors, hospital systems and others. We have heard that health plan pathways need additional oversight, due to our unique relationship with the provider. And that a potential for undue influence is there. We would argue that the other entities that develop pathways have unique relationships that are equally as important. Hospital systems and medical centers develop pathways, that can be used as a direct performance matrix for their employed oncologists. They can also influence outside oncologists who seek admitting privileges to their facilities. Hospital system pathways themselves can be also influenced through their purchasing prices for distributors. Drug distributors develop pathways that have a unique relationship with drug manufacturers. In regards to purchasing price and reimbursements, which may also influence oncologists' decisions. Academic centers also create pathways. These pathways are influenced by the academic centers' unique relationships with pharmaceutical manufacturers in terms of their pipeline products. Which can create bias in their development as well. Given all the various relationships in the system, we strongly believe that if the Legislature feels compelled to add additional oversight to clinical care pathways. Then the oversight should apply to all pathways being developed by healthcare entities. Last year, the Committee recommended applying the provisions of this bill to all pathways. We would continue to support that approach. We also continue to object to the disclosing of names of our third-party independent panel of advisors. It is evident that when panelists' names are shared, they are lobbied by numerous entities. Including pharmaceutical manufacturers, which creates bias in the clinical evidence review process. Also, our advisors require that we keep their names confidential within their contracts. If we were required to disclose those names, even to contractor physicians, we would have to renegotiate those contracts. We are pretty confident that most of those advisers would choose not to participate. Which would diminish our ability to have the most qualified experts on our panel. For those reasons, we must respectfully oppose AB 1107. I have with me today Ann Nguyen who is Director of Oncology Solutions for Anthem, if you have any specific questions to our pathways. Thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 4304, 'end': 4314, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alison Ramey: ramey with blue shield of california in opposition.
[]
Teresa Stark: teresa alicia stark, with kaiser permanente, we have an oppose unless amended position, and would like to thank the author and the sponsor for talking with us. we still have further issues to resolve, happy to keep talking should the bill get out of committee today, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anna Hasselblad: Good afternoon. My name is Anna Hasselblad with the Steinberg Institute, and we are proud cosponsors of AB 1136. California continues to face a serious challenge when trying to connect an individual in a mental or substance use disorder to mental or substance use disorder treatment, especially for inpatient services. As the Committee analysis correctly reflects, these challenges are compounded by a shortage of beds. As well as oftentimes arduous process for an individual, their family, emergency department staff, and service providers in the field to find a placement that fits a person's needs, requiring hours of phone calls and unnecessary wait times. When we think of access issues like this, a common sense response is to pull all of the availability information together in one place. Many people access primary and specialty healthcare through requesting information about the availability of a medical team, setting up appointments with the appropriate care. And often also, times within these systems, if we need a higher level of specialized care, we can be easily referred. So it would follow that we coordinate the information that we collectively have on the capacity of our mental health and substance use disorder facilities, to better organize this access. Further, with the very clear intent from the federal government through the 21st Century Cures Act, we as a state need to be responsive to the investment that is being made that can support us in being successful in establishing such a tool. And AB 1136 does just that. Finally, I want to bring this back to the individual whose condition lead them to needing more intensive mental health or substance use disorder services. Languishing in an emergency department is not appropriate care. And we owe our friends and families the respect of access to care that is right for them as soon as it is available. AB 1136 would make a meaningful change in how we treat those experiencing a mental health or substance use disorder crisis. And I respectfully ask for your aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randall Hagar: Thank you. Mr Chairman and Members of the Committee, Randall Hagar for the Psychiatric Association. I think a lot has already been said that I won't repeat, but I would just say a couple quick things to underscore. It's really important, as Ms. Eggman said, to really match the patient with the correct level of care at the time when they're experiencing a crisis. When people are in crisis, they need help, they need help quickly. And if you're a patient, at say, the UC Irvine, neuro psychiatric hospital, and they cannot take you. And you're an older woman with a severe psychiatric illness, if you are possibly 5150 level, and if you also have some medical conditions, where do you go to look for that kind of bed? That's the beauty and I think the genius of this kind of proposal, is that this online, real time registry of all kinds of different beds would help people access those in a very expeditious way. That case example I just gave you, by the way, is a real one. And it took three days to go through the phone book, and try to identify that bed. And it turned out it was in Bakersfield, long travel from Orange County to Bakersfield. So we can cut out a couple of days, maybe even almost all of those three days, and help people connect and access services. This is really not only a public health issue, but it's also a public safety issue. People who are in need of this care often do verge into that territory that we call 5150, so they may be at danger to themselves, and it's even more critical that we provide access in the best way we know how. In this day and age when we have things like Twitter and Uber and all these apps and these online accessibility, there is no reason why we couldn't put together a robust directory to help people with mental health issues. We applaud the author for bringing this bill, and we thank the Steinberg Institute for co-sponsoring this, and we urge your support.
[{'start': 53, 'end': 66, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 245, 'end': 251, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bob Giovanni: Mr Chair and members, Bob Giovanni, State Council on Developmental Disabilities. The State Council is formed by state and federal law to make sure that people with intellectual and developmental disabilities receive the services and supports that they need. The situations that we're describing here can deteriorate very rapidly, and a quick effective response is absolutely paramount. And for those reasons, the Council supports this bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Connie Delgado: good afternoon, mr. chair and members. connie teresa delgado with the california hospital association here in opposition. we really appreciate the assemblywoman's attention to this issue. the mental health crisis is a severe crisis. unfortunately we don't believe that the bed registry is the appropriate solution. it wasn't successful in other states, but we hope to continue conversations as this bill moves along.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 60, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrew Antwih: Thank you Mr. Chairman and members. Andrew Antwih with Shy Anted here on behalf of the California Medical Association. We thank Dr. Arambula for bringing this proposal forward, we actually collaborated in coming up with the elements of the proposal. And as you can see from the two distinct parts of the bill, we believe that addressing the opioid crisis involves taking a multi-pronged approach. And we think that physicians in the field we face certain amount of pressure to deal with pain management. We want to strike a proper balance between making sure folks have the meds they need when they are suffering from severe pain. But then also find a way to curtail excess prescriptions being left in medicine cabinets and being available for people to abuse them. Away from the people who are intended to get the prescription. And we think this bill strikes the proper balance in that regard. And the pain as the fifth vital sign deals with the long standing issue that we've seen emerge as an increasing pressure. To treat for pain and lead to a situation where we might prescribe in situations where if we had the discretion, we wouldn't. And we think that this bill would help prevent that. It was well intentioned, and in the 90s there was a lot of pressure to deal with pain treatment. We're at a place now where we want to re-strike the balance there. We think this bill does that. And we thank the author and we ask for an aye vote.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 132, 'end': 140, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Connie Delgado: okay, thank you. good afternoon, mr. chair and members. connie connie delgado with the california hospital association. pleased to be here in support. and looking forward to continuing discussions particularly related to the practical implementation of the partial fill. and we're thankful to work with the assemblymember and his staff on that thank you.
[{'start': 56, 'end': 77, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tamar Sofer-Geri: Dear Mr. Chair, Mr. Vice Chair, and Members of the Committee. My name is Tamar Sofer-Geri. I'm the mother of a teenage girl with Type I diabetes. I'm also founder and Executive Director of a non-profit, CarbDM. So I represent not only myself, but also members of my community, which number in the couple of thousands. My daughter has been using a continuous glucose monitor since she was diagnosed at age eight. The device is literally life saving. Just the other day, while we were in the two-hour warm-up period of the continuous glucose monitor. During the time with which we don't have data from the device. Her blood sugar dropped to 40, which is very low and very dangerous. And that does not happen when she is on the device. That information should not be available only to those who have private insurance, and who can afford the device. That kind of information should be available to anyone who has Type I diabetes. The peace of mind that comes from having a child on that device, and can see their child's blood sugar levels remotely. When they're at school, when they're asleep, when they're on a school trip. That should be available to any parent who is managing their child's Type I diabetes. Kids are diagnosed as young as 11 months old. And every parent should have that ability to monitor their child's blood sugar levels remotely. And have the peace of mind to be able to sleep through the night. So they can get up the next day, and be a productive member of society and get to work. And that isn't a privilege that should be available only to those who have private insurance. There are members of my community who are not able to have private insurance. And the burden on them, in addition to the regular burden of managing Type I diabetes, is extremely high. And they have to quit jobs in order to manage their children's Type I diabetes, because they don't have these life-saving devices. So I urge you to support this bill, and make it available to everyone who needs it, thank you.
[{'start': 73, 'end': 89, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barrett Bagley: Mr. Chair, Mr. Vice Chair, and Members of the Committee, my name is Barrett Bagley. I am a patient with Type I diabetes, and I'm also a registered nurse, and a certified diabetes educator. So, my testimony is kind of two-fold. What has continuous glucose monitoring allowed me to do? It allows me to be a mom, it allows me to be a nurse practitioner student, allows me to be a nurse in a hospital. Without having the fear of going low, like right now, when I'm presenting. Having a low blood sugar is something that everybody who has diabetes is at risk for. The longer you have diabetes, the less likely you are to feel your lows. Patients will actually alter what they do in order to not go low. Meaning that they'll run their blood sugar high, which ultimately leads to bad outcomes. When I drive a car and my children are in the car, I know what my blood sugar is. If I don't know that, can you imagine if I were to have a car accident, because of having a low blood sugar? If you look at patients that are admitted to the hospital with hypoglycemia or low blood sugar, it's astonishing. We would rather pay for the care that a patient receives in the emergency room and, ultimately, in an in-patient stay. Than actually trying to prevent blood sugar variability, with just having a device. Think of your family members that have diabetes. One out of three Americans, by 2050, will have diabetes. That's mostly Type II diabetes, but all of these patients, we're seeing it younger, we're seeing it go on longer. These patients are at risk for hypoglycemia. Which is the number one reason why we want to have a CGM, or continuous glucose monitor. We don't need to, I poke my finger before the device six to 10 times a day. That would take time out of my work, that would take time out of my life. And ultimately, it would affect decisions that I make. Yet I would not know if I was going up, or if I was going down. Now I have a device that shows me the direction. So instead of looking in the rear-view mirror to see kind of what my blood sugar was doing, I can see where it's headed. I urge you to support this bill. It's going to change the lives of not only patients with Type I, Type II, and gestational diabetes. But ultimately, this is something that I can't go to bed at night without having next to my bed. So that I know that when I wake up in the morning, I'm going to be there for my children.
[{'start': 68, 'end': 82, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rostel Duka: good afternoon chairman, mr. vice chairman, members of the board, members of the committee. my name is rostel connie duka, and i'm a volunteer with the american diabetes association. i'm also a type i diabetic, and i'm a person who wears a cgm every day. individuals with diabetes who use insulin, like me, must diligently monitor their blood sugar, just to get through the day in a normal way. to preserve a healthy and prevent long and short, to live a healthy life and prevent long and short-term complications. long term complications could be blindness, amputations, stroke, heart attack, kidney failure. but there are dangerous short-term complications as well. and those can be related to low or high blood sugar, they can happen over a very short period of time. my personal use of the cgm has facilitated me to maintain an active, healthy, exercise-based lifestyle. now, one of the things about exercise is it can bring on low blood sugar incidents a little bit unexpectedly. however, exercise is, by far, one of the best things we can do to maintain our blood glucose levels on an ongoing basis. in addition, it's just a good healthy lifestyle. by using a cgm, i'm able to maintain this lifestyle and i can actually get an alert before my blood sugars get to a place that's critical. this means that i can deal with it by taking some simple medication and do it before i have to end up in the hospital or in an ambulance. another key area where cgms are very critical is during sleep. it is actually possible to have a low blood glucose event during sleep and not wake up from it. before i had a cgm, i actually had an incident where i had a low blood glucose event during my sleep, i did not wake up. if it wasn't for the fact that my wife was there and was woken up by the fact that i was going into seizures, i would not have known. that could have actually been a life threatening incident for me. the fact is, i have the cgm now, i can get an audible alert that wakes me up in the middle of the night, and lets me know that things are going in this direct, and i can simply eat some glucose tablets and take care of it without having to be hospitalized. authorizing medical to cover cgms can enable people with diabetes to lead safer and easier lives. and also prevent greater costs from hospitalization and treatment of complications. on behalf of the association, i urge your aye vote on this legislation, thank you very much.
[{'start': 103, 'end': 121, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bless Sheppard: Bless Sheppard, representing Stanford Hospital, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Nguy: Linda Nguy with the Western Center on Law and Poverty, in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Baca: Michelle Baca, with the California Medical Association, in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ryan Spencer: Ryan Spencer, with the California Academy of Family Physicians, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Oliver Rockward: oliver rostel rockward, with the california life sciences association, in support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Alley : Good afternoon. I'm Jennifer Alley with the California Association of Health Plans. We actually have an opposed unless amended position on this bill. We've been in constant communications with the author and his staff. And I think that we're very close to working something out. We are reviewing the new author amendments in regards to medical necessary nor actually asking for rate development language to be included for our MediCal managed care plan members.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 34, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Randall Hagar: Thank you, Mr. Chair and Members of the Committee, I am Randall Hagar representing the California Psychiatric Association. We are one of several sponsors of the bill. Just briefly, this does conform state law to the federal Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act. It's really important. I think this is a small bill that has a big heart, because parity is really important to a lot of providers and families. There's been decades of discrimination against people who have services. Not to put it too simplistically, but, often, with no health benefits or substance use benefits, you can pay more and get less. And I could go into that more, but I think given the lateness of the hour, all I will just say is that it's really, really important to have those laws on the books to conform the state to federal law. But it's even more important that our Department of Insurance have the tools to really aggressively enforce this law so that it can bring the promise to people who are needing those services. So with that, I'll end. Thank you.
[{'start': 56, 'end': 69, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Wendy Hill: yes. hi, wendy jonah hill with the california department of insurance, and on behalf of the department and the commissioner, dave jones. we are in strong support of this measure, and we're available to answer any questions that you might have. thank you.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 125, 'end': 135, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Amanda Levy: Amanda Levy, California Psychological Association, proud to co-sponsor and support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Lungren: mr. chairman, brian wendy lungren, on behalf of the national alliance on mental illness california, in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicole Quinonez: Good Afternoon, Nicole Quinonez, on behalf of the California Chapter of the American College of Emergency Physicians, in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Gonzales: rebecca brian gonzales, national association of social workers, california chapter, another co-sponsor, in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Cortez-Roth: melissa on behalf of autism speaks and the center for autism and related disorders, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christopher Castria: Christopher Castria on behalf of the California Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Leah Barros: leah rebecca barros on behalf of the california association of marriage and family therapists. we're also co-sponsors, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Faith Lane: yes. hello, faith leah lane on behalf of the california association of health underwriters, we'd like to thank the author, his staff, and the committee staff for working though cahu's concerns about the effect on grandfathered plans. based on the clarification we received of the underlying state and federal statutes not impacting grandfathered plans, cahu's no longer in opposition and moves to a no position on sb 374. thank you.
[{'start': 12, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jorgio Castro: Chair, Members, I'm Jorgio Castro, Staff Attorney at Bay Area Legal Aid in the Economic Justice Unit, and I focus mainly on Social Security disability advocacy. Bay Legal is the largest provider of free, direct legal services for low income residents in the San Francisco Bay Area. Current state law ensures access to free medical records in SSI and SSP cases on appeal. This is incredibly important for the lowest-income Californians that we serve. One of the most common reasons for denial in Social Security applications is insufficient medical evidence to establish disability under Social Security regulations. This often occurs because individuals are not able to provide documentation of their illnesses, because their healthcare providers require payment to copy and provide records up front. This places a huge hurdle in front of individuals applying for SSI benefits, who are often homeless or marginally housed, with no income or savings. One recent SSI client for Bay Legal met with us days before a scheduled hearing to appeal a denial. This client was homeless and not receiving any public benefits at all. We obtained their case file from Social Security to assess their case for representation. And the case file was thin, as no medical records were provided from either a large private or public healthcare organization that had provided healthcare treatment. This individual would almost certainly have been found not disabled under Social Security standards, because of the lack of medical evidence. We requested a postponement, and while our request was granted, the individual now must wait months more until their day in front of a judge and a decision in their case. Bay Legal attorneys were able to advocate continuously for the release of the individual's records from the provider, which the client has a right to under current state law, and we are now preparing the meritorious case for hearing. Were it not for state law requiring the free release of medical records for applications on appeal neither the individual nor Bay Legal would have been able to afford these records. And their case would likely have failed before even being presented in full. Current wait times from requests from an administrative hearing, to receive of a decision average 595 days nationally, which reflects our clients experience in the Bay Area, it is in an individual's best interest to obtain approval early on in the process. As SB 575 extends free access to medical records to the inital application in the Social Security disability process, it will increase the ability of applicants and organizations like ours to fully present their case earlier and help them receive life sustaining and stabilizing benefits earlier. These same issues with Social Security apply to the Veterans Administration, another federal administrative agency, where people are more likely to be unrepresented in their case, and cases often take even longer to reach a decision, thank you for the opportunity to speak on this important issue.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Nguy: Thank you, anyone else in support? Good afternoon, Chair, members, Linda Nguy with Western Center on Law and Poverty, proud sponsors of this important measure, I'd just like to point out a client story to highlight the need for this bill. A pregnant woman on CalWORKS in the Central Valley was unable to meet the 30 hour work requirement due to severe feet swelling, which prevented her from standing for too long and made her balance very poor. When she sought to seek an exemption by asking her Doctor to complete the one page exemption form, she was informed that she would be required to pay $40, her monthly CalWORKS benefit is $340, all of which she relied on to pay her rent. This left her in the difficult position of coming up short on her rent and utilities, or not paying the $40 and being sanctioned her entire benefit, although most providers freely provide medical records, there are some who do not at dire consequences for our clients, therefore, we respectfully ask your aye vote.
[{'start': 67, 'end': 77, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Connie Delgado: Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and Members. Connie Delgado with the California Hospital Association, here in support. This bill ensures that patients have a right to medical records at a reasonable price, and it places the federal and state law in one section so that patients and providers will know exactly what the rules are for accessing. And it also harmonizes state and federal law. So for these reasons, we're here in support.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randall Hagar: mr. chairman and members of the committee, randall for the california psychiatric association. we commend this to your support.
[{'start': 43, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Lungren: mr. chairman, brian on behalf of national alliance of mental illness california in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nina Weiler-Harwell: weiler-harwell for aarp california in strong support.
[]
Rachel Brainard: rachel with the alzheimer's association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joseph Morgan: Thank you Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee. My name is Joseph Morgan, I'm an Associate Professor of social work at the University of Minnesota. I'm here today as a researcher who has studied dialysis social worker caseloads for more than a decade. SB 349's proposal to establish minimum staffing requirements for social workers, nurses, and patient care technicians in chronic dialysis clinics, as well as minimum transition time between patients receiving dialysis. Services can help strengthen patient's safety reduce dialysis acquired infections, and contribute to overall positive health outcomes. My research has shown that California has had consistently high patient caseloads for social workers compared to many other states. Between 2007 and 2014, a full time Dialysis Social Worker in California, had an average case load ranging from 121 to 137 patients. With some social workers reporting individual case loads as high as 500 patients. Of all the states in the country, California Dialysis Social Workers had the highest patient case loads in 2007. The second highest case load in 2010, and the second highest case load in 2014, these findings illustrate a troubling trend. The staffing requirements proposed in SB 349 offer hope for dialysis patients being treated at more than 550 clinics in California. The National Kidney Foundation's Council of Nephrology Social Workers strongly recommends a maximum of 75 patients per full-time social worker. This ratio would allow practitioners to utilize their full range of training and expertise. To assist their patients with interventions such as depression screening and treatment, motivational support to promote medication adherence, and strategies to reduce missed or shortened treatments. Nurses and patient care technicians are also vital members of the care team because, they work collaboratively to ensure that patients are dialised safely and infection risks are reduced. Unfortunately, these professionals confront pressures similar to social workers, large case loads, and inadequate time to complete required tasks to ensure patient safety. In the absence of minimum staffing requirements that are grounded in the reality of everyday practice, we run a risk of diminishing patients' well being. Increasing their likelihood of being hospitalized due to infections, and adding to already high healthcare expenditures for dialysis care. I urge your support of SB 349, and I thank you for your consideration.
[{'start': 64, 'end': 77, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Emmanuel Gonzalez: Thank you Mr. Chairman, my name is Emmanuel Gonzalez. I'm a patient care technician in a dialysis clinic and I live in Pomona, California. I'm here today because something is terribly wrong in the dialysis industry. It's harming patients, caregivers and their families. The two largest dialysis corporations, DaVita and Fresenius Made $2.9 billion in profits from their dialysis operations in the United States during 2015. Rather than invest in their patients and caregivers, dialysis companies seem more concerned with their profits. They often fail to provide enough caregivers to safely monitor patients. As a result, we don't have enough time to ask questions about patients' well beings or their needs. The quality of care suffers because there's simply no time to do more than the minimum. Dialysis technicians have reported situations where they must monitor and care for 10 or more patients at a time for hours on end. It's really unsafe when you have multiple patients at risk of falling blood pressure, muscle cramping, or even cardiac arrest. Dialysis's company say their goal is for dialysis technicians to monitor no more than four patients at one time. But that goal gets violated all the time. There simply aren't enough staff to serve the patients. I've seen it first hand, and I've worked as a patient care technician for Fresenius and Queens Dialysis Center. This is not a one time incident, it's happening all the time. For me, it hits very close to home. My father has been on dialysis for 20 years. He's the reason I got into this field, but all too often, it feels like the companies don't care about patients like him. It bothers me a lot knowing I can't give my patients the full attention and care they need and they deserve. I should be able to check in with them during their treatments and see how they're doing, but it's not possible. There aren't enough staff. It's no way for patients to be treated, and that's why dialysis caregivers are standing up for Senate Bill 349 and forming a union. We're united with patients, families, and our elected leaders to improve patient care and fix the dialysis industry. I'd like to thank Senator Ricardo Lara for his leadership on this issue and for authoring Senate bill Senate Bill 349, and I urge every member of the Committee to vote and support this bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2167, 'end': 2179, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ronny Batino: Good afternoon Mr Chair, honorable Senator. My name is Ronny Batino, I'm a nurse in Orange County, California. I've been on hemodialysis now for the past 17 years, and I'm so grateful and glad that finally dialysis need is being heard and this will give a great impact on the patient care. Hemodialysis patients go to the clinics three to four times a day, with three to four hours of treatment. There's a lot of incidents that can happen during dialysis. Patients are passing out, but the other staff are doing other patients. Because of this patient ratio, we can attend to other patient needs. The poor patient end up usually in the hospital, because the attending time for them is too late, that they cannot respond anymore to the fluid replacement. Another example is the patient bleeding. Sometimes there's not an adequate for the patient to hold their side. The technician is rushing because the other patient is coming out or going in to the chair. So they have to rush, and then end up the patient coming back to you bleeding and you can see the blood all over the floor. We're concerned about the infectious control that could lead to contaminate all the patients, all the staff workers as well. Especially those patients that are hepatitis and those that are HIV. Our patient in dialysis deserves a good quality of care, and we can just do this is we have a safe staff to patient ratio. This is their life sustaining treatment, in order for them to be with their family the rest of their life. Helping to pass SB 349 will surely improve patient safety and improve the long-term outcomes that are beneficial to the patient as well as to their family. My mom was once a dialysis patient, that's what I'm very close to the dialysis patient, and I can always remember how those technicians and nurses will treat my mom. So I treat those dialysis patient very well. Please support SB 349, so that we could give the best care that our dialysis patients deserve.
[{'start': 55, 'end': 67, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roberta Micheals: Thank you Mr Chairman, and members of the Senate Health Committee. My name is Roberta Micheals, I'm a retired nurse and a dialysis patient advocate, and I live in San Diego. This is a picture of my father and his three children. Sorry, I Learned a great deal about the dialysis industry when my father was a patient at one of the largest providers in San Diego. We educated ourselves completely about the dialysis process so that my father knew exactly what solution he needed. He knew everything and anything about infection control practices. For almost five years, the time my dad was on dialysis, I went with him to every appointment and I would sit next to him as he underwent a grueling session of dialysis. Where often he would have complications because the staff were not available. These treatments lasted three to four hours, sometimes he was at the unit five hours. I noticed during those appointments that the staff was often rushed. They have to hustle because there was so little time between patients. I observed shortcuts being taken. The shortcuts affected infection control which is still, according to the network in Southern California, at 9%. Thank you, and as well as not following physician orders. During many appointments, I would alert staff about other patients having problems. Either, thank you, if it was their blood pressure, they were nauseous, fainting, especially those who were without family and friends. I was another set of eyes for the patients on the floor. I didn't mind doing it, but this should not be necessary in a dialysis clinic. This is a life sustaining treatment. If a patient does not get this, they will die. And that's what happens when a company doesn't put enough of its profits into patient care. It would get especially bad during the lunch break. For that 30 to 45 minute period I would often see one technician monitoring 15 patients, and that is not safe. In July 2010, my father was receiving dialysis treatment at a clinic in San Diego. At a certain point his blood dropped extremely low. There were staffing issues, and apparently this prevented them from doing the usual intervention of giving him IV fluids, which would have raised his blood pressure, and he would've left the unit as he did when he came in. Because this usual intervention wasn't done He was taken out of the clinic on a stretcher, and he died three days later at home, without his children being able to be with him. It was devastating, this was my father. And it seemed like no one cared to stop and say, let's give him the intervention that we always do to raise his blood pressure. It was let's give him sips of water, and his blood pressure was extremely, extremely low, to the point where he was barely responding. I don't think he would have died so soon, if the patient care was better that day. No patient should be treated like that and the company should be aware of this. I don't want anyone else to go through what he went through, or his family as family members, and that's why I became an advocate in 2007. We need to stand up for our family members who depend on dialysis. These are our brothers, sisters, mothers, and in my case, my father. This is a life sustaining treatment, and we need reform now. I do want to add something. Several years ago I had an organization and we advocated for patients and we did not charge them. In California, we posted all the inspection reports online for almost every facility in California. The organization doesn't exist anymore, it was too emotional for me to continue with. And all I have to say is that, the rating system that's in place now does not show the real picture. The real picture is seen if you read the dialysis surveys. More than half of the surveys have deficiencies and infection control, patient safety areas, and varies other things that are very harmful to patients. And I support SB 349 and vote you all to urge, to urge you all to vote yes, I'm sorry.
[{'start': 78, 'end': 94, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mario Gonzales: my name's mario faith gonzales, i'm a patient, former resident of california, and i support this bill and i hope you will too. thank you.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Emerson Padula: My name is Emerson Padula, I'm a patient care tech. I work for DaVita and Fresenius, I support SB349. This will save lives of countless patients. Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Asra Bassey: hi, my name is asra, i work for fresenius and davida, both companies as a patient care technician. i'm here for my patients, i'm here for them too, and i urge you to support the bill, because that will save lots of people's life. and every one of you needs to go see out there. not the picture they present to you when you come out, that's the picture. you need an unplanned visit to the clinic. then you will see how the transition time goes, how we're rushing to, it's like a factory there. we're just bringing people in and picking people out, that's the way we train. it's not like what they show. what we're demanding for 45 minutes for transition time to treat our patient the worth they deserve, the care they deserve, because we're treating life, not animals. and that's why i urge you, every one of you to support this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kristen Luela: hi my name is luela i'm 31 years old, i'm a dialysis patient, and i support this bill.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anthony Hill: Yes, my name is Anthony Hill, I am a patient care technician for both DaVita and Fresenius, and I support this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Enrico Monago: my name is enrico, i'm a dialysis technician and a police officer, working for 10 years for seniors. please support this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Russell Cruto: Yes, my name is Russell Cruto, nine years dialysis nurse, currently with Fresenia Medical Care, I support this bill.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brenda Gret: my name is brenda mario gret, i'm 61 years old, i'm on dialysis. i'm from oakland, california, and i really need you badly to support this bill, so we can keep on living.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amar Boreal: hi, good afternoon, my name is amar brenda boreal, i am also a patient for procedures over in san bernardino. county. i live in fontana, i am a patient that was hospitalized last year. because of my heart stopped slowly and i was not able to breath properly. and i had to be rushed to the 911, emergency hospital. thank you and i support this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Flox: mr chair, members. sarah amar flox, california labor federation, proud to stand for workers and patients in support of the bill.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Gonzales: rebecca sarah gonzales, national association of social workers in california chapter, in strong support and cosponsor of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joshua Volka: joshua rebecca volka with the american federation of state county and municipal employees, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marion Esmund: i'm ms marion joshua esmund, i'm 80 years old, i've been on dialysis three years. i go to uc davis university clinic, and i support sb 349.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sonia Perez: Hi I'm Sonia Perez, and I'm a social worker at a dialysis clinic, and I support this bill.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maria Beltron: hi, my name is maria marion beltron, i'm an ldn at the davita clinic. and i support this bill because our patients deserve the best care we can give. thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Durban: Amy Durban with the California Medical Association. In between positions, just want to thank the author and sponsors for working with us to address our concerns, and with the amendments taken today, we are neutral on the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Wong: Good afternoon Senators, my name is Dr. Brian Wong. I'm a board certified doctor specializing in kidney diseases and specifically helping to treat those patients needing dialysis to survive. I've been in practice over 30 years and am the past President of the California Dialysis Council. Over the years, I've treated thousands of patients with kidney failure that required dialysis and have spent a lot of time in outpatient dialysis clinics. I'm currently serving as a medical director for two clinics in the San Francisco Bay Area. I believe Senate Bill 349 is a solution in search of a problem. In fact, the bill creates a tremendous health care access problem for our dialysis patients. And like a hospital setting, a dialysis clinic typically runs an open floor plan, where the patients are treated around the perimeter of a large room. Caregivers are always having a direct line of sight to patients and are never more than a few feet away.  The staffing of a dialysis unit is based on the individual needs of the patients. SB 349's rigid staffing ratios do not allow for this personalized care and they will limit the number of appointments each dialysis center can accommodate in a given day. For example, SB 349 creates a dangerous situation whereby any sick call absence of the healthcare team will result in cancellation of an entire shift of patients. This same staffing ratio prevents acceptance of patients discharged from the hospital's emergency rooms for same-day dialysis. Studies have already shown that even missing a single dialysis treatment increases a dialysis patient's mortality for a staggering 30%. SB 349's mandatory 45-minute empty chair time would further limit the number of dialysis patients that can be treated. It practically eliminates the fourth shift of operation where working dialysis patients can count on getting the treatments after they get off from work. Nocturnal dialysis programs would, likewise, seize to operate. SB 349 would add hundreds of millions of dollars in new cost for care. Over 90% of dialysis patients depend on medical and Medicare for coverage so SB349 would exacerbate the current medical funding shortfall. As a doctor caring for this fragile and vulnerable population, two-thirds of whom is either black of Hispanic ethnicity in my clinic, I take issue with the assertion that current dialysis care is jeopardizing patient safety. Dialysis centers are already operating under very strict federal and state guidelines. Supporters have failed to make a credible argument that quality is suffering. In fact, according to data from California Department of Public Health, complaints in the last two and a half years represent less than one-tenth of 1% of the total treatments given across the state and there has been no evidence that states with staffing ratios have a better outcome. In fact, according to independent data from federal regulators, California dialysis clinics outperform other states, including those who stuff in ratio, in both patient's satisfaction, and quality measures. In conclusion SB 349 is not about improving patient care, it will hurt access to care and will unnecessarily disrupt the lives of thousands, and thousands of dialysis patients. And SB 49 will add hundreds of millions of dollars annually to the cost of state's MediCal. I urge you to oppose this misguided bill.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Arnold: Mr Chairman and members, Michael Arnold, representing the California Dialysis Council. I'm going to give my time to our other witnesses, but let me just say that our major concern is that there are many unintended consequences that will flow from this bill. So, we'll talk more about that and we'll be available for questions.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carl Riddle: Good afternoon, Senators. My name is Carl Riddle and I am a dialysis patient in Vicelia California, for a little over a year. Before I go into more details about my story, I would like to say that I am very happy with the quality of my care. Things that supporters of this bill or saying about the dialysis care quality are not reflective of my personal experience at all. I've never felt there was inadequate number of staff when I have been dialysing and I would be the first person to say something I felt unsafe or otherwise jeopardized in any way. I fear Senate Bill 349 would negatively impact all dialysis patients, particularly patients like me that have a full time job, and the need to dialyze in the evenings in order to maintain my work schedule. I manage a staff at my day job, and I understand the economics of staffing a shift. While we would love to all have more employees for the sake of having employees, oftentimes, this isn't economically or particularly feasible. If Senate Bill 349 passes, I can see why my nocturnal shift would not be sustainable because of the cost and logistics and that it would be devastating for me and others like me. When I started dialysing 14 months ago, my appointments were during the day, three days a week, four hours at a time. I missed nearly 100 days of work in my first six months that I was on dialysis, and was close to losing my job because of my absences. Right now, I work from 4 AM to 2 PM, Sunday through Thursday, and I dialyze 3 PM to 9 PM, three days a week. When I switched to nocturnal dialysis, it was truly a life changing experience for me, because I was able to keep my job and able to work. I was able to keep my job, my outlook on life improved, and I feel much healthier, like I am today, just healthy. I fear this proposal would make evening shifts unsustainable. I also don't understand SB 349's requirement that the chair has to sit empty for 45 minutes between patients. I've been dialyzed for 14 months. It doesn't take long to transition between patients. That seems arbitrary and not in the patient's best interest. Senate bill 349 is trying to solve a problem that simply isn't there. My quality of care is great. And the potential impact is the bill would have a negative effect on my life and my lifestyle. I strongly encourage you to oppose this bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mariella Vedez: Hello, my name is Mariella Vedez. I'm a facility administrator in East Los Angeles and I oppose SB 349. Thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Evetta Lisalda: Hello, my name is Evetta Lisalda and I'm a facility administrator over in Montebello, California and I oppose SB 349.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tate Rider: Hi, my name is Tate Rider. I'm the regional operations director in Downey California and I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Connie Delgado: Connie Delgado with the California Hospital Association, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Will Brougher: my name is will maria brougher and i'm the facility administrator of the davita northgate dialysis clinic in san rafael, california. i urge you all to oppose this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amber Brock: My name Amber Brock I'm a facility administrator in Fresno, California and I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cindy Bernard: i'm cindy will bernard i'm a group facility administrator and an rn from fresno and visalia, california and i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Esther Korcas: my esther cindy korcas, and facility administrator from santa rosa, and i strongly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 3, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lisa Callahan: hello, my name is lisa esther callahan, and i've worked as a pct, rn, and i'm an administrator. i ask you to oppose this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brenda Jackson: brenda lisa jackson, facility administrator from stockton, california, and i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Phillips: My name is Michael Phillips, I'm a facility administrator from Linwood, and I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ron Abercrombie: i'm ron brenda abercrombie, patient care technician for 22 years, facility administrator for three. i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sean Crane: my name is sean ron crane, i'm a facility administrator in napa, california, and i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eric Smith: Good afternoon. Eric Smith, Fairfield, California. I'm a patient educator and facility administrator, and I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ted Yusamra: Hi, I'm Ted Yusamra I'm a patient care technician for 24 years and I'm also a group facility administrator, and I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chloe Corals: Good afternoon, Chloe Corals from Atwater, California. I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 21, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Fred Ford: Good afternoon, Fred Ford from Fresno, California. I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Valerie Lomax: good afternoon, my name is valerie, i'm from los banos, california, and i oppose this bill as a facility administrator.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicki Tong: i'm tong, a facility administrator from the east bay, and i oppose this bill
[{'start': 4, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jenny Coozy: jenny i'm a facility administrator in fremont california. i have worked in dialysis for 17 years as a pct and a nurse.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert Hare: Robert Hare I am from Richmond California, a PCT and facility administrator. I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tyler Anderson: Tyler Anderson, I'm a patient care technician and a facility administrator, and I urge you to oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jamie Hale: I'm Jamie Hale, facility administrator in Stockton, and I urge you to oppose this bill.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shane Hall: Good afternoon my name is Shane Hall, I'm a facility administrator, and I ask you to oppose this bill.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Thaddeus Hill: Thaddeus Hill, social worker, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Aris Salinas: i'm aris sean salinas i'm an insurance counselor from fresno, california. my father was a patient for divided dialysis, and i strongly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Crystal Carpenter: Crystal Carpenter facility Administrator of North Highlands Dialysis and I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Suzanne Dolan: Suzanne Dolan, California registered nurse and facility administrator for DaVita in Grass Valley in Auburn, California, and I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Gonzales: I'm Laura Gonzales, PCT and a facility administrator. I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Harty Martinez: harty aris martinez, facility administrator, sacramento california. i strongly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chad Fowler: Good afternoon, I'm Chad Fowler, West Sacramento, and I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Cardnela: good afternoon, brian harty cardnela, sacramento, california, in opposition.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Whalen: good afternoon. mike brian whalen, elk grove, california, and i oppose this bill. tthank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Sosas: Tim Sosas, Sacramento, California, and I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sean Gallaherd: gallaherd, technician, 26 years, and i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Seth Miller: Seth Miller, Rockland, California, and I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joe Morrell: joe mike morrell, sacramento, california. i also oppose.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christy Camisa: Christy Camisa, I'm a patient care technician for 17 years, and I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jay Aggarwall: Dr. Jay Aggarwall from Riverside, California, and I'm in favor of improving dialysis quality, and that's why I oppose this bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Hansen: Karen Hansen, i'm senior operations director for Dialysis Clinic Incorporated and I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ed Curran: I'm Ed Curran, I'm an operation director from DCI, and I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rory Pace: hi, im rory, i'm a registered dietician from san jose, california, and i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 11, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dede Burkes: Hi, I'm Dede Burkes from Stockton, California, and I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Emma Batista: i'm batista, director of operations, walnut creek, and i urge you to please, you know, i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Arbetta: hi, my name is karen joe arbetta. i'm a registered nurse with dci, a nonprofit organization, and i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pran Singh: I'm Pran Singh. I work DCI nonprofit organization, and I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rose DeBalis: my name is debalis. i'm a nurse manager for a non for profit organization, and i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nadine Collins: hi, i'm collins. i work for dci non-profit. i'm their clinical manager, and i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Ollen: John Ollen, Orangevale, California, also opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Diane Berman: diane karen berman, petaluma, california, also in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eric Wong: Eric Wong, Regional Operations Director in San Jose, I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debbie Spear: hi debbie i work for dci. i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 3, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Scott Hoffman: hoffman, sacramento, i oppose.
[]
Chris Greenhall: greenhall, sacramento, california, pct, 28 years, i oppose.
[]
Renee Brown: renee diane brown, registered nurse, yuba city, i oppose.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Stanton: brian renee stanton, woodland, california, i oppose this bill. it will hurt our patients and our staff.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jerry Aryu: jerry brian aryu, oakland california, and i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eric Crowley: crowley, lodi, california, patient technician 24 years, i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katie Burning: burning, elserito, california, and i oppose this bill
[]
Jenny Hilton: hilton, administrator, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sherry Owen: My name is Sherry Owen. I've been a clinical manager for a few years. I've been a dialysis nurse for over 45 years, and remember when we had to deny dialysis to patients, because they didn't have any money. And I don't want to see the patients going back to the hospitals, because we don't have enough staff to dialyze them and I don't want to see the death squad back.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joan Allen: thank you, joan with seiu united healthcare workers. thank you for that question. and we got to the ration of one to eight partially by looking at the other states that have ratios. and then also realizing california's status as having gone further in hospital ratios as well. and looking at, how do we as california lead on this issue as we have in the in-patient setting? and really looking at those other states, go that extra step further. find that one step further for patients so we do recognize that this is a little bit stricter than other states, for that reason. in terms of whether moving the ratio from eight to nine would impact opposition, we would we be very surprised.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kristin Jung: Good afternoon, Chair and Senators. My name is Kristin Jung. I'm half Mexican and half Chinese. I embrace my mixed heritage and consider it to be one of the most unique things about myself. What I never considered is how the same unique feature would bring such hardship and frustration in the face of my diagnosis of acute myeloid leukemia. I was diagnosed at 17 years old, and with 10 rounds of chemotherapy, I was put into remission by 18, but I didn't make it to 19 before I relapsed. At that point, a bone marrow transplant was inevitable, and due to my mixed heritage, finding a bone marrow donor was slim to none. My two older brothers tested negative to be my donors. And my name was put on the be the match registry, and to this day, I have yet to receive a phone call saying that I do have a bone marrow donor. As my hope dwindled, I slowly started to accept the fact that I may not make it through this time. And at that point I was then chosen to be a part of a clinical trial to receive an expanded double cord blood transplant at the City of Hope in Duarte, California. Although the transplant was the most trying time in my life, I'm not sure if I'd be sitting here right now talking to you all without it. I'm almost five years in remission, and when you reach five years, statistics show that relapse is less than 5% to happen again. I hope I was able to provide insight of the importance of public cord blood banking and how they easily provide people like me a second or third chance at life.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alex Tung: Good afternoon. Chair and Members of the Committee, my name is Alex Tung and I'm here representing Mixed Marrow, and I'm here in support of bill SB23 to continue funding for the California's Umbilical Cord Blood Collection Program. My story is about two and a half years ago, I was diagnosed with acute myeloid leukemia and I needed to have a bone marrow transplant in order to survive. Being of Chinese descent, I thought it would be really easy for me to find a matching donor of similar ethnic background since there are 2 to 3 billion Chinese people in the world, I thought it'd be pretty easy. My Doctor told me that I only had a time frame of six months to find this match and have this transplant, otherwise the cancer would be impossible to eliminate from our body. With only six months to find a match, finding a match soon became much, much more urgent than I initially thought. Month by month had passed and I was still unable to find a match in all of the bone marrow registries around the world including Asia and all parts of the world. By the fifth month, my chances of finding a match and surviving leukemia was becoming slimmer and slimmer until one of my doctors at City of Hope in Duarte, California started looking into clinical trial cord blood transplants for me as an option. Sure enough by the six months time frame, we were able to find two cord blood units, that were of a close enough match to my blood's HNL typing, where we were able to proceed with and have a successful cord blood stem cell transplant for me. If it wasn't for the cord blood collection programs and cord blood banks that already existed two years ago, I probably wouldn't be here speaking in front of all of you wonderful people here today. Like I mentioned, I was born Chinese, and out of the two cord blood units, one came from a Hispanic baby, and one came from a Vietnamese baby, and only one of these baby's stem cells would engraft in my body and keep me alive for the rest of my life, and it was the Hispanic baby's cord blood that survived in my body, and I am now half Chinese Hispanic, which is pretty awesome. If it wasn't for the cord blood collection programs in existence, many patients would not have the chance of beating cancer. The more cord blood units collected and stored in the public cord bullet banks, the more people would be able to survive these life threatening diseases. And because with cord bloods, the HLE typing doesn't have to be as perfect of a match as if it was from a non-related donor. The more cord bloods units that we are able to collect, is going to give everybody of all different ethnic backgrounds in the world that are facing these diseases a better chance of finding a match, and I think the whole purpose of this, is to give everybody of all ethnic descents, of all ethnic backgrounds the same opportunity to survive, and live and have the chance to have a successful transplant. So please pass this bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 63, 'end': 72, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Angela Gallia: angela jerry gallia with the university of california, we're the sponsors of this measure.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ilya Borne: borne representing blood centers of california and the city of hope is one of our members, we are in strong support.
[]
Greg Herner: herner on behalf of the public and private research, university research institutions in the state of california, and the other 750 members of the california life sciences association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jon Walker: I'm Jon Walker, I'm co-director of the Umbilical Cord Blood Collection Program for the state. When one of the units that we've collected is transplanted, we negotiate with the banks that a portion of the money that they receive from the insurance will come back to our program for sustainability.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cliff Costa: Mr. Chair and members, Cliff Costa on behalf of the California New Car Dealers Association. We're in strong support, thank the author for authoring the bill. This bill is extremely simple and straightforward. All it says is for those consumers who want to opt-in, they can now use an electronic contract and now sign that contract electronically, that's it. It also adds additional consumer protections that the Assemblymember Dababneh mentioned specifically. This bill does not change the contract, it does not make our contract something where you scroll to the end, click a box and now you've signed everything. That's not what this bill does. It takes the paper contract and puts it in a digital format where then you can sign it. All the disclosures, all of the requirements in terms of font and color that's currently under the Automobile Sales Finance act, as well as the Vehicle Leasing Act, is all included. This changes none of that, this adds additional consumer protections. Additionally, we think this puts us now in potential conformity with the 49 other states of the United States. We're the only state where we have this prohibition. So we respectfully request an aye vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 427, 'end': 435, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Courtney Jensen: mr. chair and members, courtney jonah jensen with the california credit union league, also in support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Margaret Gladstein: margaret courtney gladstein on behalf of global automakers, also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rosemary Shahan: Mr Chair, and Members, and Assembly Member Dababneh, I'm Rosemary Shahan, I'm President of Consumers for Auto Reliability and Safety. We're known for sponsoring legislation enacted in California over decades to improve consumer protection in our state. And I've spent a lot of my time listening to your constituents and getting emails from them when they've been ripped off. And there are a lot of them who are very unhappy with the transactions that they have had with car dealers in our state. And there is a reason why auto transactions were carved out from the legislation allowing electronic signatures and there are a number of reasons. Among them, this is a very high cost item for a lot of people. There's a lot of money involved, it's a complicated transaction.  There are, I'm sure you've seen, when you look at the contracts, the paper contracts, it's complicated. There's a lot for them to digest. The new car dealers were very kind and invited Roger Dickinson and me to see a demo. I think they thought that it would be reassuring, but instead it was the opposite and what we found was that sometimes dealers would have screen that you can't take with you. Under Truth and Lending, you're supposed to be able to get certain disclosures so that the you know what the cost of financing would be, that you can physically take with you to another dealership and comparison shop. That's the way the free market supposed to work. Under this scenario, if you opt in for this, you may not realize that, thereby, you're, in practice, surrendering your Truth and Lending disclosures, as far as being able to take that document with you to another location and shop around. I appreciate that the Assembly Member amended the bill to have that opt in provision, but I think that, in reality, most people are not going to understand what the legal implications of that are. We are very concerned that this bill, as a practical matter, is going to make it almost impossible for consumers to prove what they saw and what they agreed to. And I brought with me an example of a contract. There are some dealers who are jumping the gun, going all electronic, this is a contract where a consumer bought a new Toyota from a Toyota dealership. She told her attorney later that she had declined over $5,000 in add-ons, like $1,200 for service protection, over $4,000 dollars for service contracts that were contemporaneous to the manufacturer's warranty and, therefore, virtually worthless. And there were two service contracts in addition to the manufacturers' express warranty. She did not agree to these and yet they were added in. And when you look at the signature, the electronic signature on this document, it's letters of the alphabet. And there's a big problem at dealerships with forgery already. This makes it almost impossible to prove the forgery. And as far as saving paper, we think it's way more important to think about what costs are involved for consumers and consider that. Just today, the Federal Trade Commission announced settlements with major car dealers in our state, who they alleged had been engaged in a number of bad practices, including deceptive and unfair sales and financing practices, deceptive advertising, deceptive online reviews. And I wish I could say that I'm confident that the Federal Trade Commission is going to be as active going forward, but I can't say that with any confidence. So it's going to fall increasingly onto individual consumers to defend themselves. It's already extremely difficult for them to do that because virtually all the dealers in our state now impose Mandatory Binding Arbitration, and a lot of times, people end up in small claims court. If you're in small claims court, how are you going to prove that you didn't agree to these ridiculously priced, worthless add-ons? How can you do that? You can't. So we would respectfully ask for your no vote.
[{'start': 43, 'end': 51, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 57, 'end': 72, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 956, 'end': 971, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Aaron Lewis: Good afternoon Mr. Chair and members. My name is Aaron Lewis with the Consumer Federation of California. I would absolutely subscribe to my colleague's views on this, and we are opposed to the bill. I'll just say that our objections are fundamental to this. It doesn't take a great deal of imagination to envision a consumer where language is a barrier. An elderly consumer who's at a dealership and is presented with this, and is not given meaningful disclosures, is not comfortable with the electronic format, is not able to review the contract in its totality, is not able to walk away with it. And I think as Ms. Shahan mentioned, the practicalities of this in a high pressure, stressful, unpleasant sales environment, which is with an industry that does not have a good track record, to say the least, of treating consumers well. It's very problematic to us, so I'd just oppose the bill and urge your no vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 49, 'end': 60, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 617, 'end': 623, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Joe Ridout: Assembly Members, Joe Ridout representing Consumer Action, opposed.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Margaret Gladstein: Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and members. Margaret Gladstein here on behalf of the California Chamber of Commerce, we are in support of this measure. We appreciate the author bringing it forward. Historically, California's data breach laws have mirrored one another, the public sector and the private sector and we think this is an important measure to make sure they continue mirroring each other and provide appropriate consumer protections in the case of a public agency breach.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Micheli: Mr Chair and members, Chris Micheli on behalf of the Computing Technology Industry Association, in support.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ross Buckley: ross with the personal insurance federation, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicolina Hernandez: good afternoon, nicolina margaret hernandez, from political solutions on behalf of the retail industry leaders association, in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dorothy Johnson : Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and members. Dorothy Johnson with the California State Association of Counties, respectfully opposing this measure. We did note a few technical concerns in our letter, but this really does come down to costs. Unlike our counterparts in the private industries, local revenue options are extremely limited. And a similar measure that was carried last year, Senate Appropriations noted tens to hundreds of millions of dollars in new costs for state and local agencies. And for those reasons, we respectfully ask your no vote today.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 54, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Joe Vidal: joe nicolina vidal representing the super action, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stephanie Roberson: Thank you Mr. chair I appreciate. Members of the Committee moving the bill early, Stephanie Roberson with the California Nurses Association, we're proud sponsors of the Chairman's bill AB 402. As you all know the bill was vetoed last year, based on a technical difference in the understanding of the role of standards board. We hope that this version further clarifies that the OSHA Standards Board, has the authority to change and adopt regulations after the statute has been enacted. We've made several attempts to clear that up. It wasn't our intention to circumvent the role of the standards board, by making sure that that intention was clear. We did letters to the journal and language in, that they'll specify that the bill doesn't limit the standards or the authority over the matter. The bill before you, we've taken several amendments to resolve the concerns of the Department of Industrial Relations. The California Hospital Association, so the billing chief basically requires a standards board to adopt and come up with a standard by 2020, on how to remove and evacuate harmful surgical plume smoke, that's harmful to our doctors, our nurses, and patients who aren't under general anesthesia. The smoke plume as the Chairman has mentioned, has harmful byproducts to our healthcare workers ocular respiratory, benzene cyanide is very carcinogenic. The bill had overwhelming support, and some of you on this Committee voted for it last year and we appreciate that. The bill is back again however and we must continue to do the work to work on measures, common sense measures, that improve upon the health welfare of our workers. In these places, we respectfully ask for your aye vote. And again, thank the Chairman for his work on this, and his commitment moving this issue forward. Thank you so much, and I have Penny Smalley here.
[{'start': 82, 'end': 100, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1824, 'end': 1837, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Penny Smalley: mr chairman and members of the committee, thank you very much for the opportunity to be here today to address you on this subject. my name is penny jonah smalley, i'm a registered surgical nurse, and i'm sorry, here representing the international counsel and surgical plume. we are a not for profit clinical advocacy organisation, with over 150,000 members to date, representing many different health care professionals. our commitment is to eliminate surgical plume through education, research and most importantly, support for standards in legislation. i've been an advocate for plume evacuation since the beginning of my career, which admittedly was a few years ago. i'm a contributing author to nearly all of the national and international standards guidance, documents and regulations that are currently available. these standards are all evidence based. and provide both rationale and risk assessment. as well as benchmark recommendations. they are not however rigorously enforced or implemented, because they're not enforceable in the united states. they're up to individuals to follow or not to follow. i've seen a significant impact on clinical practice, when the core subject of these particular standards becomes mandatory. the shift to required compliance reduces staff risk of exposure to all of the hazards that have been mentioned, and a few more. it also protects patients from being operated on, in an at risk environment. whether or not staff or patients are put in to that at risk environment, should never be left to an individual who may choose to or not to use a plume evacuation device, at his or her own discretion. it must be an occupational safety and health requirement, because it is the nursing staff and the surgical team members, who are mostly at risk day in and day out in their workplace. a plume evacuation system, is any device that can capture and filter the plume as it is generated. this can be any device currently available, and there are a wide range of them. or any future system, that can provide an adequate level of protection. facilities should be responsible for assessing their needs and selecting appropriate solutions to the plume problem, as long as that capture infiltration level meets current standards specifications. clean air in the or can be a reality, without change to any surgical technique or daily work practices. icsp supports this bill because we believe that no one should accept the known risk in their work place, when mitigating that risks takes little but the desire to do it. thank you for your consideration of ab 402.
[{'start': 142, 'end': 161, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cesar Diaz: Thank you Mr. Chair, Member Cesar Diaz on behalf of the State Building & Construction Trades Council, proud sponsors of this bill. An important clarification to what we're living in now, which is the elimination of redevelopment agencies, and how to fund perhaps some private residential housing projects that are in dire need, right? We do know that there is a crisis, more so a crisis on affordable housing then there is market rate development. So with that in mind, we know that income and inequality further exasperates that crisis. And that people are actually having less in terms of income to provide for the housing and the rates that are available. Driving down worker's wages on construction projects, where there are public subsidies, doesn't help address the housing crisis. And so we are proud to sponsor this bill because in the absence of re-development agencies different entities have been providing what's being termed a public subsidy, and that public subsidy no longer carries a protection for those workers. That protection ensures that there's a skilled and trained workforce available for not only private projects, but also industrial, commercial, and public works infrastructure. It takes away from the low road construction model, when we see a lot of private construction projects we also often find unfortunately that there's abuse of construction workers on those project sites. Oftentimes those workers don't have the proper safety harnesses. Many times we find employers, and there have been repeated studies in this matter they don't have worker's comp, Unemployment Insurance, and you can start going down the list of things that are wrong, that happens on many construction sites. When that happens, those actual workers become a burden on public in general. It's even more of a problem when a project is publicly subsidized. When, fire fighter resources, childcare resources, other types of resources or different types of programs, basically suffer perhaps. And in an attempt to actually drive more production of housing, and then have a double hit like tax payers who are already subsidizing those projects, having them to subsidize the healthcare of a construction worker who is injured on a construction site and goes to an emergency room. All the exemptions as Mr. Assemblymember Chiu had mentioned exist, so single family dwellings, mortgage assistance, affordable housing, all those exemptions are still there. In fact, this bill still maintains an exemption from the prevailing wage by including when there's an agreement available. By keeping that term, we're actually driving towards figuring out what that definition of an agreement is. Inviting the developers basically to tell us. We know that they're not permits, we know that they're not variances. We know that they're not density bonuses, even though those are actual public benefits that provide to a developer. The definition of a public subsidy isn't changed with this bill. All we're trying to do is to clarify, because there is a loophole in the absence of redevelopment, that there are public assets that the public could use for the greater public good that's going to a private developer. And we want to make sure that the investment is not lost by driving down workers' wagers. So for those reasons, we ask for your support.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2321, 'end': 2325, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Danny Curtin: thank you so much, sorry for being late. there's only 10,000 people out there trying to get in. quite a hearing you've got here. my name's danny penny curtin, i'm with the california conference of carpenters. a lot of the debate around this bill i find interesting, because it was resolved in sb 975 in 2001 where we actually defined what a public subsidy is. not just the cash or a cash grant from a local agency. that's where the real debate was. this bill actually doesn't do anything different that wasn't passed in 2001. the people are saying it's going to raise the costs. we've already seen that, we've already not seeing the raise costs but we've already been through that debate. for 15 years all of these the issues regarding what is or isn't a public work have been resolved. it does one thing because there's been a change in the delivery system. so there are no longer any redevelopment agencies. but the debate about what a government subcity is, was done in 2001. it's been working very, very well and i want to point out one key thing. what the debate was around whether is the government is a regulator of construction or market or a participant in the construction market. when the government decides, whatever level of government, which really wasn't much of a conversation in 2001. but when whatever level of government decides it wants to be a participant in the marketplace, by subsidizing in one form or another, they are no longer a regulator but a participant. and a participant decides what rules they want to operate under. the government, as a regulator whatever the rules are, they try to make sure they're in force. but what public works basically says is, the government is participating in the marketplace. we're doing it because it's good public policy. we need transportation, we need water, we need energy, in this case housing, or in some cases housing. but for that participation, we also have other public policy issues that are important to us, like decent wages, like training, like pensions, like health care, for the workers who build those facilities. that debate was done in 2001. it built off the public works laws from the 1930s. this change is nothing, it changes nothing. it just says that the government at any level that participates in the construction market is responsible for paying decent wages. whatever the project they decide it is now a good public policy, now is the time to say we will subsidize your project, like you have to do by these public works rules. that's the fundamental issue and i'm amazed at the level of conversation around this, it doesn't change existing law at all. not one iota, it just says the government agencies, there's no redevelopment agencies, so there's some confusion about that, it clarifies that. so i encourage you to support it, it's not really a change, it's existing law. when the state decides it should be a market player, it also decides that these are the rules that market plays with.
[{'start': 139, 'end': 157, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Emily Johnstone: Thank you Mr. Chairman and good afternoon. My name is Emily Johnstone. I'm a managing director at the AFL CIO Housing Investment Trust. We are a financing entity for union construction projects that are built with 100% union labor. We have been around for 55 years, and we have financed over 100,000 units, many of which are affordable. I'd like to speak today, that it is very possible to finance affordable housing that is built with union labor all over the State of California. We have projects right now in the City of San Francisco, in the City of San Jose and also in the City of Salinas. All paying our workers on site, a decent living wage so that they don't then qualify for affordable housing. Continuing on this need to continue to construct even more affordable housing because we're not paying people a decent wage, it just compounds the problem. Secondly, when you look at the cost to build affordable housing, the differentials, we just don't see significant differentials between a union shop and an open shop. We do see big differentials in the cost of land, impermanent cost, in reserves that other financial entities require. So again, affordable housing finance is made up of multiple, multiple factors depending on where you are geographically. We're seeing these same issues all across the United States. And the biggest thing we can do to stop the need for more affordable housing is to pay people a living wage so they can live in these communities in which they work. To work with members of the community through apprenticeship programs in Salinas, 40% of the workers on site are now joining the union, having a good opportunity going forward. It's a great alternative to college for families that can't spend $100,000, $200,000, $300,000, on the cost of University. So we are very supportive of this bill. We believe it supports the development community by not overstepping on financing options that don't require prevailing wage. One of the biggest vehicles for financing affordable housing is low-income housing tax credit that's obviously not included here. And that remains the biggest subsidy for affordable housing and that, even though it's a federal program and a state program does not trigger prevailing wage. So we are in support of this bill, happy to answer any questions.
[{'start': 54, 'end': 69, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Caitlin Vega: Mr. Chair and members, Caitlin Vega for the California Labor Federation. We are here in strong support and as strong advocates of affordable housing, which is something our members need. You cannot say you care about affordable housing and not care about the wages that workers are paid, thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike West: my name is mike danny west, i'm representing district council 16, painters and allied trades.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike West: mike mike west, district council 16 in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Madison Holt: Madison Holt, District Council 16, support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Janice Austed: Janice Austed, California-Nevada Conference of Operating Engineers in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Megan Subers: Megan Subers on behalf of the California Professional Firefighters in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Erin Guerrero: good afternoon, mr. chair and members, erin mike guerrero, on behalf of the california building industry association. members, we're in the middle of a housing crisis that is escalating to the level of an emergency. california ranks 49th in the nation in home-ownership rates. that's the lowest level since the 1940's. we're dead last in terms of first time home buyers. the average california home already costs two and a half times more than the national average. only 41% of californians can afford the state's median priced home california's average monthly rent is 50% higher than the rest of the country. we're producing less than half the number of homes needed to keep pace with the demand, and we need to build 3.5 million more by 2025. now, enter ab 199. this bill will drive costs up even further during this emergency, resulting in almost no additional homes and making all homes even less affordable and further out of reach for the majority of californians. this is not a narrowly crafted measure. ab 199 eliminates the private residential exemption from prevailing wage. the sponsors would have you believe that this bill is just about making sure subsidized housing projects pay prevailing wage, but it goes way beyond that. in fact, we can't come up with a project, a privately financed project that would not become a prevailing wage project under the terms of this bill. the reason for this can be boiled down to two issues, what a public fund is and the nature of the agreements referenced in the bill. the labor code contains a very broad definition of public funds, and it's not what the average person would think of. most importantly, public funds as defined in a code are not the same as a subsidy as the sponsors would like you to think. here are a couple of examples of what a public fund is in the code. if a developer pre-pays his processing fees, plan check and inspection fees, that money is received into the local government coffers and placed into its own account. when that money enters the account, it's considered public funds. if the developer overpaid and goes to receive a refund on the excess, those are public funds that he's just now received. another example, if the developers is asked by local government to construct an improvement to accommodate another unrelated project. for example, if the city asks him to install a slightly larger trunk sewer line for the benefit of an adjacent property, legally, the city has to pay it's portion of that project. but once they do, those are public funds. those are just two of many examples. it's because the definition of public funds is so convoluted that the residential exemption was included in sb 975 in 2001. that exemption created a firewall at the curb. beyond the curb, improvements would be prevailing wage projects, but on the lot side of the curb, the bricks and mortar of the vertical building, those were to be exempted. the second issue is the nature of the agreements. who is making what agreements? this bill expands the agencies making the agreements to political subdivisions, which include counties, cities, and districts. we cannot identify a single project that would not include an agreement with at least one of these entities. in fact, most have multiple agreements with several of them. for example, upon filing a development application, cities and counties require the applicant to agree to pay processing cost and sign an agreement to indemnify the city or county. and in the other example of the sewer trunk line, that would require a reimbursement agreement with the local government. there are many more examples. members, this bill will have immediate and tangible impacts on the housing market. there are quite a few estimates out there on what prevailing wage does to the cost of a project. according to a 2016 beacon economics study, mandated prevailing wage would result in up to a 46% increase in the total cost of a new home. according to a study by uc berkeley, it would drive up costs by 37%. according to early reports from our members, costs would increase by $46 to $77 per square foot. pick any of those estimates. suffice it to say, the impact will be significant, making housing even further beyond the reach of teachers, firefighters, police, grocery clerks, nurses, and the average californian. according to the eye on housing report, for every $1,000 increase in the price of a home, over 15,000 california households are priced out of the market. californians already can't afford to buy homes. the consumer certainly cannot sustain the increases this bill would bring about. however, neither can the builders absorb these cost increases. the industry average pretax profit margin hovers around 6.5%, regardless of which cost estimate you choose, under no circumstances can these increases be absorbed at today's housing cost. our members simply will not build a product for which there is no market. this means housing production will be dramatically cut through out the state as a direct result of ab 199, and the housing crisis will only escalate further. thank you, mr. chair.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Gamboa: Yes, my name is John Gamboa, and I'm representing three organizations. First, the California Community Builders, which is a nonprofit organization building low cost housing for very low income workers in the lowest areas of California, the Central Valley on it. Also represent The 200, which is a project built by 15, 16 historical community civil rights champions who have banded together to try to address The wealth gap plaguing our communities, especially with communities of color, through access of homeownership. Homeownership has always been the avenue that created wealth and created the middle class in this country. We commend Assemblyman Chu for his attempt in this bill. It's an honorable attempt to raise the wages of a few workers in the state. And the effect is not modest. And the language that says the definitions have a terrible impact on the most vulnerable part of our communities in California. I've heard estimates, some today, that it would increase cost 46%. I've heard from proponents and to say, that's preposterous, it's only 9%. But like many issues, the truth is probably somewhere in the middle, maybe 25%. But even if it's the minimal 9%, and raises the cost of all housing, it's way too much, for way too many people in our community on it. With our rents in the state being 50% higher than it is in other areas, our wages are not 50% higher. Has a terrible effect on renters, and disproportionately, renters in the state are renters of color on it. And they're striving. Some of them are paying up to 80% of their income to cover the rent. The effect of this is that three or four days before payday, they're feeding their children potatoes. I've seen it. I know some of the families that we've talked to on it. Any increase in the housing that increases the rent is going to push those people right on the margin into the homeless, on it. We already have enough problem with the homeless on it. Second, it'll have a disproportionate impact on homeownership. The minority community has suffered disproportionately on access to homeownership since the inception of this country. For 40 years, we were denied access to the government subsidies for home-ownership that created the greatest middle class in the world. In fact, we were the envy of the world. The only trouble with that was, it was only for white families. We were red lined out of the access to home-ownership. Subsequently, we were left behind for many, many years, until 1970. Until the civil rights champions in our community were successful in turning around some of those laws. Just when we're starting to make gains in wealth and home-ownership, along comes the housing crisis and the great recession, and again disproportionately hits our communities on it. According to Pew, CNN, and other studies, minorities lost 30% of their wealth through home-ownership in three years on it. And that is a main avenue for wealth access. According to the Brandeis University study, the effect of this is that white families are 13 times wealthier than black families, and 10 times wealthier than Latino families on it. Continuing this bill and the effects of this bill, will deny our communities access to home-ownership on it. And if it denies us access to home-ownership, it denies us access to middle class. Already this country is too far divided by the haves and have nots. We have newspaper articles every single day talking about the exodus of people from this state and the economy. Our organizations and our community almost beg you, this bill as written, has a terribly negative impact. I know it's not the intent, but that's the effect of it. I've cut short what I wanted to say because I had three of our champions, and our historical champions of our community, civil rights champs have asked me to please read a statement.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 650, 'end': 653, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jeff Guidak: Executive Jeff Guidak, Council Member for City of Marino Valley and a member of the League of California Cities for the Riverside Division, representing 28 cities who voted unanimously to oppose this. Thank you.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Greg Hauck: My name is Greg Hauck. I'm President of Lamda and Aba Restoration. A landscape constructor company, and I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Don Hoffer: My name is Don Hoffer. I'm with Shea Homes. And I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dave Lindquist: my name is dave erin lindquist. i'm a subcontractor in the greater sacramento area. i have owned a business, and i oppose this bill. why is the bill necessary if it's making no change?
[{'start': 11, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeff Grunden: My name is Jeff Grunden. I am the Regional Director for American Woodmark, the largest cabinet company in America, and we oppose this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Rotelli: My name is Mary Rotelli with Teichert Construction, and we oppose this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Webb: My name is Kevin Webb, Division President from Watt Communities in Northern California. We oppose this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 47, 'end': 51, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tony Brown: My name is Tony Brown. I'm a flooring contractor in Sacramento, California, and I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeff Pemstein: My name is Jeff Pemstein with Homes by Towne, Sacramento, California and the Chair of the California Building Industry Association. I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Heisnger: Thank you, Mr. Chair. Kevin Heisnger, Regional Land Company President, in opposition.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Doug Dieter: my name is doug dave dieter with k. hovnanian homes and i oppose the bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Toni Ramos: Toni Ramos, Ramos Homes Manteca, and I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 12, 'end': 17, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mike Wyatt: Mike Wyatt, K Hovnanian Homes Sacramento. We oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Beckman: John Beckman, BI with the Greater Valley. We oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Don Keller: Don Keller, Placer Title Northern California. We oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cynthia Mitchell: cynthia doug mitchell, woman owner of citadel tile and flooring and i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chrisanne Giles: Chrisanne Giles, Shea Homes, I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Natalie Nurettew: natalie cynthia nurettew colrich construction from san diego, we oppose this bill.
[]
Michael Battaglia: Michael Battaglia, Calatlantic Homes of Irvine, Vice Chair of California Building Industry Association, I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Balsamo: Mike Balsamo, BIA Southern California, over 1,100 member companies, we oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bernie Heyne: bernie natalie heyne, cencal pacific, we oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dean Dickson: Dean Dickson with Davis Development Company, we oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Balis: John Balis, Private Landowner and Contractor, oppose.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Allen Bennett: allen, general counsel ucp inc and benchmark communities, we oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Norm Brown: norm bernie brown in c brown development license civil engineer, i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jim Ramsey: jim, cal-atlantic homes, we oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dustin Boag: Dustin Boag, UCP, I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bonnie Chu: Bonnie Chu with The New Home Company, a California-based homebuilder, and we oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Craig Mary: craig with richmond american homes, most of northern and southern california, and we oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Ash: Paul Ash, CVC Holdings, we oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joe Klinger: joe norm klinger representing kb home in california, we are opposed to the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Aiden Barry: aiden joe barry, the true life companies, we oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeremy Suthers: jeremy aiden suthers, jeffrey demure associates, architects and planners, we oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ernesto Gualtierra: Ernesto Gualtierra with Land and Habitat, and we oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chelsea Richardson: chelsea jeremy richardson, jeffrey demure associates, architects, planners, we oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeffrey DeMure: Jeff DeMure, Jeffrey DeMure Associates Architects Planners, we oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rick Wiley: Rick Wiley, Villara Building Systems, we oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeff Starsky: Good afternoon. Jeff Starsky, I am the former mayor of the City of Folsom and owner of SVP Investments, LLC and I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Daniel Masterson: Daniel Masterson with Toll Brothers. We oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bruce Wick: wick, california professional association of specialty contractors, opposed to the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Teddy Neumayer: teddy with toll brothers, who oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Donald Arons: Donald Arons with Taylor Morrison Homes, we oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matt Towery: matt chelsea towery with towery homes in bakersfield and also representing the home building association of kern, county, we oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Richard Hylton: hylton, cbia, i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dan Towery: dan. towery air conditioning, subcontractor in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeremy Guilard: jeremy matt guilard, homes by town standing in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brendan Hayes: Brendan Hayes, Fairfield Residential we oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Banco: Bill Banco BIA San Diego, strongly oppose this housing bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Fahey: fahey. dhs flooring. oppose the bill.
[]
Mark Harris: Mark Harris with Performance Dry Wall of San Diego. Strongly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Norwood: john with brookfield residential and the executive committee of cbia, strongly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeff O'Connor: o'connor home state corporation, we oppose this bill.
[]
Mike Vonquilick: mike jeremy vonquilick vice president of operations for watt communities, northern california. 70 year old company out of santa monica, we oppose the bill strongly.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Josh Santos: josh mike santos, richmond american homes, northern california, i oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Cutting: cutting from woodside homes of northern, central, and southern california, and we oppose the bill.
[]
Dave Sampson: dave josh sampson, chairman, denova homes, northern and southern california, we also oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Steve Jones: steve, william lyon homes, northern california, i oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bob Lockteff: i'm bob dave lockteff with the california geotechnical engineering association, and we oppose this bill.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mario Orzua: mario bob orzua, the olsen company southern california, in opposition of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matt Mikey: Matt Mikey, partner of Black Hawk, oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Scott Roylance: Scott Roylance, William Lyon Homes Northern California, oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bryan Bergeron: bergeron, william lyon homes southern california, oppose the bill.
[]
Jennifer Speck: Mr Chair and members, Jennifer Speck on behalf of California Association of Renters. We're actually in a tweener position on the bill at this stage of the game. Housing supply is extraordinarily important to our members in the housing market. We are working with the author and the sponsor on amendments, to assure that home renovations or privately financed residential construction projects, are not burdened by new rules.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeff Jones: Jeff Jones, West Park Communities, oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Sidakis: Chris Sidakis, the Gateway Company, oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marti Fisher: Marti Fisher, California Chamber of Commerce in opposition, and also we have identified this as a job killer.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert Hooker: Robert Hooker with Warmington Residential of California, we oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Peter Lezak: Peter Lezak, Director of forward planning, Northern California KB Home. Opposed to the bill. It turns a crisis to a catastrophe.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joelle Lamb: Joelle Lamb, Shea Homes, I oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicole Rice: nicole mario rice, california manufacturers and technology association also opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eric Villareal: Eric Villareal, Atlantic Concrete, I oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeter Shapiro: Jeter Shapiro, Shay Homes, oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Bass: David Bass, Shay Homes Northern California, I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Josh Marsden: Josh Marsden, Civil Engineer McKay Homes and as a prospective home buyer next year, I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Allison Jones: Allison Jones, McKay Civil Engineers and I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jimmy Morris: Jimmy Morris, McCore Rubber Communities, I oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Reggie Decker: reggie nicole decker, richmond american homes, northern california, i oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicole Hunt: nicole reggie hunt, richmond american homes, i strongly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jerry Marcus: jerry nicole marcus, richmond american homes, i oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sean Dolan: dolan, home care director for richmond american homes, and i oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Fred Sears: Fred Sears, Richmond American Homes, strongly oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Evan Modise: evan american homes, i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anna Ford: anna, richmond american homes, i strongly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carolyn Tornay: Carolyn Tornay, Richmond American Homes, I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Burgundy Sullivan: Burgundy Sullivan, Richmond American Homes, I strongly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Allie Sweeney: Allie Sweeney, Toll Brothers, I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Siegel: Kyle Siegel, Richmond American Homes, I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bob Bort: bort, toll brothers, strongly oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Angela Pounders: Angela Pounders, Toll Brothers, I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrew Gunstein: andrew, toll brothers, i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joel Macmillan: Joel Macmillan, Toll Brothers, I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Allison Lipman: allison jerry lipman, toll brothers, i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Justin Sherp: sherp, toll brothers, in opposition.
[]
Sandra Valderon: valderon with toll brothers, i strongly oppose this bill.
[]
Cynthia Teeva: cynthia allison teeva, toll brothers, i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jesse Vasco: Jesse Vasco, Toll Brothers, I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Darren Anderson: Darren Anderson, project manager in the building industry. This'll put me out of my job. I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lindsay Anderson: Lindsay Anderson, I'm a millennial and I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amanda Frazier: Amanda Frazier, also a millennial, and I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tiffany Harper: Tiffany Harper, Sac Metro, future homebuyer, oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tom Winn: Tom Winn owner, Winn Communities, I oppose this job killing bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 16, 'end': 20, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 60, 'end': 64, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
DJ Miller: DJ Miller, Toll Brother's Homes, oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Bellis: jason cynthia bellis winn communities, i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
George Carpenter: george i work for a small builder, and i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tyler Johnson: Tyler Johnson Toll Brothers, I also oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vanessa Humphrey: Vanessa Humphrey with Murray, Smith and Associates. I'm a civil engineer and I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Ryan: kyle jason ryan with toll brothers. i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nick Whittemore: nick. sac metro homes and i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Winn: David Winn, graduate student at UC Davis and future home buyer and I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bob Shaduk: Bob Shaduk, Shaduk Planning and Management, I oppose this bill on the grounds that it will-
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Espersega: Michael Espersega, Toll Brothers, I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeff Grand: Jeff Grand, self employed home builder, I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Lundgren: john, capital fireside. i strongly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Reed: Jason Reed, Frazier Design Groups, civil engineer. I strongly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael McCleary: Michael McCleary, USA Properties, builders of affordable housing. We oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Bond: Melissa Bond, up and coming civil engineer. I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Hopper: michael, sunright company, strongly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Wiese: Mark Wiese, Pacific Housing of Sacramento based non-profit affordable housing builder, I strongly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Benny Masitos: Benny Masitos with Erickson Framing. We strongly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicholas Winn: Nicholas Winn with Winn Saw Brownworks a small family business. We oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stephanie Kane: kane richmond american homes and i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Heather Shay: heather kyle shay, richmond american homes, i strongly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dan Fox: fox, two live companies, we oppose this bill.
[]
Rob Smith: Rob Smith with the North State Building Industry Association, representing over 500 member companies. Opposing this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Nicodemus: Mark Nicodemus, DC Plumbing Company, oppose.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Pitman: Mark Pitman, Placer Title Company, strongly oppose.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ron Lapp: ron, creative design interiors, strongly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Fuentes: amy heather fuentes with the western manufactured housing association, opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rachel Vardez: Rachel Vardez, Vardez Homes, local private builder, strongly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Ackerman: karen amy ackerman, tim lewis homes, strongly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jody Tharp: jody karen tharp, tim lewis communities, i strongly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Winn: mike jody winn, wiinn communities here in sacramento. strongly oppose.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Stanic: john mike stanic integral communities, statewide developer. strongly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tim Lewis: tim john lewis, tim john lewis communities here in sacramento. strongly oppose.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 16, 'end': 30, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mike Mahoney: Mike Mahoney, Con-Am Group and San Diego BIA strongly opposed to this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eddie Ko: eddie with morten and patalo civil engineers, strongly opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 11, 'end': 17, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 22, 'end': 28, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Robert Opadaka: Robert Opadaka, Green Lining Institute, opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Austin: chris tim austin with development planning and financing group, strongly oppose.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Guadalupe Cervantes: cervantes, uc berkeley student, strongly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bruce Quan: quan, korean churches for community development, strongly oppose.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rich Balestreri: Rich Balestreri, Tim Lewis Communities, North State BIA director, strongly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Angie Lopez: angie chris lopez, community housing opportunities corporation, we strongly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sylvia Codo: Sylvia Codo, El Concilio of San Mateo County, oppose.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Aaron Ross: Aaron Ross Swayne with Richland Communities, strongly oppose.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Chris Hawk: chris angie hawk, mayorcore development, strongly opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Trevor Smith: trevor chris smith with richland communities and the bia of the central valley, strongly opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Don Jordan: jordan, jordan construction, strongly opposed.
[]
Daniel Montenegro: Daniel Montenegro, Montenegro Construction, strongly opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Antonio Wolko: antonio, future home buyer, strongly opposed.
[]
Jim Boyd: Jim Boyd, Toll Brothers, strongly opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
James Sotero: James Sotero, Development and Financial Advisory, strongly oppose.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pat McFettridge: pat trevor mcfettridge, tim lewis communities, strongly opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jim Burns: Jim Burns, Toll Brothers, opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roy Hill: Roy Hill Capitol CD Northern California, I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Esther Moscoitz: Esther Moscoitz Vice President of Listing Incorporated, we are fabricator and installer for the big builders. You will put us small businesses out of business. We strongly oppose.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Catisol: john pat catisol. land owner developer maverick partners. strongly opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jim Raidler: Jim Raidler. Land Advisors. Opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Adam Puffinbarker: Adam Puffinbarker. Bright and Felton. Opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nick Gibson: nick. bright and felton. opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 6, 'end': 12, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 17, 'end': 23, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tim Sloane: sloane. harris and sloan structural and mechanical engineers. opposed.
[]
Rj Rather: rj with land divisors, oppose.
[]
Lauren Marcie: marcie with heritage homes and chair of the trade builder alliance council with the building industry association, strongly oppose.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Charles McCaige: charles john mccaige meritage homes. strongly opposed.
[]
Chris Belliberg: chris co west wall systems. strongly opposed.
[]
Collin Brown: collin. timber works construction. strongly opposed.
[]
Chris Stump: Chris Stump. Shay Homes. Strongly opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Adam Withers: Adam Withers. Nor Cal Lumber Company. Strongly opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrew Sellers: Andrew Sellers. Capital City Drywall. Opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Curt Hermann: curt charles hermann, master building solutions, oppose.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shannon Green: board of supervisors, in opposition. thank you. shannon curt green with energy inspectors, we strongly oppose. thank you.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 66, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Drew Kusnick: drew, integral communities, strongly opposed. thank you.>>
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Fryer: Kevin Fryer, Integral Communities, strongly opposed. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Daniel Reya: thank you. reya, whole brothers, strongly opposed. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Revrin: Paul Revrin, server at Our Homes, Local Brethren, strongly opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Farmin: Thank you. John Farmin, West Park Communities, opposed.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark County: Thank you. Mark County, GMC Home, strongly opposed.
[]
Kat DeBurgh: Kat Deburgh with the Health Officers Association of California in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gayle Batiste: Thank you. Mr. Chairman and Committee, I'd like to thank you for allowing us to come here and speak today on this issue. My name is Gayle Batiste. I'm the President of SIEU 121 RN, and I represent nurses from Ventura County all the way down to Indio and other parts of Southern California also. I'm also an operating room nurse at North Ridge Hospital Medical Center and I became a nurse 34 years ago because I wanted to help people. Well, with the State of affairs as it is now, it's kind of hard to do that when we're being put out of ratio and we're asked to take on unsafe patient assignments. Current law, gives RNs protection if they file complaints with CDPH about unsafe and unlawful assignments. However, the law does not provide them from retaliation from the employer if they refuse those unsafe assignments that put patients at risk. In fact, since 2014, CDPH has received staffing complaints at 31% of all acute care hospitals in the state. That's a big one, that's a large amount. Nurses file complaints after complaint with the state to no avail. Knowing this, hospitals continue to violate the law and give unsafe assignments to RNs. That is why SEIU is sponsoring AB 1102 because as nurses, we need to know that fulfilling our legal and moral obligation to advocate on behalf of our patients will not cause us to be retaliated against by our employers. AB 1102 would extend existing healthcare worker whistle blower protection to nurses who are directed by their employers to take unsafe patient assignments that violate Title 22, California's code of regulations. In doing so, nurses will be empowered to stand up for the patients they already have in their care and won't be forced to choose between breaking the law, or putting patient's safety at risk. As President of my nurse's union, I come across members who have experienced retaliation. I'll tell you about a nurse that this happened to. An example is an RN at Monterrey Park Hospital was suspended for refusing an unsafe patient assignment. He's telemetry RN and was told he was going to floated to the Intensive Care Unit, that's a higher level of care. He refused because he knew he did not have the training or competency needed to properly care for patients in the ICU unit. He was concerned about providing sub-standard or dangerous care to those patients, but he also knew that his employer was asking him knowingly to break the law.  He asked if they could assign another nurse that was properly oriented and competent to provide care for the ICU patient. In response, the hospital suspended him for what they deemed insubordination. When nurses are not competent to care for certain types of patients or when they have more patients that allowed under the law, patients die, and a nurse is left with his or her conscience and legal liability. This is why we need AB 1102. AB 1102 would protect nurses from these types of retaliation, and it closely resembles a bill introduced last year at the federal level by CNA's national arm, the National Nurses United, which also provides that a nurse who refuses an assignment on the basis that it violates the nurse's staffing ratios will be granted whistle blower protection. AB 1102 would apply this thinking to strengthen our state's enforcement of our existing staffing ratios and bolster our nurse's ability to serve as patient advocates without having to choose between providing safe patient care or protecting their license. On behalf of the nurses in California, I respectfully urge you to pass AB 1102 for the protection of all patients we see at our hospital. Thank you.
[{'start': 132, 'end': 145, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1162, 'end': 1166, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Emily Marquardt: Hi, my name is Emily Marquardt. I'm a registered nurse at Kinder Hospital South Bay in Southern California. As a third generation registered nurse, compassion, healing, and advocacy is an innate part of who I am. And I am so proud to do the work that I do for not only my patients, but for my community. I'm here today to ask for your support of AB 1102, which would protect nurses who are patient advocates from retaliation. We need AB 1102. Without it, hospitals will continue to put the patient safety at risk. At our hospital, nurses are given double the legal allowed patient load in order to cover for other nurses on their meals and their breaks. This is a dangerous practice because it's impossible for a nurse to provide proper care for patients when we have to care for more than double the safe patient ratio allowed by Title 22. Nurses have formally raised concerns and objections about the unsafe assignments, but most times, we reluctantly accept them for fear of being disciplined or terminated. Unfortunately, as a result of these unsafe assignments, a tragedy recently had occurred at my hospital. While one of the nurses was on break and another nurse was breaking her with nine patients, not the legal three, or four, my apologies. One of the patients ended up choking and was found too late, and despite all heroic measures, this patient died. Now, that nurse has to live with knowing that they were unable to watch and care for those patients for the rest of her days. And what patient deserves to just, to go without this level of nursing care and be put at risk? Though how can you choose the patients to prioritize? Examples like this one break my heart. And with AB 1102, we may prevent further tragedies by allowing nurses to speak up for their patients and refusing unsafe and unlawful assignments without the fear of being called insubordinate and being disciplined or fired. We respectfully urge you to pass AB 1102 and I thank you very much for your consideration.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Benjamin Vise: hi, benjamin from providence st. joseph medical center in burbank california, and i support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sandra Beltran: i'm sandra jonah beltran from olivia medical center in the san fernando valley, and i support ab 1102.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeanie Monteal: monteal, nurse at northridge hospital. i support the ab 1102.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susan Sanford: Susan Sanford, registered nurse at Pomona Valley hospital Medical Center in Pomona and I support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cheryl Jimenez: Cheryl Jimenez from Riverside Community Hospital and I support AB 1102.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katherine Hughes: hi i'm katherine sandra hughes, rn and the newly elected executive director of seiu nursing alliance of california, we represent the 35 thousand seiu registered nurses in california and we're in full support and ask for your aye vote. thank you.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katherine Austin-scott: sorry, i thought we might have created that category last year. katherine within the california hospital association. when we look at this bill, we struggle with the complexity of our patient classification systems, our staffing systems, and our competency determination systems that are all required and developed with charge nurses using title 22. we are opposed unless amended and have offered amendments that would recognize that there are situations when the charge nurse has determined that using the patient classification system the acuity patient puts that patient in a particular nurse staffing ratio. four to one, three to one, two to one, one to one, and the nurse may disagree, but we've made that determination, the charge nurse has made that determination using title 22, which was developed by the hospital. we need a place for that conversation to happen, in a way that respects and balances the nurse is right to say, i disagree but, the hospitals need and requirement in a dynamic healthcare environment to place that nurse having determined that they have used the title 22 requirements to make that patient classification, that staffing ratio requirement. so we've offered some amendments that would give us the opportunity to have that dialog and so, until those amendments are accepted, we are opposing unless amended.
[{'start': 64, 'end': 73, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stephanie Robertson: thank you mr. chair. robertson on behalf of the california nurses association, representing 100,000 registered nurses in the state of california who are opposed to this bill. while we completely agree with the problem that exist in today's hospitals, there are bad actors who avoid the ratio law. so this description is accurate. our nurses are squeezed everyday balancing all of the time the inherent right to take care of our patients, and at the same time holding the hospitals accountable to uphold the law. right now our nurses already do what the bill purports to do. a nurse can and must refuse a patient care assignment and 1278.5 of the health and safety code, and in title 22 and title 16. there are further protections in the labor code section 6311 for all workers that provides protections for workers who perform work that endangers themselves or others.  so there are both protections on the patient and employee side. we also have a process where we have ados, those are assignment despite objections, where management is notified and the rn documents an unsafe condition. the hospital is on notice at that point and that ups the ante that the unsafe condition will be remedied. and that's an added layer that unions use. in cna we have professional practice committees that evaluate these situations. our organization has had major success using this tool, and we're hearing that that's not, it's an unfortunate tool for others, but we are seeing major results when we push back in the facilities. cdph administratively adds ratios to the list of items that can be inspected during hospitals annual inspections. that was just added last year. additionally, cdph can levy administrative penalties for licensing violation and that's included in the ratios. is it a slam dunk? no. but are there things we can do that we can look at that puts the onus back on the hospitals, and that's where it should be placed, not on the backs of our nurses. so we are trying to understand what protections are inherent in this bill. are they suggesting nurses walk off the job? we are patient advocates and we cannot walk away from our patients. that is both under current law and it's or ethical obligation. federal law requires a 10 day strike notice specifically for health care workers. why? because patients must be cared for. i want to address the federal bill. the sponsors of the bill aren't telling you the full picture, they're walking around section 3401, that specifically details the whistle blower section. that is one part of a total bill. we are moving forward with the federal bill, and that's on ratios and whistle blower protections. so we are not just doing a standalone bill on whistle blower protections it is encompassed in a total bill. we are the only state in the union that has ratios. in the state of the union, the only state that has whistle blower protections and ratios on the books. we know that ratios has brought back nursing to california and it is a huge deal. also, what about the ado process? what is it that they're saying that this bill does more? we still haven't gotten an answer to that question. so respectfully, we must oppose. we haven't been brought to the table on this critical issue and we want to continue to talk. we are in fact, told, that we weren't going to be brought in on this issue in the very beginning. so, with that, we respectfully oppose. thank you chair.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shirley Toy: my name is shirley and i've been a nurse for 35 years. i've worked for 25 years at uc davis here in sacramento. i am a patient advocate, i take very seriously the nurse patient ratio laws, and the enforcement of those laws. however it's very difficult to just walk away from a patient, or to refuse care. on my unit, we have i work on a step down unit between an icu and a regular floor, and we have a 3:1 ratio. there was a late sick call, and so it was going to put us out of ratio. it took about an hour and a half for them to move one patient off our unit, but i would never not take care of that patient during that time. it sounds very good on paper work, the bill. but in reality, i can't refuse care. it puts us in a hard mind. we never want to be over ratio. and i work very hard that we would not be over ratio. we do the ados, we do strong campaign, we make sure the hospital is held accountable. but for me to refuse care, i guess i've never refused care. and we need to hold the hospitals accountable, but this bill is rather drastic, and i don't think it's the right bill at this time.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Bosley: my name is karen katherine bosley, i'm an rn at mercy san juan and with the cna and i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kate Sheridan: kate karen sheridan, california nurses association and i oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shane Brenton: shane, california nurses association and i oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Barney: my name is michael kate barney with the california nurses association, i strongly urge you to oppose the bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gabriel Luwin: Gabriel Luwin with the California Nurses' Association and I oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ashley Flowers: I'm Ashley Flowers, Registered Nurse for the California Nurses Association and I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ginger Fossino: Hi, Ginger Fossino, California Nurses Association and I also oppose the bill.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sue Finly: Sue Finly, California Nurse's Association, National Nurses United, strenuously oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Cabrera: May I just, Michelle Cabrera with SEIU California. We're the sponsors of the bill and I would like to correct one thing. We certainly would love to have CNA's support and continue to have dialogue. We never indicated that there was not a place for CNA at the table. And in this conversation, we actually felt very inspired when we saw their federal legislation which we agree is a part of a larger bill that has to do with implementing staffing ratios at the federal level.  We were heartened to see that it was an approach that their federal folks had endorsed, and so, we would love to be able to move something similar at the state level.
[{'start': 12, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Diana Coronado: Thank you. Good afternoon, Chair and members. I'm Diana Coronado with the Association of California Cities, and we are strong support of AB 1095. This bill will act to further protect those who are seeking to live in a sober living environment. And currently, many owners and operators of sober living facilities are procuring multiple homes either on the same parcel of land or on very near to each other on separate parcels of land. This ultimately has led to an oversaturation of sober living facilities within residential neighborhoods. Because cities and local governments are unable to provide oversight related to these sober living facilities, unintended consequences have led to a fostering of an institutional atmosphere due to the proliferation of these sober living facilities. This model has failed the communities, but also has failed the patients. We believe that this legislation considers the well-being of those seeking treatment and allows the cities the ability to ensure proper development of sober living facilities. For this and the reasons previously stated, we are in strong support of this bill.
[{'start': 50, 'end': 64, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Ryan: Good afternoon, Mr Chair and members. Jason Ryan, League of California Cities. Forgive me for my cold, I sound a little froggy. We are in support of this measure for some of the reasons that have already been stated. I think it is really important to note, though, that this bill is narrowly targeted. And it's really only going to impact those individuals who own, one individual or company that owns multiple facilities that are clearly trying to exploit existing law. It's not intended to chill or otherwise diminish these sober living facilities that operate lawfully in our jurisdiction, and our organization supports these entities as long as they abide by federal and state laws. However, we are limited in our ability to regulate those facilities. We believe this bill really just closes a loophole and returns the power back to the state, really. And those residents that are looking for a living situation much like neighborhoods, so they can integrate into the community and choose the patient over the profit motives that we've seen in some of the residential facilities in our communities, and for that, we support the bill.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicole Wittleman: wittleman, on behalf of the orange county board of supervisors, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kurt Child: Thank you, Mr. Chair, members, Kurt Child, Disability Rights California. Unfortunately we see this as another bill that really strikes at important treatment, housing, and civil rights goals of providing integrated community services and residential options for the persons with disabilities. And this bill seems, as many of these bills are, directed toward disrupting the characters of the neighborhood. But always underlying these bills, what we find is, there is a real nimby attitude that is behind them. We've seen these bills repeatedly come forward, often stated in a new way or disclosing a loophole. But always the goal is, I think to support community opposition that builds up around these facilities. Importantly from the perspective of Disability Rights California, this would be a real erosion of the six and under rule. And narrows the opportunities for persons with disabilities to live in community settings. So, and our perspective is a much broader issue. And finally, I think, as your analysis properly notes, that to the extent that this bill does and we believe that it does. Limit the existence of current facilities, and limit the creation of new facilities. For that reason, it violates the federal fair housing laws. So we urge your no vote on this bill.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert Harris: mr. chair, harris with the california society of addiction medicine, the addiction medicine, physician specialists who treat people and we oppose the bill. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sherry McCue: Good afternoon, Sherry McCue, representing Cliffside Malibu, in opposition to the bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Steve Carlson: Mr. Chair and members, Steve Carlson for Promises Treatment Centers, in opposition.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tam Ma: good afternoon, mr. chair members. i'm tam michael ma with health access california, and we're the state health care consumer advocacy coalition. health access sponsored much of the underlying legislation that established the attorney general's authority to review these transactions that involve nonprofit hospitals and nursing homes and we have been actively engaged in representing the consumer interest in the attorney general's review of these transactions. we are here to support mr. muratsuchi's bill today because we think it improves the ability of limited english speaking people to be able to participate in this existing review process of the attorney general holds, make sure that their voices are heard through this process. especially when a hospital or nursing home is sold, residents of a nursing facility or patients of a hospital, and the communities around the area have a lot of interest in making sure that either services are preserved for the community. and we're very pleased to support this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 490, 'end': 500, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jen Flory: good afternoon mr. chair and members. flory with western center on law and poverty in support of the bill.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Louie Brown: Mr. Chair and members, Louie Brown on behalf of the California Consortium of Addiction Programs and Professionals in support of the bill.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert Harris: mr. chair and members. robert tam harris on behalf of california society of addiction medicine. this bill aligns perfectly with the grand application department of healthcare services just sent in. and so we support it.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bob Jarreau: Chairman Wood and members, Bob Jarreau on behalf of the National Union of Healthcare Workers. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to thank you and your staff for your commitment to this issue. We would, of course, I know Mr. Maulhardt talked about having a clinic opened up in another part of the state. But we'd love to see all those people that are driving from Humboldt County down to Santa Rosa everyday to be treated, have a clinic up towards that way, too. We support the bill and we thank you for the opportunity.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 13, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 27, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 212, 'end': 221, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sharon Rapport: Good morning, Sharon Rapport with the Corporation for Supportive Housing. Data show homeless people, particularly chronically homeless people, are extremely expensive to MediCal. Generally, comprising over half of a hospital's frequent user population, people experiencing chronic homelessness incur between $30,000 and $75,000 per year in publicly funded healthcare cost. These individuals have poor health outcomes dying on average 30 years younger than their housed counterparts. Data also shows supportive housing affordable place to live with services promoting housing stability, works and homelessness among chronically homeless people, while also saving publicly funded healthcare dollars. We are excited that Medi-Cal is rolling out new programs, like the whole person care pilot and the health home program, to fund services that help get chronically homeless people connected to supportive housing, and help keep them sustainably housed. However, based on data, we also know that services alone no matter how good those services are or how intensive they are, do not allow someone experiencing chronic homelessness to get healthier or to stop using acute care services. To achieve any cost savings to our health care system, homeless people must get connected to housing first. AB 74 would create the Housing for a Healthy California Program. And I think Assembly Member Chiu talked about the essentials of that program. Counties would have to tie these rental subsidies funded under the program to services funding that will now become available under MediCal. The bill requires a rigorous evaluation, which HCD will spearhead in collaboration with the Department of Healthcare Services. While we know what Medicaid cost savings are in other states from moving people from homelessness to housing stability, we do not have good data here in California about MediCal savings. The evaluation findings would also help the Legislature decide whether to continue the program after five years. So we greatly appreciate the Assemblymember Chiu's leadership on this issue, and we urge your aye vote. And with me today are Dorothy Edwards and Emily Martinique. And they're going to talk a little bit about their experience with supportive housing.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1382, 'end': 1386, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2126, 'end': 2141, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2146, 'end': 2162, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Emily Martinique: hello, my name is emily, and on june 3, 2011 i officially became homeless. prior to that, i was diagnosed as being bipolar, but i self-medicated to alleviate the pain. it caught up with me. i found myself standing over a freeway thinking, this would be so easy. but i had a new determination, and i walked home to get help. three days later, i was homeless. i found myself at olive view hospital on a six week hold at a county mental hospital. if i had met the criteria as chronically homeless, i would have been placed much sooner, and i was placed at la family housing. a homeless center, where i lived for nine months. we had services there, such as keeping doctor's appointments, taking good tenancy classes and picking up your medicines. the process for section 8 was accelerated during that time. on march the 15th, 2012, i moved into a brand new studio apartment, fully furnished in sun valley, california, where i still live. and thanks to supportive housing, just a year ago, i had a financial setback. without supportive housing, the staff at my apartment complex, i may have found myself in an institution again or back on the streets. seniors have different needs. they need to keep their independence, their health, their self-esteem, and their independence, after working hard all their lives. today, 10,000 people will become seniors and for many years to come. without supportive housing, i'd probably be dead. i still suffer from my emotional disease and some physical problems but mainly, mostly emotional. and every day, i have support that i can go down and talk to to help me through my crisis, if i'm happy. my doctor, my social worker, come to my apartment complex for monthly and biweekly appointments.  we have services such as drug and alcohol programs. we have healing arts. we have cooking. gardening.  it's not just an apartment complex. it's a community for people who are having difficulties coping with life as it is today, for whatever reason that is. i feel fortunate i'm one of the very few homeless that can actually advocate and help other homeless. and it's my pleasure to do this, because in my wildest dreams, as i worked from the age of 11 to 50 years old, never did i think i would be homeless. i had a union, i've had my own businesses, i've had children, insurance, i've lived without insurance, but never did i think i would be homeless, and never did i think i would be spending my 59th birthday in a psychiatric hospital. and i'm only so fortunate that i have found the corporation for housing services, and i'm able to volunteer, and be an advocate for the homeless. and thank you so much for hearing my story. and please support the policies for homeless seniors, and homeless people. because the senior epidemic is an epidemic within the epidemic. seniors are not getting younger. we just can't go out there, and ta da, and i'm back in the workforce. because the employer looks at you like why are you even applying for the job? i tried. they look at you like, we don't want you, you're too old. and it's very demoralizing. thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Lane: Michael Lane with the Non-Profit Housing Association of Northern California, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anya Lawler: anya on behalf of western center on law and poverty in support.
[]
Megan Rose: megan jonah rose, leading age california, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christina Serrato: Christina Serrato with Episcopal Communities and Services in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Priscilla Hanes: Priscilla Hanes, Santa Clara Methodist Retirement Foundation, strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Angelique DaSilva: angelique, telecu residential management, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jamie Wingassen: Jamie Wingassen, still from Corinthian House Residence in San Jose, California, strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Janet Howley: Janet Howley, Northern California Presbyterian Homes and Services, strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Uri Eskanon: good morning, uri, with the east lake community union in strong support. also a united states marine corps veteran, having seen firsthand what has been spoken to in regards here, in very strong support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Stomp: Mary Stomp, PEP Housing, Petaluma, strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joseph Barry: barry. as politicians i know ethics is a big thing. even if you're a subscriber of utilitarianism, i think that you can't deny that fact that housing is the right thing to do. i'm here on behalf, again, of dogfite, disability organizing group for initiating total equality, cara, california alliance for retired americans, and the californians for disability rights in strong support of the bill. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joe Boniwell: And Joe Boniwell from Housing California in support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maria Chavez: good morning, ladies and gentlemen, my name is maria, maria megan chavez, i am the property manager at mutual housing at river garden. it is the largest property of the mutual housing, california portfolio, of affordable home. that is home to nearly 4,000 people in sacramento, davis, and woodland. i am here to tell you how living in an affordable housing like dixieanne mutual housing changed my life with my family's life, this is my story. my husband and i are from mexico, we moved here to california 35 years ago. in the beginning my husband worked many different types of jobs, i worked briefly for two electronic companies. in 1992 my husband and my daughter had a very bad accident, he couldn't work for a long time. while he was rehabilitating, at this time i was a at home mom and we ended up on welfare. in 1993, we moved in a mutual housing at dixieanne, it was affordable housing, one of the first mutual housing california properties. we moved because it was affordable, and it was a bigger unit, and it was very accommodating for my family. while living at dixieanne mutual housing, i participated in committees, resident events. it helped me become more confident of myself. after a couple years of living at the property, i applied for the assistant manager position. by working in the office i get an office and customer service skills, eventually i become the property manager at dixieanne avenue, mutual housing. living at mutual housing was a stable, safe, and a strong community for my family. my children love living at mutual housing at dixieanne, so much that when they did not want to leave when we bought our own house. i have five children, i am proud of all of them, i have four grandchildren, and two more on the way. i had met one of my best friends while i was living at dixieanne mutual housing, she and her family also benefit living at dixieanne. she got her university education by her house and now is working at the state of california. mutual housing california has been instrumental in my personal and professional growth. i have worked with different management companies for mutual housing california for 20 years and it has been a great and pleasant experience. during this time i have seen many, many families have the opportunity of purchase their own homes. by living in affordable housing, they were able to save money and achieve the american dream of owning a home. i truly appreciate being part of mutual housing california and the opportunity to give us for being in affordable housing. i do thank them very much, i also would like to ask the panel if you will support ab 71, thank you.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 52, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 54, 'end': 72, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cesar Diaz: thank you, mr. chair, members, cesar maria diaz on behalf of the state building and construction trades council. i want to thank the assembly member and the chair for introducing this legislation. i can't help but interject with personal testimony as well as i hear mrs. chavez's remarks. reminds me very much of my own mother who is actually living in section eight in san fransisco, the assembly member's district. this crisis impacts all working families across the economic spectrum. we're seeing many, many regions where minimum wage just can't. it's basically impossible, to rent a one-bedroom apartment, let alone a two-bedroom apartment for a family. we're talking about income and equality and the low wage crisis, is further intensified when you have economic recessions. we had a mortgage crisis, that made it very difficult for working families, particularly those in the construction industry. left us in economic distress. both jobless and actually without a home. so now that redevelopment has gone away, there are many, many subsidy programs, but there's just not enough to actually fill the void of financing for a focus on building more affordable housing units, which is i think what every single piece of legislation should be focusing on here. we thank the assembly member because this does focus on the true need in terms of the construction industry the sector of housing that needs to be built up. so for those reasons we urge your support and are thankful for being here.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 271, 'end': 277, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Marina Wiant: Thank you, Marina Wiant with the California Housing Consortium, we're proud to be co-sponsors of this important measure. I wanted to thank the Assembly Member for his leadership on this issue. His commitment to innovative solutions to help solve the crisis backwards housing policy that has gotten us in to this mess. And measures like AB71 will help reverse that and make a big step toward solving the problem. We urge your support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debra Carlton: I thank you. Debra Carlton with the California Apartment Association here in support. The bill, to make clear, does not affect second homes that are rented. So with that, the California Apartment Association urges your aye vote.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Lane: lane with the non-profit housing association of northern california, in strong support.
[]
Anya Lawler: Anya Lawler on behalf of Western Center on Law and Poverty in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sharon Rapport: Sharon Rapport with the corporation for supportive housing in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dorothy Edwards: Dorothy Edwards, Speak Up advocate Corporation for Supportive Housing.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Monica Zemi: Monica Zemi with the California Alternative Payment Program Association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Emily Marby: Emily Marby, Speak Up program, Corporation for Supportive Housing.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Megan Rose: Megan Rose with Leading Age California in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stuart Hartman: Stuart Hartman, Retirement Housing Foundation, also in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christina Serrato: christina cesar serrato with episcopal communities and services in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Janet Howley: Janet Howley from Northern California Presbyterian Homes and Services, strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ginger Roberts: ginger christina roberts, speaking communities, strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Priscilla Hanes: Priscilla Hanes, Santa Clara Methodist Retirement Foundation, strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Stomp: Mary Stomp, PEP Housing, strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Angelique DaSilva: angelique ginger dasilva from teleco residential management in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Samantha Corbin: samantha angelique corbin on behalf of the california tax reform association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julia Redia: julia samantha redia from burbank housing in santa rosa, california for support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susie Crisamania: Susie Crisamania with Eden Housing in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kurt Hamilton: good morning. my name is kurt julia hamilton. i'm a resident at glen ellen mutual housing in south sacramento. i support this.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Aurora Canteleria: i'm aurora kurt canteleria, and i support this from mercy housing. and i hope that we can get some housing for all these people that are homeless. i really wish there would. thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shavela Vijay: I'm Shavela Vijay, and I support this strongly, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andre Johnson: my name is andre aurora johnson. i live in the noho senior villa in north hollywood, california. nature was not a part of my homelessness. from the age of 14 to 53, i was homeless, and now because of affordable housing, i'm able to hear the birds sing. and i want that for everybody. that's the best feeling in the world. so i support ab 71.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lijean Russell: Good morning all, my name is Lijean Russell. I live in an affordable home in the City of San Diego. I am able to raise my kids with life necessities, such as hot meals, safe place with our own privacy, and accessible bathrooms for hygiene. If there was no affordable housing, I believe I would be homeless with my kids. And someday soon, I would like to become a homeowner. Thank you, again, my name is Lijean Russell from San Diego in affordable housing.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 403, 'end': 417, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Parenz Shamumba: Thank you. Hey, my name is Parenz Shamumba, and I live in San Diego in affordable housing. And I'm here to support because in my community, the housing crisis every single day. And without the affordable housing, I wouldn't be able to be even here. Thank you, I'm here to support.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Monica Cruz: hola, mi nombre es monica andre cruz y yo quiero apoyar a la ab 71 porque es muy importante. vengo de california. hay amigos, de san diego, california, hay companeros que viven en casas afordables y necesitamos mas. es una necesidad muy grande en san diego.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 55, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mary Rodriguez: okay, and what she shared is that she's from san diego. myself, i'm ms. mary monica rodriguez, and i'm also from san diego. and many of her friends live in affordable housing, and she's for support for ab 71. and i'm also from san diego. i'm a community organizer, and i'm from residents united network. and i've definitely seen the life of many of my single parent friends benefit from affordable housing and also a lot of our refugees in our community in city heights. thank you.
[{'start': 72, 'end': 93, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Godliv Shamumba: hi, my name is godliv mary shamumba, i live in an affordable home in the city of san diego, california. affordable housing has changed my life because i came as a refugee from congo. i didn't have a way to pay my rent, but with affordable housing, i was able. thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ricki Brown: My name is Ricki Brown, and I live in San Diego. I'm affordable housing manager. And my residents are able to live in a safe, clean, affordable housing, but I also have to turn away a lot of people. My wait list is six years long.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rafael Monroy: good morning, my name is rafael godliv monroy. i'm a marine corps veteran and also a single father. and i'm here in support of ab 71, thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Margot Velez: pardon me, i'm sorry, i'm so emotional. my name is velez. and allow me to have a stable and affordable place to stay with my children without the fear of being evicted because we were once completely homeless. so i thank god every day that i'm able to wake up in a place with my children.
[{'start': 51, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Suzette Valdez: my name is suzette rafael valdez, and this is my mom, maria hernandez. we live in affordable housing in the city of poway. affordable housing has changed our lives because we have somewhere to sleep.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 54, 'end': 69, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Anastasia Hernandez: good morning, my name is anastasia, and i'm community organizer with mutual housing california. and i'm in strong support of this bill on behalf of the residents we serve. thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Addie Davis: good morning. my name is addie suzette davis, and i also work with mutual housing california. and i am in strong support of this bill as i've witnessed residents gain stability and a safe place to live.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Augusta Pinook: Thank you. Good morning, my name is Augusta Pinook, and I'm intern of Mutual Housing. It's my second time before I volunteered in Mutual Housing. And I see how Mutual Housing changed life of people, and I very strong support.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Serena Felucho: good morning, my name is felucho, and i live in an affordable home in the city of poway. affordable housing works has changed my life because i made new friends, and i know that i'm in a safer environment.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Monique Felucho: Hi, my name is Monique Felucho, and I live in affordable housing in the City of Poway. And affordable housing has changed my life because now, my family and I can afford rent and we live in a stable environment.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rosalinda Martinez: Good morning, my name is Rosalinda Martinez, I live in Woodland. I'm a board member of Mutual Housing California. And this organization built zero-net energy affordable homes for farm workers of which I'm very proud. And I strongly support this bill, so we can continue doing this good work. Thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Mirabelli: Good morning. My name is Sarah Mirabelli on behalf of the San Diego Housing Federation. I support this bill.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Courtney Poole: good morning, my name is courtney addie poole. i'm a community organizer with mutual housing california in sacramento, and i strongly support this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anthony Rodriguez: good morning, my name is anthony courtney rodriguez. i live with mutual housing, and i strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mitch Mankin: good morning, my name is mankin. i grew up in san francisco, and the people i went to school with, the people i grew up with, can't afford to move back. i strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicole Montojo: good morning, my name is nicole anthony montojo from silicon valley at home. i work in affordable housing, and i strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Parker: Hi, my name is Michelle Parker, and I'm from EAH Housing, and I strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kristin Taylor: good morning, my name is kristin nicole taylor, i work with eah housing, and i also strongly support this bill that will help our most vulnerable families.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Angela Nugent: My name is Angela Nugent, I reside in Carlsbad, California and Vista, California. I have two homes, thanks to affordable housing. And I never would have thought I would support a bill that would have taxed a vacation rental property, or vacation home, since I did own one, and I owned a home. But in 2009, when we lost our home due to the economic crisis, and my husband, who had served as a military veteran of the Marine Corps, suffered some post-traumatic stress due to that economic crisis, we found ourselves in a completely different financial situation. And we went from affluence to a broken home. And this is my son, Todd, and my daughter, who I found myself trying to figure out how I was going to keep them in school, college, and keep our family together while my husband needed to take care of his needs after serving his country. I was able to find affordable housing through Community Housing Works, and then I was able to find a job managing affordable housing for seniors in the City of Carlsbad. I've seen this situation from the inside out. I've lived it, it's not easy to come up here. It's very humbling. But I think if the people that had these taxes levied on them knew how it affects these people, then they would support it as well. Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 626, 'end': 630, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tiffany Nugent: I'm Tiffany Nugent, and I'm with Angela. And I live in affordable housing in Vista. And being there has changed my life in the fact that it gives me a sense of community. And I feel like I can help support the younger generation in teaching them and trying to educate them in ways to not be in that situation and to help them find positive ways to move on. So this has helped me to fulfill that without feeling like I'm doing this all by myself, so thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 33, 'end': 39, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Todd Nugent: Hello, Todd Nugent, can you hear me? That's fine. Affordable housing gave me structure when our family didn't have structure and when I couldn't even think about school. And it allowed me to go back and refocus and now I'm pursuing my BA. And it's allowed my family to be in a more stable environment, where I can be happy and safe and know that everything's going to be ok. That's it.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Crystal Huynh-Kim: hi, my name is crystal kristin huynh-kim. i'm a community organizer at mutual housing california. and again, i strongly, strongly support this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anabelle Sanchez: hello, my name is anabelle, i'm with community housing works as a community organizer in san diego. our community has, we have a lot of people that are still on waiting lists. a lot of our waiting lists have been closed, and there are about from 5 to 10 years on our waiting list. so i support this bill.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joseph Barry: hello everyone, my name is barry, i represent several social justice organizations. california alliance for retired americans, disability organizing group for initiating total equality, and californians for disability rights. and we are all in strong support of the bill, thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christopher Carlisle: Christopher Carlisle with the California Association of Realtors, I'm feeling a little bit like David after that parade. Nonetheless that doesn't mean that our arguments against this bill are any less valid. First off I want to make clear, we completely support the purposes of the bill and what the money would be going for and we were supportive of the legislation last year. Our only quarrel is where the money is coming from for this. As your analysis notes, the amount of benefits is capped. So it doesn't matter if you have one $500,000 home and for $250,000 homes. You don't get any more of a benefit because you have a second home. The second issue, I would mention is we keep referring to these as vacation homes. I've gotta believe that there are a lot of folks that are living in Tracy, working in Fremont, they're doing that hour commute over the Altamont Two hours or more every day if they can get a small condo in Fremont where they are working they are going to do that. So these are not always vacation homes finally thing I would say is you kind of pulling the rug out from under folks if you take this away. People bought their homes with the understanding that they would have it and so you have these areas like recreational areas of the state like up in Tahoe [UNKNOWN] where a lot of homes were purchased with this in mind. You take this out from under that, when those buyers go to sell those homes and those buyers don't have the mortgage interest deduction, it's going to depress the price of the homes that they can be sold at. And that's not going to help the economy of those areas. For those three reasons, we ask that this bill be amended to withdraw the mortgage interest reduction on second homes and lacking that we ask for your no vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 96, 'end': 101, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brian Augusta: the speaker is in favor please. thank you brian on behalf of the california rural legal foundation and given mister canella's comment i'll keep it brief and of course the authors. just quickly the goal here is to ensure that we have an ongoing supply of land to meet the need and as we developed we make sure that there are remaining sites that will accommodate the remaining need. it's in a common sense approach to making the housing helmet law a living document that will continue to work. and we are working with folks, stakeholders throughout the process to find a common ground on this that we can all live with it to make for a working policy, thank you.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 116, 'end': 123, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tyrone Buckley: Tyrone Buckley with Housing California also in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sanso Diaz: Mister Chairman members, Sanso Diaz on behalf of State Building Construction Trades Council also in support.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erin Greuer: greuer on behalf of the california building industry association again not an official position but greatly appreciate the senators' work on this.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Lee: chris jonah lee with california state association of counties. we have the same concerns that were just expressed by the league, thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Lane: Sure, chair and members, Michael Lane with the Nonprofit Housing Association Northern California. Representing nine counties of the Bay Area and some of the largest and oldest nonprofit affordable housing developers in the state, and among the most productive in the United States. It's been a real pleasure to work with Senator Weiner and his staff on this. And these amendments are really what got us to the table and it allowed us to take a support position today. And to be able to file the support letter with you and our members. As you know many of us who work in this area for many years have said we need to make both the Rena and the housing element real with they need to have teeth in them. And they really need to mean something to the communities we go through that process. This bill really helps us to do that and it actually, but it also respects our values at the local level and our commitment to lower income people. I think these are excellent amendments. I think just a couple things I'd like to point out in addition as we go forward. We understand the admitment to include prevailing wages and an enforcement mechanism, but if we go any further beyond that in terms of labor requirement. We'd like to have an open and transparent process and be part of it just to make sure that we're able to negotiate something that works state wide in all of our jurisdictions across the state including the rural areas. And then on the demolition piece there are times when we have a deed restricted kind of a development, that may be an older building that's dilapidated, we want to go in and actually reconstruct it and we need to demolish it. But we want to make sure that we can provide, if we can provide our low income tenants with relocation assistance. And temporary relocation assistance that's paid and then a guaranteed right to return that building and once it's fully completed and rehabilitated and rebuilt. We think that's appropriate for some of this older housing stock. Which we certainly want to preserve and maintain affordable, and then go ahead and extend that deed restriction out for an additional 55 years. It's just to make sure that we maintain that asset in good condition, in good quality living conditions for the residents in that building. So we want to propose that going forward as an additional potential amendment, but we really appreciate the work that's been done on the bill and we know this a very contentious issue and our goal here is to serve as an honest broker for you going forward. We know that we were involved a lot in the discussions last year In the previous session. And it's a difficult area to work in, but that's why we're at the table now to try to bring the equity groups, along with developers and others, together to try to find a happy medium. And some type of a A grand bargain to be able to move this forward. Because we also need ongoing permanent sources of funding for affordable housing as well, so this is an additional piece. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 329, 'end': 335, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Chris Rosa: Good evening Chris Rosa on behalf of the Silicone Valley Leadership Group, we're in support of the bill. On an annual basis, SVLG surveys its member companies at the CEO level to find out what are the most important issues to keeping the Silicone Valley a vital place economically. And for the past 10 years, housing affordability and attainability has been selected as the top impediments to employee recruitment in the Silicon Valley. The cause for that housing crunch is clear, demand consistently outpaces supply. And the Silicon Valley Leadership Group is encouraged by Senator Wiener's SB 35's direct approach, to addressing planning shortfalls. For California to retain its role as the epicenter of the international innovation economy, we must ensure that our cities provide necessary housing. SB 35 thoughtfully identifies a new way to make certain that cities across the state, are investing appropriately in the housing development. We need to end our current crisis and retain our industries. This month, we released our Silicon Valley Competitiveness and Innovation Project. And this is a multi-year project where we drilled down and really put an effort to assess the region's economic health. So amongst its findings, we looked at the years 2010 to 2015, and we found that the economy added about 367,000 new jobs to the Silicon Valley. At the same time though, we only added about 57,000 new housing units. And that's a problem. SB 35 is sorely needed as housing is one of the state's chief inhibitors to ongoing prosperity, and we ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 583, 'end': 589, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Laura Clark: Hi, Laura Clark, MB Action. We're new to this. Young people have been devastated by this crisis. And so the renters mostly that I represent, the housing activists are coming out because we are in crisis. Most of the people who I represent, don't live in subsidized housing. They mostly live in market-rate housing. And the market-rate housing prices are luxury prices. They live four or five people in a room that was intended for one or two. People are living in their parents basement. Every time I send out my newsletter, I get a few back saying I am sorry I've been displaced, you're going to have to take me off the list. It is unreal, the level of crisis that we are in. And I think that probably you guys don't hear it from as many young people who are struggling, with this issue as live in your district. Millennials are ashamed of the fact that they have been stunted by this crisis. They have blamed themselves for a long time. And it's not our fault. This is a work 30 years in the making of chronically under-building housing. And my generation is demanding to have a seat at the table. There are amazing jobs in California. There is an amazing amount of opportunity here. People from across the country, from around the world, want to come and live and work here. California has done an amazing job of creating a great state that people want to live in. And now it's time to open the gates and let more people come home. Let Californians stay in place. We can build enough housing so that we stop the displacement crisis. SB 35 does a great job stepping in that direction. I don't know how many of you have sat through the hearings, that take place at 3 o'clock in the afternoon on a Thursday. There are not many working people who can engage when the hearings that are held about individual projects, are held at a time and place where they're inaccessible to working people. Our voice is not being heard. So when people say they are concerned that the community is going to have less impact on this, I think that that's not necessarily correct about who the community is. The community decides what the zoning rules are. We're asking people to follow those rules, when the largest group of people get to decide what the allowable zoning is going to be. I organize people to come out Thursday afternoons. And it's a lot of work. So I ask you to please make sure that these decisions, are made in a more equitable manner. Thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tiffany Phan: hi,tiffany chris phan on behalf of bridge housing, we know california has a high cost of housing and the state needs to produce housing at a rate faster than it has been. bridge housing has 1900 units under development. and the time it's taking to build is very excessive, and we urge your support in sb 35. thank you.
[{'start': 3, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Scott Feeney: hello, feeney, volunteer member of v&b action. so i'm going to start with a question, have you ever had somebody turn to you and say i'm not a racist but? and if so what came after that? probably a statement that was pretty racist. we have the same thing with this debates over housing, where people will offer comment on some proposal to build more housing. and say i'm not against housing, we need more housing but. and then they'll come up with some kind of an excuse. and so i think we have a dynamic where people know that it's selfish to pull up the draw bridge, to ask for no more housing in neighborhoods, knowing that they've already got theirs, and they don't care if other people are able to come to california, and enjoy the opportunities here. but people know that, that doesn't look good, so they invent these excuses. and i'm concerned that, i support this bill, i'm afraid that it may get like water down too much, if we listen to concerns that are really excuses for just not tolerating more housing. so when you hear somebody saying, i support housing but, you know just i would ask you to go through those arguments with the fine-tooth comb. good.>>and see if that's something that maybe senator wiener bill.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1215, 'end': 1221, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brian Hamlin: My name is Brian Hamlin, I'm the co-executive Director of the California Renters Legal Advocacy and Education Fund. We're a non-profit that works to make housing more affordable and accessible for all Californians. And I enthusiastically support SB 35. Thank you.>>Good.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Coyle: Tim Coyle on behalf of the 300 members of the San Francisco Housing Action Coalition, and believe that SB 35 presents a very sensible advance in planning, and to the Great benefit of the state. Please move it forward, thank you. Okay, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Ranaberger: Mark Ranaberger, member and volunteer with SFMB Action. I want to thank Senator Wiener and echo also my strong support for SB 35. We need more housing. We need to reduce costs. Thank you. Hello, my name is Alfred Tu.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 80, 'end': 86, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 206, 'end': 215, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Milo Trouss: Hello, my name's Milo Trouss, support of SB35. I want to make the point that so many of the other great things that California does, environmental wise or regulation wise. They're just almost don't matter if the state doesn't take action and make it affordable for people to live here, come here and stay here.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Daniel Camp: Daniel Camp, also a renter and volunteer within MB Action. I also want to enthusiastically support SB35. California and especially its wealthy coastal areas need to build more housing yesterday
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nori Jobber: good evening, i'm nori tiffany jobber, and i'm a development consultant. and every project i work on i try to help get projects approved. every project i work on, whether it's four units or several thousand units, faces immense opposition and it just shouldn't be this hard. i support this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erin Guerrero: erin on behalf the california building industry association. we don't officially have a position on this bill yet, but we wanted to express our appreciation to the author for dealing with a very difficult topic this year. and we look forward to working with him to make this bill even more applicable throughout different regions of the state, so thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Rhine: yes thank you mister chair, jason league of california cities. thank you very much for this special hearing and now testimony on this bill. we at the league, we are making a very conscious effort this year to come to the table and work on many of these issues. it's actually in fact one of our four goals for the year. is addressing this housing affordability challenge that's gripping many of our communities. unfortunately, with sb35, we have three or four really fundamental issues with the measure. starting, we strongly believe that we can have the planning process. we can do ceqa. we can hear from our residents on the front-end and then offer up some sort of by right ministerial process after the fact. the fact is under sb 35, many of these the planned permits will be handed out based on old and dated documents that have not had new or current environmental review. and again, we don't have to make a choice between either of those two. i mean, we have very strong values in this state around public engagement and transparency, particularly at the local level. we have very strong values around the environment and protecting the environment. and i don't think, our organization doesn't think that we need to choose the environment over housing. we can accomplish it by doing both. the other issue that i'd like to bring up is around rhna. we all have different opinions on whether it's good or bad, but rhna really is a planning and zoning exercise. it's not a housing production mandate. and it was never intended to be a housing production mandate. so i think if the legislature wants to have a discussion around coming up with a way to come up with a production mandate, that would be one discussion. but i think, to use a tool that really is planning and zoning, and make it into something it's not really isn't an appropriate thing to do. the final thing i'd like to mention is the parking requirements that are in the bill. as the bill is currently in print, not the amendments. and it's difficult to talk to the amendments since we haven't seen the amendments. i saw an outline but i haven't actually seen the words. but as far a limiting parking requirements within the local jurisdiction it obviously is an issue of concern. i think if anybody in our community, well, those who know best about parking are those who live in the community, those who are represented by the community. they know what are the needs in that community so to have a state directive to eliminate all parking, it is a concern. and for that, we oppose sb 35.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Federado Martia: Sir my name is Federado Martia I'm with the Council of Community Housing Organizations in San Francisco but also working with the Six Winds coalition in the Nine County Bay Area. There's much to applaud in this bill, especially some of the amendments that are coming this way but we have serious concerns about SB 35. I think we must be clear about the problem. Is the problem too little housing or is the problem too little affordable housing. In the Bay Area, we say that we built only about 60% of the housing need by RHNA. But in fact, when you look at the numbers, we have built 99% of the market rate need by Rena and only 28% of the affordable housing need. The problem is to little affordable housing is the solution then more market rate housing and even then is this possible solution one that actually works. So on page six of the staff report that you all have, staff critics that trickle down nature of this bill. The solution I quote focuses on increasing market-rate units, referred to as filtering, that assumes that over time, older market-rate housing becomes more affordable as new units are added to the market. And it is the most effective way to exit the housing crisis. Unfortunately, staff report says, the filtering process can take generations, meaning that units may not filter at a rate that meets needs of the market's peak. Further prioritizing market rate housing developments could be built to the exclusion of construction and more housing that is affordable to low and moderate renters and homeowners. So one of the other things that this bill does do that I think is very important. And I might disagree with my friend here, is that I think we're correctly elevating the regional housing needs as a metric as does SB 166 which I think you all are going to be considering pretty soon. For most jurisdictions based on predictions of job growth and population growth, the RHNA calls for about 40% low income housing, 20% in the middle, 40% market rate, make sense, right. Half of the people make more than a median, half of the people earn less. Many cities,
[{'start': 15, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 615, 'end': 619, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Deepa Varmer: my name is deepa from the san francisco tenant's union and our mission is to preserve and expand affordable housing. so we agree that there's affordable housing crisis and there needs to be more affordable housing built, but we're concerned that this bill may not be the answer. first of all, this bill looks to fix the problem of affordable housing supply by speeding up market rate production. that's basically trickle-down economics. we've seen on a national scale that these kinds of economic tools are great for building wealth for the wealthy, but they leave the rest of us behind. secondly, it sort of, it's conflating housing need with demand for market rate units. it is important to understand that the demand for market rate units is not just based on the people who want to live in a city, but it's based on the entire real estate investment dollars available. which there's a global market for. in san francisco, 40% of the units that we've seen in new market reconstruction are not being lived in. their addresses are actually, the people who own them have primary addresses elsewhere, and that doesn't even include the 10,000 or more-  what?>>thank you. i mean, the issue is that there's also, so that the market is accounting for something that has nothing to do with demand for one to live there. in addition, there's the issue of gentrification. i have never lived in a neighborhood where the rents came down after luxury condos were built, never.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: Good evening, Kyle Jones with Sierra Club California. And we are opposed to this bill because of the numerous projects that could then not undergo CEQA exemption. We note that there's 14 exemptions for infill, and that this bill could lead to cumulative impacts, including air quality and water quality impacts that would go unmitigated. Okay. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joseph Smoot: Joseph Smoot with Housing Rights Committee of San Francisco, and South of Market Community Action Network. Just want to speak from the perspective of South of Market Neighborhood, which is-
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyra Ross: Kyra Ross on behalf of Emanuels Jones, on behalf of the cities of Glendale and Santa Rosa and the Marin County Council of Mayors and Councilmembers, all in opposition to the bill
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 23, 'end': 37, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Chris Durazo: chris nori durazo from veteran's equity center, we also are not in support of this.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Aileen Joy: Aileen Joy on behalf of Tenants Together, California statewide organization for renters' rights, and we oppose.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cesar Diaz: well, senator, i say out of respect to senator wiener and to this commission- introduce yourself, please. cesar chris diaz on behalf of the state building and construction trades council. i think some of you know very clearly our position last year on the by-right proposal. this is very strikingly similar to that. we definitely want to work with the senator. we know that we've seen some improvements from what we saw last year, which was very egregious in terms of how it obliterated, usurped a lot of regulations, and so forth. we are thankful for the prevailing wagerequirements. we think that's very important to address the root cause of affordability out there, which is income inequality. and the ability for the middle class to continue having a middle class and access a home, whether it be a rental property or actually buying a home, which is the american dream. but there are a lot of concerns, both on the environmental side and the local planning side. and so for those reasons, i think we're definitely going to be working with the senator. we're very concerned about the framework of by-right, and we made it very clear last year that we were opposed to the by-right proposal proposed by the administration, thank you.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 53, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 106, 'end': 122, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Lee: Chris Lee, on behalf of the California State Association of Counties. We also have concerns with using RHNA as a production target, and look forward to having a discussion about whether that's the right measure to use.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anya Lawler: Anya Lawler, on behalf of the Western Center on Law and Poverty. We continue to have concerns, but do appreciate all the time that the Senator and his staff have put into the bill. And it's early, and we are going to continue working. And hopefully we can get somewhere around increasing affordability percentages and addressing displacement concerns.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tyrone Buckley: buckley, housing california. i share all of my colleague's concerns that went before me.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Caitlin Vega: Mr. Chair and Members, Caitlin Vega for the California Labor Federation. We have many of the concerns that have already been expressed. The local planning process is the place where workers have a voice in these kinds of decisions. We think that streamlining can work to silence workers and keep them out of these kinds of decisions. Also concerns around affordability, gentrification, tenant protection. So we appreciate the Senator's willingness to work with us on addressing all of those issues, thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Pariset: Hi, good afternoon. Michelle Pariset with Public Advocates. Thank you for all your work on this. We look forward to working with you to increase affordability and address displacement issues. Thanks.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeremy Smith: thank you, mr. chair and members of the committee. jeremy cesar smith here, again, on behalf of the state buildings and construction trades council. this is a twofer for us. obviously, when it comes to construction bonds such as this, we are always in support. in support of those, that's how big things get built in this state. we stand ready, the construction industry in general and my members in particular stand ready to do this work. there's over 70,000 active apprentices in california's state approved apprenticeship program. so the work force is there. they're ready to be put to work, but also a lot of our mine members earn and live middle class livelihood. they live near these ports, and the environmental impact of this bond, cleaning up the air around the ports, making the environment cleaner and easier to be in, is also going to affect them and for those reasons, we also support this bond. we urge your support today, thank you.
[{'start': 51, 'end': 69, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shrayas Jatkar: Hi, good afternoon, Chair. Shrayas Jatkar with Coalition For Clean Air, here in support of SB 4. We are also planning to work with the author on some potential amendments to address some concerns we have on the infrastructure side. We are wholly in support of the funding proposed in this measure for cleaner trucks and freight equipment. It's necessary, as was described earlier, to mitigate the heavy toll that goods movement takes on the health and environment, especially in communities in and around freight hubs, and along major trade corridors, and we think that this bill is also going to be effective at meeting the federal air quality standards. Attaining those standards will require significant funding to turn over the fleet of trucks and freight equipment. The South Coast and San Joaquin Valley air districts have identified a need of about $1 billion each annually. Now, that includes more than just heavy duty, but the point is that we do need in California new sources of dedicated funding for cleaner trucks and freight equipment. This bill offers that. We think it's good and wise to direct the $200 million for cleaner trucks to the South Coast and San Joaquin Valley. Those are the regions in the state where people are breathing the dirtiest air in the country and so, it's wise to invest strategically there. And this bill, I think, also will build on the successes of past efforts to date to fund investments in cleaner trucks and freight equipment. As noted, the Goods Movement Emission Reduction Program has expended its $1 billion. So we do need more funding to turn over those trucks, and locomotives, and cargo handling equipment, etc, and also, as was noted, Prop 1B provides a really good funding model. For every $2 that was spent on freight infrastructure, $1 was spent on air quality mitigation. We want to see that kind of funding model continue, and so we strongly urge that SB 4 is tied to SB 1.  That calls for significant investments in trade corridor infrastructure. We need to see air quality mitigation to go along with that. Thank you. Okay, I'll stop there, thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Gonzalez: Thank you Mr. Chair and members, David Gonzalez on behalf of the Truck and Engine Manufacturers Association. Happy to be here in support. I want to thank the Senator and his staff for reaching out to us and we look forward to being a part of the conversation. Thank you.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Jacob: good afternoon, mr. chair and members. mike jeremy jacob with the pacific and shipping association. we have an opposed unless amended position and it's the same language as you, that we have expressed, and chairman's familiar with respect to sb 1 and the composition and changes, and the programming language for tcif. the current language that's in tcif allows for ports to receive funding for efficiency and capacity enhancement projects. the language that's proposed in this bill would actually restrict that if there are any worker displacement issues. that's an operational concern that can't be addressed at the time of programming by ctc. and as a result, there will not be on port terminal project improvements, and that includes for zero emissions infrastructure capacity. so we have concerns about that, and we'd like to have those resolved moving forward. we'd like to be supporting this bill. we supported proposition 1b and we support the intent, thank you.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dan Rinzler: thank you. is this mic close enough to me? yeah? okay. all right, so thank you so much to the committee and to senator beall for inviting the california housing partnership to be part of the hearing today on the housing affordability crisis. my name is dan, and i am a senior policy analyst at chpc. which was created by the state in 1988 as a privately-funded non-profit to help lead around affordable housing preservation, finance, and policy. since then, we have helped developers create and preserve more than 60,000 affordable homes for the state's lowest income residents through technical assistance, training, and policy leadership. so, my presentation will cover the magnitude of the need for affordable housing in the state and the inadequate resources we have to address that need. and i will also touch on the specific and critical role that the state plays in financing affordable housing, and i will offer a few ideas for how the state can help address this crisis by increasing its investment. so, first the need. there is a shortfall of 1.54 million affordable homes for low income renting households in the state of california. so, big picture the trend has been lands have increase while income have declined and as a result renter have lost an average of $6,000 in annual purchasing power of the last 15 years. the burden of the affordability crisis is almost entirely shouldered by the lowest income californians. it's not on this slide but the overwhelming majority of extremely and very low income californians spend more than 50% of their income on rent. this means that the poorest families and individuals are foregoing basic necessities like food healthcare and transportation because the rent literally eats first. so, what do we have to address this problem? since 2008, california has actually lost 66% of state and local funding for affordable housing development and preservation mostly due to the loss of redevelopment. and also exhaustion of prop 1c and prop 46 bond funds. so, we are actually in a weaker position today than we were several years ago to address a crisis that itself has gotten worse over that period of time. so i'm going to run through a quick primer on how affordable housing finance works. and this is important because i just want to point out the very specific and critical roles that the state plays in creating affordable housing in conjunction with other financing sources. so there are basically three types of sources that cover the cost of affordable housing development and keeps rents low over a period of multiple decades. so first, you need a loan from a bank. just like any real estate investment. but if you're going to keep rents low you can not support very much debt. so you've got this gap, and you need to fill it with subsidy basically from the government. first, with housing tax credits which developers apply for and then sell to investors to raise equity for the project. and this fills some of the gap. to cover the rest of your costs you need a subsidy or gap financing from federal, state, and local sources. and this is the role that the state plays in financing affordable housing. as that gap subsidy piece. and anyone who has seen the kind of layer cake of financing and sources for an affordable housing development will know that developers typically draw on multiple state and local sources to really make the deal feasible and work at all. so just to further add context to the state's role, you really need to understand the low income housing tax credit program or lihtc which is the largest federal subsidy for affordable housing production. it is run through state finance agencies. and it is really what drive affordable housing in the state of california. you are not going to have a new development that serves low income people that doesn't have tax credits in it. and one key point that i want to make here is that the price for tax cut, it says, actually dropped over the last few months. because investors are anticipating a drop in the corporate tax rate under the new administration in congress. and this means that developers need even more subsidy than they did ever a few months ago to fill that financing gap that i was talking about on the previous slide. to take an even closer look at the light tech program on, there are two types of housing credits, first. the 9% credits, which cover most of the causal development, but they are capped, so there are very competitive and over subscribed and it's a limited number of units you're going to get out of every year through that program. the 4% credits on the other hand are uncapped and not competitive but they don't generate as much equity as the 9% credits. so the only, really, way to make 4% deals work is with substantial gap subsidy provided by the state and other sources. so basically, we actually could be getting more affordable units out every year if we only had more state subsidy for affordable housing development. these states has successfully played this gap financing role to help leverage 4% credits before and continues to do so today. one very succesful example is the multi-family housing program or mhp which was created in 2003 using bonds created through prop 46 and 1c. from 2003 to 2015, california invested $1.5 billion through the mhp program to create around 25,000 affordable homes, at a cost of only $67,000 per unit, and that actually comes down to around $425 per year to house a low income californian, which is an incredible bargain considering the social benefits that have been very well documented through research health earnings, educational outcomes and so on. as i mentioned before, mhp funds are actually mostly exhausted at this point and we need something to replace them. a little bit of additional context. in the fall elections this year, voters in l.a. and in the bay area approved more than $3 billion in new funding for affordable housing production. they saw the effects of the crisis and they did something about it. with these new local funds available, if the state makes an investment of $1 billion, we estimate that we can increase production per year of 14,000 new affordable homes per year. this obviously would not meet all of the need. but a state investment of this skill would make a large dent in addressing the affordability crisis facing low income families in the state. so i just want to end with the few options, ideas for sources of finding to increase the sales commitment to portable housing production and preservation. first, a new state housing bond similar to proc 1c and 46. you've seen that work well in the past. would be good idea moving forward. a documentary recording fee. elimination of the mortgage interest reduction on second and vacation homes. elimination of some 1031 exemptions for large corporations which basically encourages flipping. and finally, a tax on bank profits in california which has increased pretty dramatically just even over the last year or so. so, i will stop there and ask if there any questions.
[{'start': 119, 'end': 124, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 253, 'end': 256, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Archuleta: Great, well, thank you for having me here today. Again, Laura Archuleta, and I'm President of Jamboree Housing Corporation. And Chairman and Committee Members it's just a pleasure for me to be here. Affordable housing is my passion, I've been at it for 30 years and you've already heard so much from the last two speakers. You've heard about the need, you've heard about some barriers, you've heard about some solutions. So, what can I tell you? So, I think what best for me to tell you is I think there's a lot of resources out there. So I worked on the city's side for 12 years. I heard about why cities don't want to build housing. I had council members say, adopt a housing element, but don't get me fired. I had projects move through with referendums. I've held over a hundred community meetings to hear from community members about their fears. And to educate before you hear, you've got a little bit about Jamboree itself. I've been there for 18 years. We've been around for 26 years, and you can see we have over 17,000 Californians that live in one of our properties throughout the state. Our average household income is 24,000. And our rents range from 500 to 1,200. We believe that housing is the platform to building a life here in California. It's a platform for providing education. It killed me when you see battles over education funding and housing funding. Because I'm sorry, when kids are homeless, or moving over and over again, their school performance suffers. And you can ask any teacher about that and they'll agree. I think housing and health go hand in hand. People say affordable housing is the vaccine for many health ailments. And of course it's the key to the family unit, whatever that family unit looks like. And so with that, you may wonder how did Jamboree grow? How did we get to where we are? And so I would tell you that the housing units we have, have on average $25,000 per unit subsidy from what used to be the redevelopment dollars, right? I lived through the reduction and the elimination, ultimately, of affordable housing redevelopment dollars. And I think we're still feeling that outcome. So people would say right now, affordable housing developers are still building. We're still producing units and why would that be, if everything was about to end when redevelopment went off the table. But the issue is that we still have cities that have some resources, they may have land. But what I'm seeing is that in the next two to three years, you will see housing production pretty much stop in the affordable housing arena. For your general affordable housing work force folks again, people who can pay between $500 and $1,200 a month. So that kind of, I think that that gives you an idea of what can be done and I think we can get back there. We heard a little bit about some Ideas on how to get back there. I thought it might be nice if I just share with you a little bit about a property that we just opened. This is in Anaheim, Orange County, California, 70 units. And so we talked a little bit about the layering of funding. This project has 15 units that are held aside for people who are chronically homeless with a chronic mental illness. It received the mental health services act funding MHSA. 48 of these families, and this is a wonderful program, again keeping families unified, keeping kids in school. Was through the Homeless Assistance Pilot Program, which was kind of under the McKinny-Vento Act. Where it targets families and kids who are at risk for homelessness and gets them into housing within that school district. And then we have six apartments we call for large families. So these would be what you would call your workforce families who qualify In a affordable, restricted development. This project was not funded by any old redevelopment dollars. This project was funded through the use of the housing authority vouchers. These subsidy programs, as I mentioned, MHSA, and the Homeless Assistance Pilot program funding, along with the Federal Home Program. A question about where we see the federal government going. We have year after year seen a cut in the federal funding programs. And I don't see that changing. We are seeing a huge gap in our projects right now because of what the Professor referred to as this reduction in tax credits. Or maybe it was our first speaker. The reduction in the tax credit value with this discussion on corporate tax reform. And so, within two years, you will again see the production of affordable housing be reduced over and over again. So, this here on the picture, I thought it was important to put a family, this is a typical Rockwood family in Anaheim, California. The Gordons. We have our mom, dad, and two kids. They were living the American dream. They owned a single-family home. Mister Gordon was working at a power plant when he suffered an industrial accident and was permanently disabled. The results, he lost job, the family lost their home and all their personal belongings. They actually lived for 11 years as homeless. They slept in tents, shelters, hotel rooms, and in the family car, searching for a permanent home. They spoke at our grand opening and so the folks who came could actually meet them, hear what it was like. They were receiving $850 a month on disability. And in Orange County, we had the average rent for their family of about 1,800 a month. So you can see there was no place for them to live. They have moved into our Rockwood Apartments. They had some belongings in a paper bag. Through the funding programs that I outlined here, we were able to provide them the unit, the furniture, appliances, linen supplies, set up their kitchen. And we do have very responsive services and programming on sites. All studies are showing that when you take folks off of the street and you put them in permanent supportive housing it saves in all areas. It saves in health care costs for a community, it saves in police calls. So the cost benefit of providing permanent supportive housing for your chronically homeless families is there. It makes good cost sense, and of course, it makes good moral sense to try to help these families. So how can we achieve more housing? In my opinion, again, having worked kind of in all different elements to this. As a developer, as a city staff person, as just a mom and a private citizen, I would say you have to look at every aspect. So there was some questions that come up about production, about reducing barriers, about increasing funding. Production is the key, but it's definitely true that you're not going to reach this targeted income population, your 50 to 35% of area meeting income is not going to be reached through production itself. It's going to be reached through subsidy programs, that's the bottom line. And so yes I think you've gotta look at housing element laws, you've gotta look at the sticks and the carrots. I remember working with the city one time where they were actually getting paid incentives if they were to get some more building permits pulled for housing. That's a great incentive program and it worked for them because they pushed our project through. We got to move through quicker, but there are also has to be some sticks there for those cities who are not doing what they should be doing to house their folks. Again, I'm headquartered in Orange County, so I get it, I've been there for a very long time, educated there. I get the concern over density, over not wanting to change the feel of the community, but I'm telling you right now, if you drive down that 57 freeway, you see the tent cities. It's there and we have to do something about it, so anyways. So let's see, we mentioned developing affordable housing requires layers of financing. We know redevelopment was solved, billions of dollars were lost, that we talked about the bonds, CBDG and home funds. Definitely regulatory CEQA reform. CEQA was an issue, we all know it, the question is how are we going to move through it. I mean the By Right Proposal, we came out, the Orange County Business Council and others of us in California came out supporting the Governors By Right Proposal. And we were not able to move that through. So, again, I would just kind of end my comments by saying that production is key along with some funding sources to get down and reach this targeted population. And I'm happy to be here afterwards for questions.
[{'start': 56, 'end': 71, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 4638, 'end': 4646, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4682, 'end': 4689, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4804, 'end': 4810, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Shamus Roller: thank you chairman bell, members of the committee. shamus mike roller with the national housing law project. we are a national support center for legal services, attorneys, all around the country, and also do advocacy at the federal level around housing programs. i started my career running a street outreach program in portland, oregon, working with homeless youth and adults on the streets. and then i moved to san francisco. and i remember very well that first day in san francisco walking through the tenderloin and realizing just that i was in a different place. that the homelessness that i saw in san francisco, the degraded condition of many of the people there was just different that what i've experienced before. what i didn't understand then and that i do better now, is that many of the visual signs of homelessness, those things that we see walking down the street, tend to obscure some of the causes and the underlying conditions that cause people to become homeless. that being homeless itself degrades your physical and psychological condition faster than just about any other malady out there. and that if only we look at the people who we most know are homeless, sometimes what we think is wrong, is sort of like thinking that only people that have gray hair get old. when in fact, it is the process of aging which makes us look so distinguished. that we need to understand that moment people become homeless and what that means as far as what our public policy is. that summer and fall before i started working in homeless services, i worked with a guy, alejandro, on a building project and we were remodeling a house. and he used to make fun of me because i would break for lunch and he would just work right through lunch. and when i started that spring i saw him in a line waiting to get into a men's shelter and he looked 10 years older than he had that summer. and that just being homeless and being on the streets just degrades people so rapidly in so many parts of their lives. both on the social strains that they have and on their physical health. and we tend to want to think of people who become homeless as a population of people. but in reality, for every person that becomes homeless, there are many, many other people that are demographically exactly the same as those people who become homeless. that it's a bit of bad luck often times it lands people on the streets. poverty is a risk factor. one in 10 people who are in poverty will become homeless at some point this year. mental illness is a risk factor. but yet, many people with severe mental illness do not become homeless. drug and alcohol addiction is a risk factor. and yet, many people with drug and alcohol addiction issues are very successful in their lives and do just fine. if people become homeless when they have a number of different risk factors on top of a little bit of bad luck, a bad landlord at the wrong time. a whole host of other issues and i think what this means from a policy level is that we think about trying stop people from becoming homeless, we have to also be able to tackle the issues that create housing instability. and as sometimes we view homeless people as being somehow other. we often view homelessness as being something intractable, something that can't be solved. but in reality, the modern homelessness situation comes from two issues. the significant defunding in the 70s of the department of housing and urban development. the dismantling of the mental health institutions without any community response to that. that there are two real big reasons why we ended up with a homelessness problem that we have in this country and that problem is not intractable. it is one that we can tackle. the success in our country over the last five years in ending veteran homelessness, i think the perfect example of how this problem can be solved. in 2010, they created a program opening doors at the federal level, combining vash vouchers which are essentially section 8 vouchers along with services from the veteran's administration. between 2010 and the current time, we have decreased veteran's homelessness in this country by almost 50%, but there was a 17% reduction just between the years of 2015 and 2016. this isn't rocket science to fix this problem in many ways. but as we've seen the system of moving people out of homelessness and into housing become much, much better over the last decade, we've struggled in california, because our housing costs are just so high. as we move people more quickly into housing, we are seeing more and more people enter into homelessness, because of the housing situation we have in california. that high housing costs are making people homeless, they're also making it more expensive to move people out of homelessness. i was doing a tour here in sacramento, i still serve as the chair of the continuum of care in sacramento county and i toured a house for people that are being moved out of homelessness, they spent 30 days sort of intense. getting all of their documents together. getting ready to move in the housing. a house like that was renting for $1,200 a month, it's renting for $2,000. it's just become more expensive to move people out of homelessness. so, many people move themselves out that the average person only spends four months on the streets. many people find their way out, but they are struggling to find their way out. because if you're renting $1,000 studio and you've gotta come up with first month, last month and a deposit, that barrier is becoming so high in california. and in california, i think we tripped away so many of the tethers that can prevent someone from becoming homeless. for many years, we zoned out shared housing and boarding houses. we demolished single occupy hotel and other housing of last result. we eliminated redevelopment agencies and we've refused to invest general fund dollars into affordable development. we've also let wealthy enclaves be cartels to block any new housing from occurring in our state and creating that supply problem that we have, and we've left many vulnerable renters to be at the mercy of predatory landlords that can evict them at will. it used to be that you could rent a cheap apartment and feed yourself just on social security. it used to be that a general assistance check in la can get a few weeks at a single occupancy hotel or a flop house. it used to be that you could find some level of assistance if you hit hard times and that's really no longer the case in california. the housing crisis that we have has become the driver of inequality in our state. exposing a larger and larger part of the population to the risks of homelessness and this doesn't diminish, i think some of the great efforts over the last couple years of this legislature to deal with homelessness, but you can't divorce homelessness from some of the broader housing issues that we have in our state. the basic level through public policy we've managed to expand the number of people who live in the river sticks. we're one mistake, one stroke of bad luck, on crappy landlord can put them on the streets. so to finish up, i got to spend a couple of hours with giving a tour to the guy. he used to run the mayor's office of housing in london and i got to talk to him about some of the really innovative programs that we have in california to help families that have kids in foster care move back in to housing, and move families that are on calworks move back into housing. and after talking to him for a little while, what i released is that in comparison to what they're doing in london like we have all of these innovative programs that are essentially a patchwork for the fact that we haven't developed any comprehensive system to help people who are dealing with housing instability and to have a general plan of how we're going to deal with housing crisis in the california and i think we've hit that point that that it's time to do that work.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 23, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 51, 'end': 69, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1575, 'end': 1584, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Pete Parkinson: Good afternoon. Thank you, Chairman Beall. I'm Pete Parkinson, I'm the President of the California Chapter of the American Planning Association. And I also have the privilege serving as the Planning Director for two counties in California including a stint working for Senator Mcguire over there in Sonoma County. So really appreciate you inviting us here today. We've been working at APA California on housing issues, literally, for decades. But like everybody else that you've heard from today, we're frustrated with the State of housing in California. And so, last fall we convened a group of experienced professional planners, all of whom have grey hair like myself, to talk about solutions that we could come up with for actually increasing housing production and improving housing affordability in California. And one of the things that I'm excited about in hearing both from the panelists here today and from the Senators is that there is a lot of agreement already, it seems to me about what the nature of the problem is, and what the range of solutions are. So for example, we know that we spend a lot of money planning for housing in California, every city and county in the state has to do a housing element. They're expensive to do, they're time consuming to do, but we also know that we can't plan our way out of the housing affordability crisis in this state. Good long range planning is critical, but it's not enough and now we have to work on getting those planned units actually built. You've also heard that while increasing production is essential. We can't build our way out of the affordability crisis either. We've heard about the need for housing subsidies in a lot of different markets. But I think you've also heard this afternoon that there is no silver bullet for resolving our housing problems in the state. It's going to take a package deal that addresses a number of different points to increase housing productions in State of California. And it's going to have to focus more than just local governments, it's part of the point that I'd like to make to you this afternoons. Local governments are very important in this process but local governments don't build housing, nor do they control a lot of the factors that influence housing development. So this means that the solution has to include all of the actors in the housing picture. It has to include local governments, it has to include the state. Has to include builders, including nonprofit builders, laborer and environmental organizations and, of course, the communities themselves. And, so again, it needs to be a package solution so as planners want to do we've come up with a series of recommendations that address six different themes in that area. First one is providing adequate funding. Next is providing certainty in the development process. Third, reducing the cost to produce, especially affordable housing projects. Fourth, we have some ideas for some different things that HCD can be worked on. We think that housing element law can be streamlined and we think we can do a better job of enforcing existing housing statutes that we have. On the issue of providing adequate funding we've already heard about the need for subsidies and many markets in the states. And so, I'm not going to go into that further but we also have a need in our community for funds to do that good long range planning that helps communities prepare for the housing that they're going to need to accommodate And helps streamline the process for approving that housing later on. Those planning efforts specific plans and general plans are expensive and time consuming, and funding is needed to do that. But we also need funding and funding mechanisms to improve the community capacity, increase the community capacity, excuse me, for housing development. And in the world of housing, we also think about, we often think about capacity just in terms of land. Does your city have enough sites that are zoned forthe number of housing units that you need to provide? But really it's a much a bigger issue than that. We have to increase the capacity of our communities to accommodate additional growth, including the local infrastructure and services that are needed to support housing, including water, sewer, transportation, parks, schools, libraries, the whole range. So, this investment in increasing community capacity, we see as something that is critical to solving the problem In terms of creating certainty for housing approvals, I think you've also heard some about this today. Housing developers often face a lot of uncertainty as they go into the process, that adds not just to the time but to the cost of developing. Developing those projects. And I think you heard from Ms. Archuleta earlier that it often times affects even the willingness of developers to get into a project to begin with, if the process is too onerous. So, to address this APA California supports ministerial or by-right housing approvals, for most housing that is consistent with adopted plans. At the same time, we think we need to allow cities and counties to address project design in a review processes without triggering CEQA process on projects that would otherwise be exempt. So, let's include CEQA exemptions for design review for housing projects there otherwise allot by right. Along with reasonable time limits for completing the sign review process. We should also provide expedited CEQA litigation for housing projects much like the Legislature has done in the past for some stadium projects. And lastly, kind of at the very end of the process, let's talk about the building code revision process. Let's change that so that projects that have planning entitlements and have been through that process aren't saddled with an expensive and extensive redesign at the very end of the process due to building code requirements that changed while they were going through the planning process. We think that we could do more to reduce development costs especially for affordable housing. Affordable housing is very, very sensitive to cost issues and improving the certainty of those approvals is definitely going to help. But we can do some other things too. Smaller units are less costly to build, so let's eliminate to the extent that we have minimum size requirements on affordable affordable units. Let's reduce or eliminate those. Let's encourage zoning strategies like form-based codes, for example, that limit the height and bulk of projects rather than the number of units. And let's ensure the impact fees of very large component of the cost of developing projects are appropriately scaled to the size of the units. In terms of recommendations for some additional assistance that we think HCD can provide, being more proactive in developing some new strategies. We'd like to see HCD shift its focus a bit from focusing on more housing element requirements to doing things like working with private sector architects, engineers, and hosing developers and local planners, to develop prototypes for housing unit including accessory dwelling units that can then be use to facilitate and speed up the process for getting those permitted and built. We believe that the state should fund HDC to track affordable units that are at risk for loss due to loss of subsidies or expiration of restricted covenants. Affordability covenants and work with the owners of those units and the communities to help preserve those affordable units. And we think that we can improve local accountability around housing issues, and I want to spend just a second on this one. When planners and housing advocates and HCD staff often get together to talk about improving the housing situation in California, we hear a lot of anecdotal comments about good actor cities and bad actor cities and who's doing a good job and who's not doing such a good job. But we don't really have the data, in my view, that it takes to look at that problem from a statewide level. Everybody has to report, as part of their annual reports to the state, how many units got built and whether those units are affordable. But that's not quite enough. We think that there can be an objective accounting of the city or county's record on approving housing development projects. How many units were applied for? How many were built? How long did it take? What incentives did the city or county provide to get those built? And so we think that that's going to provide tremendously important information, if we can do that. And it's also going to improve accountability for housing production. We think this housing element law can be streamlined. It is a critical piece of the package for addressing our housing problems in this state. But let's eliminate some of the requirements in the state element housing law that don't directly result in housing production. So we've got requirements, for example, to analyze non-governmental constraints that local government can't control. We have a requirement in every single housing element to plan for farm worker housing, even in urban areas with little or no agriculture nearby. I think we can streamline the analysis that is needed for each housing site shown in the plan. I thought Ms. Feldman made some great points about what is really needed to look at the adequacy of those sites. But we think that that can be streamlined to some extent. And energy conservation. There's a requirement in housing element law that we address energy conservation. But we do that so thoroughly through the state's building codes and energy codes that we don't think we need to address it in the housing element. So instead, we can focus the housing element on making sure that we've got sites that are zoned for affordable housing and for homeless shelters. Ensuring conformance with state law requirements for transitional and supportive housing. And people with disabilities and farm worker housing. We think that there needs to be more analysis of affordable housing that may convert to market rate, and state funding to help preserve that. And encourage the regional and sub-regional analysis of housing issues instead of having separate analysis for each city or county. And then last but not least, there's enforcement of existing housing laws. Again, we do hear often about these bad actor cities and counties that aren't complying with housing element law. We believe that those cities and counties are the relatively small minority in this state. But there is no reason why any city or county in this state should get a pass on complying with State Housing Law. So let's fund the Attorney General's Office to proactively enforce housing laws, especially in communities that haven't adopted a housing element, haven't done the promised rezoning that they've committed to, or those that deny projects in violation of State Housing Law. So, again, thank you and I look forward to the opportunity to answer questions.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 41, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 47, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 277, 'end': 284, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4758, 'end': 4767, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 9248, 'end': 9255, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Battaglia: good afternoon, chairman and committee members. my name is battaglia, i'm vice president of project development for cal atlantic homes. i'm also the vice chairman of the california building industry association, and a fourth generation home builder in my family. and three of those generations, we've built homes all over southern california. it's my privilege to be here today to discuss some of the local perspectives we have in housing. i'm very passionate about housing. i've spent my entire adult life helping people achieve their dream of owning a new home. it's time for all of us to advocate for more housing across all market segments in california. and today, we've heard lots of good suggestions. i'm probably going to mimic some of them. but earlier, you heard about the shortfall, the supply, the short supply of housing in california. we've definitely not kept pace with the population and demand for housing. and we have a difficult task in front of us to bring the cost of housing down to levels that many of the population in california can afford. one of the solutions truly is to build more housing that keeps closer pace to the demand and that will bring some pricing equilibrium to the market. many market analysts agree with the idea that if you regularly meet demand, you'll not see home prices outpace the affordability gap. but that means there needs to be a paradigm shift in the thinking in approving new home communities in all segments throughout california. now we consider ourselves as stewards of the lands as home builders, and we do take the time to understand the market demands and build homes to satisfy various segments of those markets. unfortunately, there are many, many factors that challenge us to bring all types of housing to the market. i can look back to my grandfather and father who created new home communities and houses for over a thousand families between 1960 and the early 2000s. and i've personally witnessed many, many changes in the 50 years of my life. so some of those major changes have included the ever shifting laws, codes, legislation, ceqa, and the political environment. all of those have driven the cost of housing up at a rate much higher than the national average, and making it unaffordable and out of reach to many californians. john burns who is a respected real estate consultant in southern california, said the bottom line is there is a huge correlation between government attitudes and new home construction and pricing. we strongly believe that large affordable markets will grow faster than other markets. so as new home builders, we seem to bear the brunt of solving a lot of issues, a lot of the local issues. one of which is efficiency. as you may know, we build very energy and water efficient homes. and since the 1970s, we've made great strides in water efficiency to the tune of 50% increase in water efficiency. but coming up between now and 2020, we're forced into some additional increases in efficiency that will drive up the cost of housing even more, severely increasing our costs and passing those on to the homebuyers. and we should really take a look at some of the opportunities, especially at the older housing stock and ways to make them more efficient instead of continuously burdening new
[{'start': 59, 'end': 68, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2301, 'end': 2311, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sonja Trauss: Hi, my name is Sonja Trauss, I live in San Francisco now, but when I started in activism, I lived in Oakland. I started organizing pro-density renters under the name the Bay Area Renters' Federation. Because we realized that when you're building a building, you know some 50 apartments, the small number of neighbors that are immediately affected by it come out to say no. But the future residents don't have a voice at those meetings. So, I started organizing frustrated renters two years ago to speak in favor of really anything, because the housing market is like musical chairs. And if you don't have enough then people get left out. There is this distracting fight as if we have to build market rate or subsidized, and we can't build both and that's ridiculous. We can build both if we decide to build both.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Holly Fraumeni: holly on behalf of habitat for humanity california, representing 42 affiliates throughout the state of california. we sincerely appreciate the full panel dedicated to the importance of home ownership in the state of california and the reduction of the home ownership rates. as we stated earlier, we're the third lowest in the state of california and we look forward to a package this year. and that was the general theme of this hearing and being a part of that package. because we do believe that we can't forget that everyone lives within the 30 to 50% area median income deserves not to just rent for the rest of their life, but have an opportunity to own as well and build equity. so again, thank you for the hearing today and we look forward to working with you on the package.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Scott Feeny: Hello, my name is Scott Feeny, I am a renter from San Francisco, and I'm a volunteer member of the group YIMBY Action. It's stands for Yes in My Backyard. We're a state wide group that organizes around a pretty simple message, which is that if we want to make housing affordable in California we need to have more of it. I took the day off from work actually to come in here and talk to various state senatorial aides about why we are supporting Senator Wiener's SB 35 in feel right direction. And I was chatting with an aide today who said that he was well, we got into where we're from. And I moved to San Francisco two years ago from the East Coast. And this legislative aide also happened to be from the East Coast. I think he's from New Hampshire or something like that. And so, he got this sort of guilty look on his face. And he said, so I'm part of the problem because he moved here, because he's not a native. So, he's adding to the housing demand. I think that that It shouldn't be a problem that people are moving to California. It's a blessing that people are moving to California to contribute to our state and enjoy what our state has to offer them. And we just need to make people moving to California be a positive and not a negative, and to do that we need to be building enough housing for them. Thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 454, 'end': 460, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Daniel Camp: hello, my name's daniel shamus camp, i am also a frustrated renter from san francisco who pays a price that would make your eyes pop out for a really small studio apartment that has pretty bad insulation. which is not fun during this time of the year. yeah, i also want to throw my support behind sb 35, because i think the reason that it's so difficult to find housing in the bay area and in los angeles in particular, is because we've chronically under-built housing in these coastal regions for 30 or 40 years, mostly because of local opposition. sb35 would sort of say that housing can be streamlined, the approval can be streamlined. local opposition can't count if we're in the shortage of housing, which we so obviously are. and i also want to point out that there was a proposed housing development in a neighborhood nearby me in san fransisco that was 100% affordable. it was appealed a week or two ago. if sb 35 was passed, things that wouldn't be able to happen anymore.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Josh York: hello, my name is josh daniel york, i'm from the san francisco republican party, i'm the vice chairman. please don't laugh. there are some of us-
[{'start': 18, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Fernando Martin: good afternoon, senators, my name is fernando josh martin with the council of community housing organizations in san francisco representing 24 affordable housing developers and housing advocates. i wanted to thank you very much for the presentation. a lot of very enlightening, data that was presented around the crisis that we're facing today. i think one of the really quite relevant things that was presented it was how much housing we were building from 1955 untill 1989? we were building 200,000 units every year in california. that number dipped a bit after the early 90s recession to about 180,000 units per year. then something funny happened around 2008 i think one of the speakers said there was something that happened around in 2008 and then he moved on. housing production dipped to almost zero in 2008 and has yet to recover. it's not that nimby suddenly got very powerful in 2008. it's not that environmental regulations suddenly took over after 2008. we are dealing with a very different question, and i think one of the issues that was raised was that we should in our housing element, not talk about those issues that are beyond governmental regulation. in fact, housing development is primarily about those things, or primarily largely about those things that are beyond housing regulations, which is the economy and investment markets. and we need to be very clear about that as we consider the bills before you coming up. thank you very much.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathryn Selkrik: hello, my name is kathryn, i'm an oganizational representative of the mission sro collaborative. i represent many sro tenants in san francisco, and particularly in the mission district who are very, very low income individuals. and affordable housing is the number one desire of the tenants i represent and that i work with. but what they don't want in their neighborhood is a trump towers like development. and so, what i do want to say is that not all development is good development. and it does have to take into account what is happening in the neighborhood, and that deregulating this and any sort of trickle-down development is actually catering to hyperwealthy real estate tycoons, and not to middle class and working class families. thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeremy Smith: thank you, mr. chair, members of the committee. smith here on behalf of the state building and construction trades council very briefly, i'd like to push back on one of the comments that one of the final speakers made detailing his belief that the prevailing wage is a reason that there's no affordable housing, and one of the reasons that there's a lack of affordable housing, it's just not true. and i will say that what the prevailing wage gives developers and contractors are highly trained, highly skilled workers that get things built right the first time. and what it also provides is a living wage to workers, so that they don't then qualify for the affordable housing that they are building. so, i just wanted to push back on the idea that the prevailing wage is a problem in this sense. there is an affordable housing problem housing in the state, we acknowledge that, but we don't need to cut workers wages as a way to fix the problem. thank you.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jordan Davis: hello, my name is davis, i'm from the tenderloin district of san francisco. and i just want to say that i'm not really against building more housing. heck, i'm even kind of pro-density, but what we need is affordable housing. the right type of housing. housing for working class and poor people, maybe some middle income. not these wealthy, luxury developments, i also want to say something else like it's a need for me as a transgender person, because you have to have certain types of housing that's adequate so that way you could. you can get your sexual reassignment surgery and what is just what i had to do. i came here homeless from philadelphia and i'm glad that i was able to get house here, but so many people aren't so lucky. so, thank you very much. thank you, sir.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Clark: hi, clark with yimby action. and i think we all know that we have chronically under-built housing for more than 30 years. i think each one of you probably have constituents in your districts with their kids living in their basements. with millennials who have been stunted by the lack of housing availability, and are back living with their parents and this is a crisis. right after the trump election, there were two trans activists who woke up in kentucky and realized that they had to get out. and they tried to crowdfund to move here. they ended up living in my office for a month. they have been incredibly amazing people who have contributed unbelievably to the work that we do. there is no reason that those two extremely skilled, powerful people should be living in an office building. there's just no justification for that. we can build housing, we can build welcoming communities. if california is going to be a beacon on a hill, we need to be ready to receive the people who are coming for that light. thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 387, 'end': 392, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
David Romero: Good afternoon, David Romero from the Mutual Economic Development Agency. I am a resident of The Mission District one of the neighborhoods that face up the gentrification and displacement of working class people, Latinos. In the last few years 8,000 Latinos had to leave the mission, changing the whole demographic, and there only were seen in the last year was market re-developments. But the only effect had been pushing out more people and changing the small businesses around, everything is happening like that. I will be very careful of this bill if they are taking any community input particularly for some of the neighborhoods that are facing visa displacement. I have seen every day families with kids living in their cars, they're using the bathrooms of some friends and going to the schools because they don't have a place to live. Because nobody's renting to kids, nobody's renting for people who are the workers of the people in San Francisco. The Mission District was an immigrant welcoming, a neighborhood of opportunities, now not anymore, and we need to continue having that input in every development. Otherwise the developers are not going to provide anything. We have been able to get some community benefits and community input because the community opposition just giving a green light to the developers, we are going to get nothing and all the development is now for San Fransiscans. Thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Peter Cohen: Good afternoon, my name is Peter Cohen. I'm with the Council Committee of Housing Organizations, and your counterparts in the Assembly Housing Committee had a similar informational hearing at last Friday, I was on one of the panels. And I just wanted to suggest another perspective on this was provided by Professor Chris Bernard, who's now at UC Santa Cruz and was at UC Davis. And he's presented some very excellent research, I suggest, and I'd be happy to send you the materials, about what he calls a jobs housing fit. Because as we think about how the state is growing and how our work force is growing, ultimately not all folks make the same amount of money. And I think we all understand that intuitively, but thinking about how our housing policies are creating affordability that fits the workforce is really the ultimate metric. And what he's found is a great differential between what the actual need is in growing communities in the Bay Area where he did his study, and this housing affordability that's actually coming online. So it's not actually meeting needs, it's effectively displacing workers who can't afford, in some cases, very high volumes of housing. And just secondly and separately I give you a data point. It seems like this whole hearing's about San Francisco at this point. And we try to solve state's housing crisis on the head of a pin with 47 square miles. For folks who claim that San Francisco is somehow not building housing, which is kind of puzzling to me, I give you this data point. In the last couple years, nearly 4000 housing units per year have been built, built in the City of San Francisco. Fortunately we build a little bit more affordable housing as a portion of that than many other cities. 4000 units per year, there has not been that level of production in San Francisco since the early 1960s, why? Because of urban renewal, when entire neighborhoods were being bulldozed over. That's not what's happening now, but the point being, as you think about how to accelerate the pace of development, there's also a cautionary tale that one size doesn't fit all. And it could be actually overly accelerated to the point where destruction and harm is being done. That's our particular perspective. We're not a small wealthy suburb. So we ask you to think about no one size does fit all, thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 316, 'end': 329, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Milo Traus: Hello, my name is Milo Traus, I'm from Oakland, I'm a member of Yimby Action. I think that streamlining is incredibly important. It will help Californians find homes and places to live. I think if we saw dangers from overbuilding, then the people who would suffer the most would be the builders. And that's not really our concern right now. Our concern is people who can't find places to live. So we should allow as much building as we can at all levels of affordability and in cities and places near transit. And a bill that will make it easier to build, I think, will result in more units and lower prices for everybody. Thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Deepa Varmer: hello, i'm deepa fernando varmer from the san francisco tenant's union and i just wanted to remark on something. which is that the very first speaker talked about something which was then not really picked up on by any of the other panelists. which was that the crisis is hitting the lowest income people the most. that the burden of this crisis is almost exclusively borne by the lowest income people. and that it's not clear that building market-rate housing meets those needs. and so i just wanted to put that out there and have that percolating in your mind while you think about this for the rest of our comments.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katherine Howard: my name is katherine, i'm from san francisco, and listening to the panel, i'm not a housing expert. i've been to a lot of presentations over the last year in san francisco. and i think a lot of information was left out, and there was a lot of information which i would have thought would have been kind of inaccurate. i'm not quite sure how to say that, but anyway. so i think you do need another panel that shows the other side. this was a very pro-build, build, build panel. one of the things that was left out was airbnb. in san francisco, we have our 10,000 house and airbnb listings. these are homes that people could be living in, or rooms they could be renting. that was not mentioned, we have to do something about airbnb. the other thing is that when you start attacking ceqa, please be very careful what you wish for. we need ceqa  everywhere and we need it in our cities. our cities have habitat, they have environment, they have people. they are all affected and possibly infected by environmental issues. so please preserve ceqa.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Durazo: good evening, my name's chris from veterans equity center in san francisco. i have a few thoughts. one is, i want to remind people that redevelopment, the loss of redevelopment was really a very sudden loss for the affordable housing development environment. we saw a lot of cdcs close down as a result of it, we saw production just drop. we saw people trying to figure out how to develop something. so i really want to make sure you don't count that as the reason why affordable housing hasn't been kept up to pace. on the same token, i really want to encourage you, as you're looking at housing over this next year, to really look at the users, the people who are seeking housing. because i heard a lot of issues around people not accessing housing equally. students, for instance, who do not qualify for subsidized housing, it's a separate process. immigrants, people who lost, who were foreclosed on. these are all people who don't qualify for bmr. they're not going to fit, they're not going to be right profile for the type of development that's coming forward. so, i really would encourage you to look at the bmr policies that are coming forward, to look at all your inclusionary, all the different ideas on the user and how that's going to be affected. and how, really, who's not going to be allowed through this process. excuse me, and then, i'm sorry, lastly, i know it's a hyperpolarized kind of situation, where you're hearing imbys and nimbys and you're hearing a lot of these things. but a lot of us actually do want growth. we do want a process that's clear. but every jurisdiction is a different type of jurisdiction. there's hyperdevelopment areas and there's some that have such disinvestment. and from a previous developer, from a committee planning person, they take different strategies. and so the one size fits all is going to be detrimental to some of those areas. you just really need to be clear about that. but it might be something that really encourages other jurisdictions. so, it's a big state.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1439, 'end': 1444, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1449, 'end': 1455, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kevin Munz: Yes, sir. Kevin Munz, San Francisco Information Clearinghouse, again, I'm sorry. It's all about San Francisco. But it's all about San-
[{'start': 10, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bob Telamon: My name is Bob Telamon, and I am attempting to develop a 75 unit density bonus project to in the mission in San Francisco, right. At 25, a fifth of the mission, one block away from the 24th and Mission BART station I am displacing no housing with my project. I'm displacing now existing business with my project other than my own. I have a no parking project so I'm not adding traffic. I'm creating a net Increase in both market rate and affordable housing in the city. I've been working on this project for three and a half years. I have yet to get in front of the planning Commission. It will, I estimate, be another four years before my project is built. Let me put that into perspective for you. Seven and a half years. That's almost twice the time it took for us to win World War II. Here's my message for you, as state legislators. San Francisco is a complete mess when it comes to building new housing. It is for a whole variety of reasons. It has rules, it doesn't follow them, it changes those rules all the time. Anybody can stop the building of a project, no single person can say yes. It's a nightmare as a developer. So, if you want to fix it, it's going to have to fixed at the state level. It will never be fixed in San Francisco. San Francisco is too dysfunctional. The power balance between the moderates and the progressives, it's simply too much of a knife edge. If you want to look and see why we have a housing crisis in San Francisco, you just look at many of the faces of the people in this room. They're it. So, if you want to fix it, you're going to have to fix it at your level. You're going to have to apply adult supervision, otherwise it's going to be exactly the same for as far as we can go.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Theresa Flanderick: good afternoon, i'm theresa deepa flanderick from san francisco. i also work at senior and disability action there in the city dealing with a lot of ellis act evictions or [unknown] where rents are suddenly increased by thousands of dollars. so dealing with the eviction crisis in san francisco, we see the dismantling of neighborhoods. so, yes, wanting housing for seniors, not just a senior housing place, rather inter-generation living and imitating as best one can, the community that they've been thrown out of, because of speculation. so, it seems speculation is destroying my city, my neighborhood. i too have been ellis acted out of my home of 33 years in a very precious community once known as little italy. so we're still trying to find placement, for the thousands who have been evicted lifted under the ellis act, and no fault of their own. we're still trying to find the housing from those through redevelopment back in the 60s and 70s that lost their homes. where do we start? where do we end? and it's about affordable housing because those in the 70s and their children are still entitled to a certificate of preference in housing. so is this ever going to end? the list just gets longer and longer. thank you. yeah. so please plan well.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 622, 'end': 627, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ian Johnson: Good morning Mr. Chair, members. Ian Johnson, Department of Finance. I'm here to just give you a high level summary of the administration's plan for funding the continued implementation of the Local Control Funding Formula for school districts and charter schools as proposed in the 2017-18 Governor's Budget. So consistent with years past, LCFF implementation is among the very highest priorities for the administration, and there's no change when it comes to this year's budget. Unfortunately, revenues have begun to lack expectations such that this year's budget proposes to maintain the progress that we've made in previous years towards fully implementing the LCFF. Specifically, the Governor's Budget proposes nearly $750 million in Proposition 98 general fund, towards closing the gap between current funding levels and the targeted funding levels for school districts and charter schools under the LCFF. This $750 million will close about a quarter of the remaining funding gap for each school district in charter school, and keep us at an overall implementation of the LCFF at 96%. I'd also note a related proposal to the LCFF. This was mentioned in last week's Subcommittee here as we talked about kind of the overall Proposition 98 package. And that is the deferral of $860 million of LCFF payments from June to July of 2017. So as we mentioned last week, the deferral is not an ideal fiscal situation for us. It's not where we'd like to find ourselves, but it's sort of the reality of the fiscal constraints. And as we looked at the other options when building this budget, it was sort of the least painful. Again, the size of the deferral would represent about a third of the payment that school districts and charter schools would otherwise receive in June of 2017. And unlike previous deferrals, this would be essentially a deferral of funding that would be repaid two weeks after it's made. So you could think of school districts and charter schools as receiving 11 and two-thirds LCFF payments in the 16-17 fiscal year, and then 12 and one-third LCFF payments in the 17-18 fiscal year. So with that, I'll keep my presentation brief and I'm happy to answer any questions that you may have.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ryan Anderson: morning, ryan jonah anderson with the legislative analyst's office. the sergeant passed out a handout that, well, all right, i'll be covering this. but very briefly on the first page, it's just some background again on what the lcff is and how it works. the only thing i'm going to note here just as a reminder that the state created the lcff to pursue three important priorities. first, eliminating what we're seeing as arbitrarily and equities under the old school finance system. second, providing more funding to schools that serve low income, english learner, and foster youth students. and third, providing districts with the flexibility to fund programs consistent with their local priorities. on the second page, we just have some context on the governor's proposal to augment the lcff in 17-18. as this shows, we're about to enter the fifth year of lcff implementation. and as noted, the proposed augmentation of about $744 million or exactly that amount, is relatively modest compared to what districts have experienced over the last several years. page three discusses one of the reasons why that increase is so modest is again, as finance noted. a significant portion of the new prop 98 funding under the governor's budget is dedicated to retiring a one time deferral of lcff payments in 16-17. this is to accommodate lower than projected revenues in 15-16 and 16-17. and while we think this is a reasonable approach to take for a decrease in expected revenues, we do know that by the time you finish your budget deliberations in may, it may be the case that other one time options are available to you that will reduce potentially the need for such a large deferral. in particular, it is possible that proposition 98 will come in higher, and may revision if revenues are higher than currently projected. and it's also possible that there will be some one time savings from some proposition 98 programs that will be available to pay down some of those costs. for example, the state budgets for all districts to participate in the mandate block grant, but typically, some districts choose not to. the additional funds would come back as savings and could be applied to this purpose. on page four, we give some context for what districts are experiencing. in particular, under the relatively modest increase proposed in the governor's budget. and this is an issue that i'm sure you've all heard a lot about, which is rising pension costs. the story here is that in 2014, both the state retirement plan for teachers, its calstrs, and the retirement plan that covers most classified employees, that's calpers, were facing significant unfunded liabilities. and to address the liabilities on the calstr side, the legislature adopted a plan that increased contributions by the state, by teachers, but also by districts through 2020-21. now, because districts at that time were still recovering from the depths of the recession, many of the most significant increases were back-loaded, and those are starting to come home this year. 17-18 is one of the first years of really significant increases for district contributions, which ends up being a rather unfortunate timing for districts if, as the governor's budget suggests, the increases for lcff will be relatively modest in that year. now, in the graph on page five, we show that over the first three years of lcff implementation, the additional funding that the state was able to dedicate to lcff far out-paced the growth and district pension costs that were due both to increase salaries as districts hired new teachers and gave out raises, and also the statutory increases in district contribution rates. however in 17/18, under the governor's budget, it's projected that district pension costs will increase by more than the additional funding that is provided for lcff and this will absent any changes, come the final budget, put significant pressure on many districts to cut back on programs or otherwise accommodate these increased costs. we do note, there is a good reason that the state pass this plan in 2014. it's really important that we address these unfunded liabilities. and we think that the best way that the state can help accommodate these changes for districts is to continue as the administration proposes to prioritize flexible funding under the lcff and mandate block grant payments. that's all for my presentation. thank you.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Edgar Cabral: Edgar Cabral the balance Legislative Analysts Office. I would say, I think that what Finance as, particularly it is generally what the state's practice has been for the past, say, 10 plus years of trying to fund at about the minimum guarantee. In the last few years, it's been the opposite issue, where we've had the guarantee go up, and the state has made contributions to get to that higher minimum guarantee. But in the recession years, there are other cases we have the minimum guarantee falling. And the state's practice has been to make adjustments. And a lot of the times, these adjustments, particularly in mid-year when you're in a difficult position, has typically tended to be things like deferring payments, swapping with one time funds, other accounting adjustments. And I think the idea with that is the state wanted to reduce down to the minimum guarantee but at the same time not go in and actually make a cut. And so this is sort of why the deferral is one of the options that the state is using. But why the administration is proposing it is because it's a way to get down to that guarantee without making a reduction of funding.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Natasha Collins: natasha with the legislative analysts office. my colleague ken kapon and i are here to provide a brief overview of the local control funding formula for country offices of education, discuss funding difference between county offices of education, discuss their activities and lastly provide some of the findings and recommendations from a recent review of county offices that our office performed. i'll be speaking from a handout which i believe the sergeant has distributed. the state implemented county office lcff, as you heard, at the same time as it implemented district lcff but unlike districts the state fully funded lcff for county office, for the 58 county offices of ed in 2014 and 15 at just over $1 billion. and since then there's been slight increases to represent growth in cola. the target lcff amount for county offices of education also differs from districts, and that it's made up of the sum of two parts. the first part is tied to the number of students enrolled in two kinds of alternative schools that county offices of education run. juvenile court schools, and county community schools. and the second part is to provide district services, and is tied to a base rate, the number of districts within a county, and the number of students educated within that county. i would note the county office of education, lcff, is unrestricted funding, and can be used towards any purpose, any educational purpose. the chart on page two of your handout shows this two part formula and the associated rates in greater detail than i've just described. as part of the shift to local control funding formula in 2013-14, the state included 2 hold harmless provisions for coes, which we describe on page 3 of your handout. the first hold harmless provision determined that each county office would continue to receive at least as much funding as it received the year before lcff in 2012/13 even if that amount was above the target rate that was determined for a given county. currently we estimate that 34 county offices benefit from this hold harmless provision. the second hold harmless provision determine that each county office would continue to receive as much state categorical funding as they received before lcff, we estimate that 18 county offices benefit from this provision and that this provision is growing rather rapidly over time we also note the county offices that are not required to perform activities associated with these hold, harmless amounts they were typically tied to categorical programs that the state used to have prior to lcff. the chart on page 4, shows proportionately how the three elements of county office lcff interact. we can see here that the county office lcff is made up of district services, the juvenile court schools and county community schools portion, and then about a quarter of the lcff for counties is made up with these hold harmless provisions. this is at a statewide level but if we look more deeply at a county by county level we'll see that their funding rates are very different. the chart on page five shows this county by county analysis. and how many counties receive hold harmless funding as compared to their lcff funding rate. you'll see that about 40% of counties are at their target funding level while the majority have hold harmless provisions in place with some receiving more than twice their lcff target level.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 59, 'end': 68, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Debra Brown: brown, on behalf of state superintendent of public instruction, tom torlakson. we just note, and again as reference, we'll get into this more on the next panel. but as we think about the implementation of lcff, and the adoption of lcaps. and certainly the transition to the new accountability system. the role the counties play is integral to the role that the state plays through the department of education, the state board, and then also the collaborative. and so, i think as we would say, they provide a necessary role in the support that overall we provide districts. both technical assistance, and then support as we're looking at districts who need more intensive intervention and support. so we do think that there is additional workload going forward for county offices. and so we think that that makes sense to have some ongoing funding for counties, as well to support the support that they provide for districts.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 64, 'end': 77, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Debra Brown: debra ryan brown, i would say wait until the next panel, really, because they'll talk about the rollout of the dashboard, what it means and how it's going to interact with the collaborative and the support that the collaborative's providing. so i think that panel is probably best suited to answer that question.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debra Brown: Debra Brown, again, I'd have to get back in terms of the number that might have ultimately needed the counties to provide them some additional support, so I can look into that and see if we have that information. But ultimately, all of the LCAPs were approved by the county offices.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Peter Birdsall: yeah, thank you very much. yes, excuse me. my name's peter debra birdsall. i serve as the executive director for ccsesa, the county superintendents' association. first of all, i want to express our appreciation to the legislation. the governor obviously recognized the important role counties serve in this process, and that was manifested two years ago when you approved the one time funding for two years. so that's what's enabled us to staff up and put the systems in place to support the districts improving their lcaps. so in answer to the question, in the end, the county superintendents did approve every lcap, because if you don't approve the lcap, you don't approve the budget, and then chaos ensues. so its become a really extensive process of districts routinely throughout the year interacting with the county office staff to get to a position where we can approve the lcap. and so it's not waiting in the county superintendent's office for the plan to be submitted, it's an ongoing dialogue throughout the year with every school district in the state. and so we've had that two years funding, we submitted this proposal because that one time funding ends this june 30th. and yet, we know the work is ongoing. and in fact, it's becoming more demanding and more complicated now that we have the dashboard, the rubrics, the local indicators, and all the daily work that needs to be done as part of the accountability system. so our key request to the administration, the legislature, is ongoing funding to support that ongoing work. as was noted here, there's disparity in funding for county offices. so the proposal we have submitted is to raise the funding for the lowest counties because funding for the lcap work was never built into the funding model. so those lowest funded counties literally have no resources to do this work on an ongoing basis. for the counties that are funded as hold harmless, a higher level, you effectively, if this approach was taken, would be directing those counties to designate a portion of funding they are already getting to provide that support to school districts. and so it has the effect of taking advantage of funding those counties where you got them while at the same time supporting lowest funded counties in the state to provide that support. real quickly, the support is necessary because this is really a watershed year. i'm sure you'll hear that in the next panel on the accountability system. with the dashboard and all the evaluation data now, districts are expected, communities are expected, county superintendents are expected to look at that data, see how that is reflected in the lcap and how the district is trying to address those identified concerns. initial estimate is over 400 leas, for example, are going to have problems with the indicator for student's disabilities. so there's a lot of work to be done. we now, for the first time, have that data. and so again, the first part of request is to fund the ongoing work, and then we think the most equitable, effective way to do it is to raise the funding for the bottom counties.
[{'start': 53, 'end': 73, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pamela Gibbs: good morning mr. chair and members. pamela representing los angeles county superintendent of schools, dr. deborah dwardo. we too support session's proposal to continue the ongoing funding for lcap. one thing that was important for the los angeles county office of education is to provide support to all of the 80 school districts throughout the county. we did that at the beginning of the lcap process, by creating an e- lcap tool. we were in one of the first states to provide this. this was a system that allowed all the districts throughout the county to provide their lcaps online, and to allow us to approve all 80 lcaps within the deadline that was necessary to meet the requirements set by the state. our teams also provide technical assistance on a regular basis, to all of the districts. and we look forward to continuing to update the e- lcap tool as annual updates change, as new assessments tool changed. so we look forward to continuing to do that. as far as our services, the los angeles county office of education, partners with many other agencies throughout the county such as the los angeles county probation department, to serve a lot of the students who are incarcerated or who are on probation. we think that any disruption to the services would provide a problem with continuity of services throughout the county. and we urge your support to continue on with the services that we are providing and to fully fund us as well, thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 106, 'end': 120, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Hulsizer: Mr Chair and members, Michael Hulsizer here today on behalf of the Kern County Superintendent of Schools. 47 school districts in Kern serve 170,000 students. I have two quick points. The first relates to issue number two. We'd like to thank Assemblymember O'Donnell for raising the issue of Proposition 98 in the context of rebenching by $1.8 billion. Education spending down over three years. Assembly Member O'Donnell makes a very important point that if we're ever going to reach the aspirational goal of Proposition 98 which is to get this state in the top 10 states both in terms of per pupil spending and also in terms of per student ratios to teachers and administrators. We've got to fund education at a higher level, on per capita personal spending. We currently spend about 3.25% of per capita personal income. We are the seventh largest economy in the world. The average in the United States is 3.75% of per capita personal income. So we thank Assemblymember O'Donnell for raising that point, if we're ever going to do something about education spending we can't be rebenching education spending down. In fairness to the Governor The Governor has fought for education spending over the last six years and he's prioritized it. Not withstanding the people in this room, education has not been the priority of the Legislature. It has been the priority of the people in this room and the Governor. But we just would want to remind everyone that Mr. O'Donnell's comments bear very great significance and to address this problem, you'd fund this at $1.8 billion higher. Very quickly, number two. We certainly support the proposal from Mr. Birdsall and the county superintendents. It's essential that we place acknowledgement that ongoing costs are there for county offices and funding county offices for the ongoing work related to LCFF and LCAP. Thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 256, 'end': 265, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 410, 'end': 419, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 970, 'end': 979, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1456, 'end': 1465, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1644, 'end': 1652, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sara Bachez: good morning, bachez with the california association of school business officials. thank you for today's conversation, as you recognize more revenue sore proposition 98 experiences growth and empowers our lea's to fully fund our obligations, support innovative programs for our students and support staffing needs. however, as we begin to show an economic slowdown, we are concerned and we do oppose any manipulation, such as the deferrals and the budget reserve cap as it does not provide, it sends a mixed message to our community of the actual funds available for our schools. so with that, we do support fully investing in lcff, as that does provide leas with the maximum flexibility to meet their obligations at a time, as you've recognized, all the soaring costs on the mandated side such as stirs and purrs, and all the other things that take place in order to run and operate our school district, so thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ky Jackson: good morning mr. chairman, coronel, members, and staff. my name is ky peter jackson, i represent san diego unified school district. thank you for having this conversation here today regarding lcff and base funding. i just like to, for dev tell on what your first panel mentioned and what ms. irwin posited earlier. as we look at the pension cost and that increasing glide slopes, san diego unified recognizes the importance of maintaining those retirement obligations. but as we look forward to what that does to services, and how that impacts our children, we would urge this committee and the administration to prioritize funding the lcff, and that any unanticipated funds, after the may revise be appropriated such that districts have maximum flexibility with those discretionary funds. additionally, as we look out towards pressures on our general fund, and on economic oppressors, we would urge to the legislature to consider what next after leas get to full implementation of the lcff. san diego unified look forward to being a part of that conversation, and a part of that thought process. thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 34, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 67, 'end': 83, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 292, 'end': 297, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brad Strong: chairman mccarty and members, brad ky strong with children now. we submitted a letter that covered a number of issues, in particular, on this issue. we do ask that in the letter that county offices of education are funded to provide support to local educational agencies in the development and monitoring of the local control accountability plans, and also in the use of the dashboard. so we're very supportive of the ccsesa's and mr. birdsall's proposal, and do want to make a distinction, there was a question about infrastructure. absolutely, we believe that the infrastructure of county offices of education in providing support and the development of their accountability plans as well as the use of the dashboards, that is infrastructure. separately, we want to make sure that there isn't an assumption that that funds, the infrastructure needed is part of the accountability plan which we'll talk about in the next item. i do think there's some actual hard cost related to infrastructure that are also needed in addition to the county support. thank you.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 16, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 30, 'end': 37, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 435, 'end': 443, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sarah Lillis: Good morning, Sarah Lillis with Ed Voice. On issue number one, we just want to reiterate, we share the concern of many of the members about reintroducing the gimmick of inter year cash deferrals and don't want to go down the slippery slope again that ultimately lead to money out of the classroom. And so we really hope that there's an alternative to that as we move forward. And on issue number two we also support CCSESA's proposal to have it be ongoing funds to support ongoing work, really critical work that the county offices do on the LCAP and the LCFF support. So thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barrett Snider: Good morning, Barrett Snider on behalf of a number of County Offices of Education, including San Bernardino, County, Sacramento County, San Diego, County, Santa Barbara County, and very much in support of the CCSESA proposal, and all for all of the reasons that Mr. Birdsall outlined, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 266, 'end': 274, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Steve Henderson: mr chairman, members, henderson representing the california school employees association. i'll be brief because much of the things that i'm going to say were already said by some of my colleagues first. we certainly appreciate the committee taking another look at this deferral issue. as my colleagues have said, we have districts that are still struggling to get back the cuts that they had to make during the great recession, deferring that money and then rebenching prop 98 downward to the tune of $1.8 billion is only going to make it harder for those district to get back. and having said, that i also want to associate myself with the comments of mr. birdsaw, we certainly support ccsesa's proposal.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 657, 'end': 664, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Liz Guillen: Good morning, I'm Liz Guillen with Public Advocates. We work very closely with parents and student organizations across the state, as well as many of the advocates here as part of the LCFF Equity Coalition. I really appreciate the comments around Prop 98 and how it is calculated, as you know we are strong believers in the fact that our education system is inadequately funded. And now with, we're seeing new pressures on LCFF locally, the unfunded pension liability, and budget uncertainty. The message that our parents and students are getting across the state in their local districts is that it's as if there were no LCFF, and there should be no expectation of increases or improvements in services for the students who generate supplemental and concentration dollars. And we are only in year five of LCFF implementation. And yet the Legislature still, despite I know your hard effort, still does not have transparency on how LEA's are using supplemental and concentration dollars. We are also in support of funding county offices of education. We've been proud to work with County Offices of Ed in their trainings and workshops with local districts about how LCAPs should be written and how plans should be made for increasing and improving services with supplemental and concentration dollars for the students that generated them. Thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Edgar Cabral: good morning, mr. chair and member. edgar brad cabral with the legislative analyst's office. we have a handout that the sergeant's passing out that i'll be using for the basis of my presentation. i was asked to provide a very brief overview of the school accountability system just to provide you some context for the subsequent panelists to tell you more about some of the specific components of the system and what they've been doing in getting the system up and running. on page one, so we start on page one, just providing you with some background on how the framework for the system was developed. this was all part of the 2013 legislation that created the lcff, it also created this framework for a new state accountability system. that system is built upon these eight state priority areas that you have heard folks mention already today. the idea is these are the key places the the state think are important and they want districts and schools to be paying attention to and focusing on these areas. the statute lists these priority areas and then also lists a number of associated performance measures for those priority areas to give you a sense of ways that we can measure how districts and schools are doing with regards to these priorities. so there are two main places where these priority areas manifest themselves. the first is in local control and accountability plans or lcaps and districts now are, they already have now adopted three years of lcaps. so they have now been getting more comfortable with that system and and doing the work required. under law districts are required to work with their communities to get feedback in developing their lcap and they need to have it approved by the county office of education. and in that lcap they need to set goals based on these eight priority areas and specify the actions they're going to take to meet those goals. the second piece is something that hasn't really been implemented yet but, we're not getting into the place for the state is ready and that's what are called evaluation rubrics in the code and i think now, we'll be talked about as the school dashboard. the original legislation tasked the state board of education with adopting these evaluation rubrics. and the intent is that these rubrics would be used to determine whether districts needed additional support. and the law there were two different kind of levels of support. one level of support for districts who for one sub group for example was having trouble in a priority area, so a much more narrow kind of need for support and then a larger level of support for districts who maybe have more systemic problems that have been underperforming for many years. the board adopted the rubrics in september 2016 and i believe this month. at some point this month the dashboard will be made public and will be available for for youth. there are a variety of performance indicators in the dashboard. there are two different categories, and how the public can interact with them is a little bit different. there are the state performance indicators that are based on state-wide information, this is information the state already collects. we have consistent data across the state where you can compare how districts are doing across the state. for that you'll have more detailed information, districts will be classified into a number of color coded categories to give you a sense of how well they're doing. you'll also be able to look at data by school and by subgroup. then you have these local performance indicators where there will be less information. these are areas like say for example in the priority of parent engagement we don't have any state wide or data metrics that we use so what the desk will ask districts to do is to develop a local local measure and then provide some information and a narrative form on how they're using that. how they are using that tool to identify whether there are some room for improvements in that area. so on page five we provide some information for you on the federal system and i wont go into the details here but this is just to say. we've been now working for several years to develop this deep process where we have lcap and we have this dashboard and that will be used to help identify districts that needs of assistance. our system would meet the requirements of the essa they also call for two different levels of assistance and a system of multiple measures so the state is well on its way to being able to now have one system of accountability that will work for state and federal purposes. on page six though and i apologize, i just realize i skipped over a page. on page four, i talked about, we had information on a newett agency that had been created as part of the legislation which is the california collaborative for educational excellence. the idea for this agencies that they would be intended to serve as a state-wide expert on improving student outcomes. and i think the original intent that would be a small entity that could contract out with experts to help provide assistance to districts, and then maybe called to be involved in some of the more intense intervention. the state provided two different parts of one time finding for the club. the first was just to get the entity up and running. and then last year in the 16-17 budget, there was additional funding to provide some state wide training on the rubrics and to work with some district fund developing on the pilot program. so that serves as the transition, sorry, now to page six, where we have some information on just giving you a sense over the last several years how much money the state's spent on the accountability system. all of these expenses have been one time. so we've had, you've now heard of many of those one-time funding for county offices of education, for helping work with districts on adopting lcaps. we have funding for the collaborative. we had a couple $1 million for the state board of education to do the work of adopting lcap templates, spending regulations and then now the dashboard. so right now the state hasn't really dedicated much ongoing funding to the system. but as the system rolls out, there will be some important questions to deal with regarding that. and also, beginning in 18-19, based on federal law, the state will need to be spending about 7% of its title i funding for providing support to schools, and that's about $140 million is our estimate at the moment. so that gives you just very, very high level summary of what's been going on with the system. i think we had on page seven some of the issues for legislative consideration. a lot of these have already been discussed throughout the hearing. one of the key things is identifying, once the dashboard is ready and once the system is up and running, getting a sense of how many districts are being flagged as in need of support. that might give us a sense of what the capacity issues might there be and an important role, as been discussed, is regarding county office of education. i think i just like to add a little bit in terms of the clarify, what we think is clear, not clear in law regarding county offices. state law does specify that counties are responsible for identifying whether the districts that in their country are in need of assistance or not. and they're responsible for helping determine what kind of support the districts should receive. it doesn't necessarily state that the county is the one that's going to be providing the service, that is an option. the county can do that, the county can also find another academic expert. contract that with somebody else. there's a number of ways. the statute is flexible intentionally to provide a lot of flexibility for identifying the specific needs of the district, for meeting the needs of the district specifically. that does mean there is less clarity exactly what, which activities the county office will do and won't do. they will definitely though, in law they're required to be the first kind of level of support, identifying who needs help, and trying to work with them to figure out what kind of support they should get. so that is something that moving forward i think we need to see, based on the capacity, based on how many districts come in needing support, we'll have to work on what exactly would the county's role be. the cce, or the california collaborative's role will be, and whether they'll be, well it's just what other entities might need to be involved to be providing the support that we need.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 4709, 'end': 4715, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Keric Ashley: Thank you so much Keric Ashley deputy Superintendent California Department of education. I oversee assessment accountability, title one and data management. So for the next hour and a half I'll take you through the dash board that's-
[{'start': 18, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brad Strong: members, brad edgar strong, children now. the department and the state board of education have done a tremendous amount of work, and i do believe in the spirit of continuous improvement. with respect to the development of the accountability system and the improvement, we think there's three particular investments that need to be addressed. one is data, another is the dashboard functionality, and then third is actually cde staffing. on the data component we are lacking common surveys of parents, students and teachers on safety and connectedness, lacking the data on the college and career readiness, lacking data on growth measure. on the dashboard, the functionality really doesn't provide the comparisons. you heard some of these suggestions that you could be able to identify local districts or neighboring districts or schools in your districts, but it doesn't enable the functionality for comparisons, and i think that needs to be funded. and in particular cde staffing, we really need to fund the data unit to actually staff it and populate it with current year, most current data. thank you.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Liz Guillen: Liz Guillen with Public Advocates. I would add we're very happy with the progress that's been made on the new accountability system. It's taken a lot of work, we know. We've been pleased to be part of it, along with other parents, parent organizations and community groups. And we know that a lot more work is being committed to and will be done. One of the concerns we have though is that some of the state priorities that you set are not really going to be included in the data dashboard, and one in particular is the school climate priority. Right now that requires local districts to use measures like school surveys, surveys of parents, teachers, and students. But some districts do that but others do not do that, and they need the resources to do that. So we will be talking more about how we can fund that important, important priority. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Lillis: good morning, sarah with edvoice. we very much appreciate the conversation, particularly the questions both raised in the staff analysis and by members irwin and limon about really how is this system going to be different in terms of addressing achievement gaps. and i think that thus far we've fallen a little short and i think in in part it's about investment, and mr. strong referred to a few things in our letter we think that you should look at in terms of both supporting the functionality of the dashboard, data collection and a growth model. and we think that those are the critical in allowing the system to actually do the work you intended it to do, which is addressing those students who are starting farther behind. but there are also policy decisions that are being made in the department and the board that i think are influencing whether or not the system can reach that goal. and we remain concerned that as the department said, when the growth is the same at all levels, the gaps will never close. and so we think fundamentally there needs be a different policy decision that says those groups that start farthest behind have a more aggressive target, they have to grow faster if we're actually going to close those gaps. and that's currently not in our system and something that we encourage your continued oversight both in terms of the resource investment but also in the policy decisions that are being made.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 152, 'end': 157, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 162, 'end': 167, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 371, 'end': 377, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Winger: mr. chair and members, john brad winger. on behalf of the california charters school's association, i just want to express our support of the new dashboard and the vital indicators that it provides for high school. thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Asha Kreiling: okay all right. yeah hi asha jonah kreiling with community water center, we were late to support our support letter but happy to be here to express our support. community water center, we're based in the central valley, we work with small rural communities that lack access to safe and affordable drinking water. we've worked alongside senator leva since her introduction of sb 334 in 2015. while that bill was vetoed it did kickstart a program at the state water board to offer free voluntary testing to schools for lead contamination. that program just started this january, this year. we're excited to see how it goes but as senator leyva said there are some issues that remain to be addressed. for example if lead is found in the water it is recommended that the school and the public water system take action and try to resolve that contamination but its not required. also as senator leyva said. meal times is the only time that schools are required by law to provide safe drinking water and to us that's not quite acceptable. so,we strongly support this bill. thank you.>>
[{'start': 24, 'end': 34, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 344, 'end': 348, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 636, 'end': 641, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 890, 'end': 895, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lorree Lewis: Hello my name is Lorree Lewis. And I'm actually the education director for California Tribal TANF and I wanted to share my experience because over the last two years I've worked with a group of youth. My territory starts from Modoc and it goes all the way from San Joaquin County. There are 22 federally recognized tribes. We work with a group of students who were not scheduled to graduate but they made it to graduation. And then when I attempted to take them to the community college to enroll them, they were unable to enroll because there were no classes left for them. And, to this day, it's been about almost a year and a half that they still have not been able to enroll. When you are not, if you're not CalWORKS, then you don't have the ability to get that pre-registration. And also, if you are a freshman, then you are the last to choose your classes. In our communities, we're very rural. We're very distanced. And I really applaud the community college because they've done everything to help us, including helping us get books. We drive them out to the students. We drive the students to the college. We do whatever we have to do. We're working at night, in day, in morning, but the students are still unable to get those classes. And a lot of times, we are told when we get there, the language was just different, if you were included in this language, but that's very disheartening to a student who started off at a 3.3 or not even a 0.1 or, they just didn't even have a GPA, and now they're at a 2.75 or almost at a 3 and they want to go on to college, and they can't. And it took two years to get there. They can't get work permits anymore so now they're unable to even have work experience, once they've graduated. So they're just kind of sitting in limbo. So I just wanted to share that bad experience with you and to ask you because as an educator, as a social worker, as a support person, being married to a tribal leader, it's very important for our kids to have this experience. We're doing all we can and we need your help.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bani Kim: good morning, my name is bani asha kim dado levitt kromwell. i am eastern pomo, from robinson rancheria on my mother's side, and i am big valley rancheria on my father's side. i am here today to support senate bill 164 for post-secondary education and priority registration for tribal tanf recipients. tribal tanf is an aid separate from calworks, but it affects many of our native children in our communities. i am a tribal home visitor, i work for lake county tribal health as a family advocate. so i'm in the homes of native american families, and education is one major priority for our community. we just completed, at tribal health, a community needs and readiness assessment, and these are some of the statistics from that assessment. approximately 3,700 american indian, native alaskans live in lake county, that's according to the 2010 census. and 42% of those american indian, alaska natives in lake county, do live below the federal poverty line and that's according to the american community survey from 2011 to 2015. so that's what i'm dealing with as a family advocate. we also got some information about education. according to the national school boards association concerning school suspensions, out-of-school suspensions, the suspension rates, 9% of students in california were suspended between 2011 and 2015. during that same period, lake county, american indians and native alaskans were suspended at a 17% rate, almost double. when it comes to the high school dropout rate in lake county during the time period of 2010, 2015, in lake county, sorry, for california students, 12.3% dropped out between those years. in lake county, for american indian and native alaskans, during that same period, 25.2% dropped out. so that's one out of every four students do not complete their education on time. our needs and readiness assessment also surveyed 700 community native members. and, of those 700, we asked them, what are your priorities? what are your priorities for yourself and your family? and we gave them approximately 18 options of their priority in our community, and we only took the top five. and out of those top five, three are regarding education, job skills, and adult education was one that was a priority. helping people stay in school and increase our graduation rates is a priority. and getting our children ready for school. whether it be pre-k, whether it be kindergarten, middle school, or high school. so our community recognizes the importance of education. and our american indian and alaskan native students navigate high poverty rates, almost double the suspension rates, and definitely double the high school dropout rates.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 66, 'end': 78, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mike Herald: that's good to hear. this is mike with the western center on law and poverty. this was actually a provision that we worked with the legislation and the administration on in the 2013-14 budget i believe. the year after we went to a 24-month clock for calworks program. and the purpose was because they had such a limited time on assistance to be able to get through their welfare to work activities. it made sense that the families would get these, adults would get expedited enrollment, early enrollment opportunities to make sure they got the classes they need in a timely fashion. there was never any intent to exclude the tribal tanf population, and this is clearly a friendly amendment, and something we fully support. thank you.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Justin Salic: justin bani salic on the behalf of the california community colleges chancellor's office. and at this time we don't have a formal position but we're supportive of the concept and we'll keep working with the author on it as it goes forward.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cynthia Castillo: Cynthia Castillo on behalf of the Faculty Association of California Community Colleges, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eddie Crandell: eddie justin crandell, robinson rancheria tribal chair and the california tribal tanf partnership executive chair. i am in full support of sb 1164.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jim Steele: steele, supervisor lake county district three. i have three tribes in my district. that district is one of the most impoverished in the entire state. i have nine communities and all of them severely disadvantaged. i have three tribes, so we're all in the same boat over there. we really need some help all across the board and certainly for the tribes. the tribal members are proud of themselves and they're coming back. they're absolutely in need of this and we really need to support it as well as all of the other tribal functions in this state because they're all coming back, and they're teaching us how really to look forward and work on the land so that we are not, in a negative way, impacting the surroundings that we have. and lake county truly has some beautiful surroundings.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Howard: Brian Howard, California Federation of Teachers. We also don't have a formal position but this is something that I am recommending to our board. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kris Lev-Twombly: morning chair and members, kris eddie lev-twombly with the california state alliance of ymcas. keep my comments brief this morning. as the senator mentioned, we sponsored the original legislation in 2014 to establish the dash program. and last year worked with a number of after school providers, others in the field, and the department of education on an advisory council to design and launch the program, and we had our first year in 2016. i would say the results were good within the scale that we were able to achieve. but certainly, the problem that we're hoping to address through the program or begin to address through the program, is much larger than the scale we achieved in the first year, and would respectfully request more time. we certainly agree with the points made in the analysis as well as a recommendation for five years onset. whatever that time may be, there's some valuation project underway which should have a report in 2018. so, i think we're on track here. the value of the program senator and my colleague here both spoken well to that so we request your support for this mission today.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alejandro Espinoza: Alejandro Espinoza on behalf of State Superintendent of Public Instruction Tom Torlakson. The department currently does not have a position on the bill but we are just here to provide any technical assistance, if theres any technical questions.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 75, 'end': 88, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jeff Davis: Hi, thank you the opportunity to speak. My name is Jeff Davis, I'm the Executive Director with the California Afterschool Network. And we are a partner with the California Department of education expanded learning division. And in our work with that division we found that the division strongly supports the implementation of this bill. One piece of well not in an official capacity in terms of Tom Torlakson support. But they supported the implementation of this bill last year Without utilizing any of the funding available. And what we also find is that there's national favor for such a program. In fact, Texas just introduced a program called the Distinguished After School Health Program. And a similar bill was just introduced in North Carolina. Spurred really by favor with Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, the American Heart Association as well. In our look at it, Senator Jackson's bill last year received strong favor within the California Legislature. And the California Afterschool Network, who works closely with California's 4,500 Expanded Learning Programs as part of the system of support for expanded learning, is committed to assisting in the implementation of the bill by providing increased communication to the field and support for its implementation.
[{'start': 51, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 395, 'end': 408, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 881, 'end': 888, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Picker: thank you chair and committee. i'm picker i'm the president of the california public utilities commission and i can't promise to give you quite the polished presentation that my peers will offer you but i'm going to try to explain some of the key challenges, however, i hate to say this. i've been directed by my attorneys to first read a caution. so, out of an abundance of caution i note that the new rules regarding ex-party communications at the cpuc are in effect. there may be people in the audience today who qualify as an interested person as defined in the public utilities code. while i certainly to not intend to make any ex-party statements in response to your questions, if i speak about an issue related to any rate setting or judiciary matter at the commission, and an interest person is in the audience then the cpuc's ex-party reporting rules will be triggered theoretically, this is a simple concept, but in practice, it's challenging because i dont' know who in the audience is representing whom. so regardless, if i become aware that any interested person is present today and in response to your questions, i discuss a judicatory proceeding. then myself and that interested person present today will need to file a notice of ex-parte communications, then come back to this when i talk about some of the challenges and complications in implementing some of the legislator reforms from the last two years.
[]
Brian Kelly: thank you mr. chairman, assembly member mullin. i'm brian jonah kelly, the secretary for the california state transportation agency. and like secretary laird, i'd just like to give you a broad overview of our budget agency wide, including the seven transportation related departments that are in our agency.  and just by way of reminder, that includes the office of traffic safety, california transportation commission, caltrans, the board of pilot commissioners, high speed rail authority, california highway patrol, and the department of motor vehicles. these seven departments, three of which are among the largest in state government, are also very much the face of state government, for many californians. those who interact on a daily basis with caltrans, or dmv, or the chp. in total, our budget this year for all seven departments is $16.9 billion, and we employ 38,500 state workers, all toward keeping things moving in california as safely as possible. and, making sure we are licensing and protecting californians in the area of transportation. that's sort of the broad overview. like john did, i'd like to just comment on a couple of areas of interest, that these departments are working on that will either come before you in the budget context or in other policy contexts. one of course, that will be front and center in the budget is the governor's proposal to find a stable, on-going, permanent and user-based source for transportation funding going forward. we originally put out a package in last year's budget, or actually originally in the fall of 2015, and we reintroduced it in the budget this year, a 10 year package valued at about $43 billion. we have a mix of revenue sources from vehicle fees, to some slight modifications in the gasoline tax and the diesel tax, to generate sufficient revenue to largely invest in upgrading the assets of our transportation system. we have bridges and highways, and local streets and roads that have pretty significant deferred maintenance issues, on the order of $6 billion per year, just on the state asset side, and more than that local street and roadside. so the bulk of this program is aimed at fixing our assets, what we call fix it first. we also have revenue generated and dedicated to transit improvements. and a couple of new things in the budget this year, is one, what we call the congested corridors program. which is a program that is designed to encourage and help regions and localities that are addressing congestion at some of their most acute congestion points, through comprehensive plans and processes. this is most easily identified in san diego, work they did on i-5 north project, where the region got together and developed a program to deal with congestion in that corridor. that just didn't involve building a new lane, but involved, expanding a rail opportunity, and they're expanding bus rapid transit through that corridor, funding it with a tolled price facility. they also worked into it a habitat protection and some other things, so more comprehensive planning to deal with congested corridor issues. and trying to really make headway on congestion is one of the new programs that's in the governor's budget this year. we also are making some funds, 25 million available for what's called the freeway service patrol, which is mostly locally funded, but it is a service that is really designed to help move incidents when you have traffic incidents, stalls or whatever else. they're focused to get cars, stranded vehicles and people out of there as quickly as they can, to keep traffic moving in those areas. and we also are making money available for expanded planning grants, for locals and regions who are having to revise the regional transportation plans under sb375, which is legislation passed in 2008, i think it was. for more sustainable growth plans going forward, so as they do that, we want to help fund the updates to those plans. so that's obviously the biggest part of our budget this year, and the largest proposal, i think we'll be doing the most interaction with of all of you on. the dmv, i should mention, not necessarily it'll come before you this year, but in just a couple of days they'll be releasing an update to their autonomous vehicle or driver-less vehicle regulations. you may know, mr. chairman and assembly member, that currently we have a testing program on public streets and roads for this technology. that testing program requires drivers to be behind the wheel during testing, we have about 25 manufacturers who are participating in that program, they're testing in excess of 135 vehicles on public streets and roads. and now the challenge is how we lay out the process to test driverless vehicles and ultimately deploy those. and that's what we'll be articulating just at the end of this week, through a new rule making that will go to the office of administrative law, so that's moving forward. we are still working hard with the high speed rail authority on developing the nation's first high speed rail train, that is in construction in the central valley. a funding plan was just accepted, approved by the department of finance director, michael cohen. which will allow access to bonds later this spring to move forward on the central valley construction, that very important project. i would mention too that we have been quite successful, and hope that we can continue awarding transit capital grants, that we award through a program called the transit and inner city rail capital program, or tircp. these are grants that are made available through cap and trade funds. and they're designed to promote transformative, large transit projects around the state, and particularly those that increase connections between transit services, benefit disadvantaged communities, and reduce greenhouse gas emissions. and so in the last two funding cycles, we have awarded 615 million in grants to 28 projects around the state. i've been very pleased with the program as it's gone toward i think some of the higher priority transit projects around the state. about 60% of the funds go to southern california, about 40 are split between the bay area and the central valley. so that's consistent with some historical allocations for transportation, and that's a program we hope to continue going forward. finally, i just want to mention, because it's front and center in much of what we're doing now. but, the winter storms that have hit california in december, january, and february have taken quite a toll on our transportation infrastructure. for example, typically caltrans sets aside in the shop program about $250 million to deal with emergency response issues. so far through these three months, we have identified on the order of 370 damage sites throughout the state, and this is damage through sink holes, mud slides, in some cases structures collapsing. 370 such sites around the state, caltrans has executed 260 emergency contracts, and the value of the damage is right now estimated at about $687 million. so we've got a lot of work to do, we are working hard closely with the federal government to respond and get those sites repaired. at one time we had in excess of 40 road closures around the state about 44, that's now down to. i think it's down to 25 now and we are working steadily to open everything. so those storms have taken quite an impact as i said. i should also say to you, mr chairman and assembly member mullin, that the the good news on this impact is that largely this kind of work is federally reimbursed. so ultimately there is a reimbursement from their federal government to the tune of between 80 and 88% of the cost. so we will still be dealing with some significant costs here that the state will have to absorb, but these are generally federally reimbursible projects. so that was quick, sorry about that. but, a lot going on and i'm happy to answer any questions from them.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 46, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 52, 'end': 69, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 152, 'end': 157, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1095, 'end': 1099, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5174, 'end': 5187, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7458, 'end': 7464, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Anthony Simbol: i'm anthony brian simbol from the lao and joining me is my colleague, brian brown. the sergeant's passing around the handout that we'll be speaking from. i'm recognizing that in your subsequent budget hearings, you'll be going to detail a lot of proposals. we just want to provide some high level comments on some of the major proposals. so if you turn to page one which follows the cover sheet, it's just a table that summarizes the proposed budgets for the major policy areas under the subcommittee's jurisdiction. i thought the previous speakers did a good job of giving out the high level, the proposed funding level in their area as well as the major changes from current year. so i won't go into detail about the proposed budgets, but happy to take any questions you have afterwards. turn to the second page. as secretary kelly mentioned, the major issue before you in the area of transportation is the governor's proposed funding package to provide additional funding for transportation. our office recently released a report that laid out a roadmap to help you in your discussions and deliberations on developing a transportation funding package. and on the bottom of page two, lists out the various issues we've identified. the first issue is really to determine what transportation challenges you want to address and these can be different from what the administration is proposing. in recent years, our office has really recommended that you make highway maintenance, your highest priority when it comes to the state' share of funding for transportation. the next couple of steps is really, obviously, determining what level of funding is needed to meet your identified needs and then looking at what revenue sources to come up with to generate that funding. you're going to want to look at the sort of stability of those revenue sources, as well as tying any one time needs that you identified to sort of one time sources. in other words, if there's some sort of backlog or deferred maintenance needs out there, you don't necessarily need ongoing funding to address those. the next issue that you want to think about is sort of the distribution of your identified funding to different programs. i won't get into much too detail, but the governor's proposal really for a lot of his new revenue, particularly from a new vehicle registration charge of tax of $65. he proposes a complex distribution that has different formulas, that are different than sort of the way existing funding goes out. we'd recommend that you take a more simplified approach than the governor, as well as look at the existing formulas you have for transportation, perhaps those don't currently meet your priorities and you want to reexamine those. lastly, we recommend that you really look at how the new programs, to the extent you establish new programs that the governor is going to administer those programs. and really setup an accountability system that's going to assure that whatever funding you provide is used efficiently and used effectivel, and we really recommend using the existing infrastructure you have with the california transportation commission team to provide oversight to ensure that the funds really meet the needs you've identified. on the next page, i'll turn over to mr. brown who's going to go over cap and trade and some other issues.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 70, 'end': 81, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 828, 'end': 833, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3283, 'end': 3288, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brian Brown: good morning, i'm brown with the legislative analyst's office. with respect to resource and environmental protection, there aren't any proposals nearly of the magnitude of the transportation proposal. you have quite a few budget proposals from the governor this year, but. most of them are relatively small and discrete. there are however, quite a few what we think are really important policy issues the governor has put in front of you in his budget and the first of them that i'll highlight is cap and trade, again, on page three. there certainly is, as there has been for the past several years, a proposal from the governor to spend cap and trade money. i won't go into detail on that. you do have a table that summarizes it, but i think really what the major policy question that the governor has put in front of you is whether to extend the program beyond 2020 with a two thirds vote. of course, cap and trade is one of your key program that you have in place in california to achieve your both your near term and your longer term climate change goals. for that reason, we do recommend approval of that policy change. we do think cap and trade presents, probably the most cost effective tool that you have. it is a market based mechanism and is able we think to help achieve. ghg reduction more cost effectively than many other options available and we do think that the two thirds vote can be very useful. one, it can help to achieve greater certainty in the market both in the near term and the longer term as they try to achieve those longer 2030 goals that you've established. and then also two-thirds of it would allow you to broaden the allowable uses of the fund to direct the revenues that are generated from auction to what you find to be the highest and best uses for those revenues. if you turn to page four, you actually heard from secretaries rodriquez and laird about each of the three special funds we have listed on this page, the fishing game preservation fund, the state parks and the recreation fund and the beverage container, recycling fund. these are three very important special funds in the resource and environmental protection arena. with each of these, what they have in common is they each have structural deficits and you heard that from the secretaries. i won't go into each one, you'll hear about the root causes of each one, but what i think the important policy question that's put in front of you as you face several of these structural deficits need to be resolved both in the near term. so in the case of the first two funds, the governor has a short-term solutions just budget year proposals to address it, to keep the funds all in the budget year, but the governor doesn't provide a longer term solution. we would encourage the committee to think about not just the short-term, but think about the longer term. think about what the options are for creating solvent funds for beyond. and in doing that though, there are very important policy questions that you face. you have to think about whether you want to increase revenue into the fund, whether that's through increasing the fees or taxes that going to the funds and what are the implications then for users or beneficiaries or the fee payers whoever they may be. alternatively, you can think about with each of these whether you want to supplement the program with general fund. but of course, you have trade-offs in other parts of your budget with general fund use. and then finally, you can think about whether there are options to reduce expenditures in these programs, either through efficiencies if those can be identified or whether another option is to reduce service level and reduce expenditures accordingly. reduce the expectations for those funds. those are the kind of policy choices that you have and they're all difficult. lastly, if you turn to page five, i wanted to highlight two other important issues that we think will be in front of the committee this year. the first i realized you don't have, you didn't have secretary for cdfa here today. but just to highlight really quickly, the cannabis regulation issue is going to be an important one. it's actually cross-jurisdictional, not only for this community but some of your other communities as well. there is of course in the implementation of regulation for medical and non-medical cannabis. budget proposals you'll have to review and you'll certainly want to do oversight of how departments are implementing the new regulation. but there's also a very important policy question the administration has indicated that it's going to present to you, which is how to align the two regulatory systems that were established under state law for medical cannabis and in the proposition 64 for non-medical cannabis. we think in general make sense to align these things to create better efficiency reduce potential confusion in the market. but there are a lot difficult, potentially become difficult decisions to make there. and at this point, we don't have the draft language so we certainly encourage you to request that from the administration when you have that opportunity. and then finally, i think both secretaries rodriquez and laird mentioned drought funding. there is $178 million in drought related funding in the budget this year. most of that is general fund. certainly the administration acknowledges, as we get through the wet season, they'll reevaluate how much of that is really needed, we think that's appropriate. we would also though encourage you to think about what parts of funding that has been proposed, all this funding has been proposed, excuse me, is one kind, proposed by the administration. but we think that there may be some components of it that you may want to think about as creating permanent funding, certain data collection and dissemination. water monitoring types of information that may be important for longer term resiliency so that when future droughts come along, the state is better prepared to respond. with that, i'm happy to take any questions.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1863, 'end': 1872, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1877, 'end': 1882, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5186, 'end': 5195, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5200, 'end': 5205, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alan Roth: I will give my brief comments of our testimony for this morning. Good morning to Chairman Hill, Chairman Salas and Members of the Committee and staff. I am Alan Roth. I'm President of the Respiratory Care Board. I'm joined by Tom Wagner, my Vice President and Stephanie Nunez, our executive officer. I know you have a lot to cover today so I will provide you with a brief overview. The Respiratory Care Board was created by the Legislature in 1982 to protect the vulnerable population from the unqualified practice of respiratory care. The composition of the board consists of nine members. Four respiratory care practitioners, four public members and one physician/surgeon. Appointments to the board are made equally by the Governor, the Senate Rules Committee and the Speaker of the Assembly, each authority appointing three members to the Board. The Board is responsible for enforcing state laws pertaining to the practice of respiratory care, and regulates a single category of healthcare specialists, respiratory care practitioners. The RCPs are specialized healthcare practitioners who work under the supervision of medical directors and are involved in the prevention, diagnosis, treatment, management or re-rotation of problems affecting the heart and the lungs and other disorders as well as providing diagnostic, educational and rehabilitation services. PCP's provide care for those who are dependent upon life support and that cannot breathe on their own. RCP's treat patients with acute and chronic diseases including chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, trauma victims and surgical patients. They are typically employed in hospitals, however, a growing number of RCP's work in alternate care settings like subacute facilities, home medical device retail facilities, hyperbaric oxygen facilities, and sleep laboratories along with transport. The law governing RCPs, the Respiratory Care Practice Act requires licensure for individuals performing respiratory care. In carrying out its mandate to ensure the protection of the public shall be the highest priority in exercising the licensing, regulatory and disciplinary functions of the Board. In that sense, we screen every applicant for licensure to ensure minimum education and competency standards are met and conduct a thorough criminal background check with each applicant. We investigate complaints against licensees including those generated from updated criminal history reports and mandatory reporting of violations by licensees and employers. We aggressively monitor our CPs placed on probation. We exercise the authority of the penalized or disciplined applicants and licensees including issuance of citations and fines while public reprimands ordering denial, probation, or revocation of a license. We address current issues related to the unlicensed and/or unqualified practice of respiratory care. We promote public awareness of the mandate and its function as well as current issues affecting respiratory care. Since 1985, when the first license was issued, the Board has licensed over 39,000 licensees, of which over 20,000 remain active. The Board has a $3.8 million budget to which it manages closely. The last renewal fee increase was made by statute in the 1999 and was not implemented until 2002, over 15 years ago. Since our last sunset review four years ago, the most significant changes have taken place include the establishment of two additional respiratory baccalaureate degree programs as a result of SB 850, one of which I am involved with, Raul Modesto Junior College and Skyline College. Improving respiratory care competency standards by requiring the passage of an advanced competency exam for licensure AB 1972. Successfully implementing BreEZe with our new database. Entering into a contract with UC San Francisco to delve further into the issues that the board believes may significantly improve consumer protection. That's the end of my remarks, I will pass it on to Stephanie Nunez to continue. Wait, I apologize. I have one more thing. The Board is proud to share its success in meeting the performance targets. In early 2016, they were developed as part of the Consumer Protection Enforcement Initiative. The Board's performance targets for its enforcement program are 7 days to complete the complaint intake cycle, 210 days for the investigative cycle and 540 days for the formal discipline cycle. For years, the Board has consistently met all of its performance measure targets, with the exception of the formal discipline cycle, which includes processing time by the Office of Attorney General and the Office of Administrative Hearings. However, in 2016, for the first time, the Board met its formal discipline target with an average of 538 days to process a case from beginning to end. The Board is working closely with the Office of the Attorney General to improve processes and communication so that this target can be met on a more consistent basis. The Board is committed to conducting business in an efficient and effective manner, and responding to practice in operational issues in a proactive, forward-thinking manner. Moreover, the Board is committed to ensuring that consumer protection is always its highest priority. Now, I'm going to turnover to Stephanie Nunez, our Executive Officer.
[{'start': 90, 'end': 94, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 105, 'end': 110, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 156, 'end': 165, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 226, 'end': 236, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 260, 'end': 275, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3967, 'end': 3982, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5266, 'end': 5281, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Tannehill: Good morning, Chairman and members. Jennifer Tannehill with Aaron Reardon Associates, on behalf of the California Society for Respiratory Care. CSRC fully supports extending the sunset for the respiratory care board we're pleased that this board operates well and the public is protected, unlike some boards their DRCB was able to implement the system and make it work for them and work for vast numbers of practitioners who look forward to continued improvements and to the work the board is going to do on this strategic plan. CSRC recognizes that there has not been a statutory fee increase in over 15 years. Yet, the administration cost reads implementation cost of livings, staffing cost, et cetera, have all definitely risen over that time. We support increasing the fees necessary to keep a healthy and physically stable board. That has the resources to adequately protect the public and enforce the Respiratory Care Act. CSRS looks forward to discussions with the RCB and the Committee as the best way forward in this regard. Thank you for considering our position.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Monasky: Thank you, my name is Michael Monasky. I'm a respiratory therapist licensed by the State of California. I'm a member of the American Association for Respiratory Care and I'm a peer review, I've done peer review on a few scholarly journal articles. I'm not a member of The California Society for Respiratory Care because I don't believe they represent my needs. I disagree with the stand that has been taken by them that we should increase the fees. For the last five years, the Respiratory Care Board has been losing its funding Reserve and complained that it must yet again increase fees. For therapist from $230 to $250 compared to the $190 for registered nurses and shout out to all of you here. Meanwhile private schools have created an oversupply of respiratory graduates who cannot find employment. According to this commission on accreditation for respiratory care acore, which is a bill by Mr. Roth. According to that, four private Central Valley for-profit schools, four of them, and three of them are San Joaquin Valley College, yeah, San Joaquin Valley College, have graduated more practitioners than 10 Public community colleges in the Central Valley and Bay Area combined. You can see that on your chart that I've provided. When I graduated from American River College in December 2010. It would be a whole lot easier to be able to use the Dias. This is really an unfair advantage for us giving testimony from paper. When I graduated from American River College in December 2010 the unemployment rate for respiratory care practitioners in the Central Valley, was over 30% due to layoffs in the healthcare industry after the great recession in 2008. Unemployment rates remain to this day at 25% unemployment rate statewide and at least 20% in the Central Valley. It makes no sense to attend respiratory care classes in schools like San Joaquin Valley College while incurring $40,000 in tuition costs. A better education exists at state community colleges, which grant real transferable units toward a degree and at less than one-third of the cost, about $13,000. For-profit students end up with higher unemployment and idleness rates, and lower earnings six years after entering programs than do comparable students from other schools, and they have far greater student debt burdens and default rates on their student loans. Student debt at this point is $1.2 trillion in the United States. Although the Respiratory Care Board has launched a workforce study through UCSF, it has doggedly refused to consider the lag in employment for its graduates and the structural unemployment of its licensees. The board has also ignored my request, which you have a copy of on the back from June of last year, that the workforce study include non-acute, community and public health interventions and preventative measures in expanding the scope of practice for respiratory therapists. The greatest source of personal bankruptcy is unpaid healthcare costs. I encourage and ask the numbers off topic, slightly, to consider, to review and support Senator Richard Burr SB 562 a universal health care bill, and actually I'm going to have to ask you, which consolidates low and high risk. Another 20 seconds or so and that would. This is a time. Stay on point. Well, I think we're talking about health care costs and this is a business and professions and economic development Committee and I believe that these do interplay. This is a time when consolidation of licensing services as well consolidating low and high risk citizens in our country could find a result, could result in significant savings. renewing an individual board's power isn't as important as maintaining affordable healthcare resources and providing a well-educated workforce to fulfill our needs. I trust that the state DCA can license healthcare workers without special like the Respiratory Care Board that turned a blind eye to the reality of runaway costs, and the high unemployment of the very people they licensed. Thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 902, 'end': 906, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3052, 'end': 3064, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Elaine Howle: good morning. morning, thank you, mr. chairman or chairman and members. for the record, my name is howle. i'm the california state auditor accompanying me is laura keane she is the audit manager who worked on this particular project with the audit team, conducting the work at the board of registered nursing. as you indicated, mr. chairman, we issued an audit report in december of last year. we were required by statute, business and professions code asked us to conduct an audit looking at various processes that the board of registered nursing uses to resolve complaints. asked us to look at training of staff, coordinating with other agencies related to complaints or related to disciplining nurses and a variety of other issues. so what i'd like to do for you is step you through key issues. go through recommendations and then talk a little bit about what our view as the status of implementation of those recommendations. one thing i do want to mention is for those members who are new to the legislature, new to the state auditors office, after we conduct an audit an agency is required to respond to us at at least three intervals. 60 days after the report has been issued, six months, and one year, and of course they've always provided an initial response that's published with the audit report. so when i'm referring to the status of their implementation, it's only been a very short period of time. this is their 60 day response. so what you'll hear from me is a lot of these either been partially implemented or pending. the agency is working on a variety of the recommendations. they have put together an action plan that was a key recommendation that we made, we have looked at the action plan and we think the status of that recommendation's fully implemented. we think there could've been a little bit more detail in that plan, but certainly it is very robust and we're pleased to see the board of registered nursing taking that recommendation very seriously. so with that i'll launch into i have about six or seven issues and i will go through them relatively quickly. very high level and then certainly if you have detailed questions or want us to get into more detail we're happy to do that. so the first area that we looked at is the processing of complaints and how well the board of registered nursing was doing in completing and resolving complaints in a timely manner. and our first conclusion is they are failing to do that. in 2010 the department of consumer affairs came up with what was called the consumer protection enforcement initiative. what that required all of the health boards to do is to try to resolve complaints within an 18 month window, so we use that as our benchmark when we looked at some complaints, and we found that for the majority of the complaints we looked at, of course, we took a sample of about 40. 31 of those, so 70 some odd percent of those complaints were not completed within that 18 month window. what was more concerning to us, some of those complaints actually took up to three years to be completed and fully resolved. so why is that happening? of course, we ask that question. one of the key issues we identified is that the board is had not established specific milestones or goals for each stage of complaint resolution. so they weren't able to monitor or track how well are we doing or where are the bottlenecks occurring? why is it taking us so long to resolve and solve these complaints? another issue related to the timeliness of resolving complaints is how quickly they actually assign a complaint after intake to an investigator. and there's two avenues where a complaint could be assigned, either to an investigator at the board of registered nursing or an investigator with the division of investigations in consumer affairs. the distinction there is it depends upon the severity of the complaint. there are a variety of categories, four different categories. urgent, high priority and then there are two that are routine. urgent high priority needs to go to the division of investigations. they have peace officers who have a variety of skill sets and authority. that's stronger than the investigators at the board. the board investigators should be handling routine complaints, but what we found is these complaints are coming into the board and it's taking a long time for them to be assigned to an investigator. in fact, we found that they were not meeting their goal of 45 days. so, they receive a complaint. they need to get a decision made, do an analysis of the complaint. is this a urgent or high priority that needs to go to the division? if it's not, it needs to go to an investigator within the board. they're not getting that done within that 45-day window, again of the 40. we looked at, 60%, 24 of those were still not assigned to someone after that 45-day window. so again, taking too long to not only assign the complaints, but as i said a minute ago, resolving those complaints. what that lead us to see is one of the questions that was in the b&p request in the statute, is there a backlog? well, as of july of 2016, they had a backlog 184 complaints that had not yet been assigned to anyone. what was concerning is 71 of those complains were of urgent or high priority. so these are issues that are health and safety issues for patients that could be related to substance abuse issues. very serious issues or allegations that has come to the board and these are in a backlog. another issue related to resolving complaints is getting expert witnesses to assist. there are some situations where a complaint may have been completely investigated and they need an expert witness to evaluate that particular complaint, that particular investigation in the event. it goes to court. they need to have someone who has that type of expertise, an expert witness could be a nurse in a particular specialty, such as oncology, psychiatry, some of those sorts of areas of expertise. oncology, hospice, psychiatry, psychology are examples that we identified in the report. so, they were exceeding their goal again in trying to get expert witnesses to review some of these complaints that they had at least investigated. reasons for the delay for not getting an expert witness is the availability. one of the things the board said is they just don't have enough expert witnesses to handle the volume of complaints. as you heard from me, there were a lot of complaints that were of this high and urgent priority where they perhaps would need an expert witness. another issue the board raised with us was the pay, the hourly rate for nurses and particularly some of the expert witnesses was not high enough to really attract individuals to want to participates in that aspects of resolution. so that is in a nutshell, the issues related to processing complaints. we made six recommendation in this area. three of those relate to process. so, we suggested to the board or recommended by march of this year get formal policies established for specific timeframes for each key stage of a complaint resolution process. make sure that management is monitoring each of those stages to see if there are bottlenecks, to see if there are concerns with how investigators are conducting their investigations. establish a plan to eliminate the backlog awaiting assignment to investigators. those are related to process. related expert witnesses by june of this year, we recommended that the board develop a process to track its effectiveness and recruiting expert witnesses. look at its licensing renewal process to include questions or inquiries to nurses who are renewing their license as to whether, or not they would like to participate as. or be an expert witness on behalf of the board and then take steps to address the hourly pay rate issue. so three recommendations in that area. again, as i indicated in my opening comments, this is very early, it's only been six months. i mean 60 days, i apologize for the process recommendations, those three. we think they've partially implemented. they have taken this very seriously. they're working on developing some timeframes and included some of that in their action plan. again, i will defer to the board to get into more specifics, but we've seen some progress there. with respect to expert witnesses, they've also provided some assertions to us that they're looking at the hourly rate, that they are working on modifying some of their materials for renewals. so we're saying, pending. the reason it's pending versus partial pending as we just need to see evidence and once we see that evidence and we've look at it, we can perhaps make an assessment that's been fully implemented. so it's a little stronger than i partially implemented, just to educate you a little bit about the distinction there. the next area that we looked at is their analysis of data and this really ties to the breeze system where the board lacks accurate data that it's important for them to assess their efficiency, and effectiveness in resolving these complaints. again, when i talked earlier about not monitoring and not having key milestones in their resolution process, they also don't have good accurate information in the breeze system. so, we had a couple of issues there that i wanted to comment on. they lack a reliable way to monitor the performance, because they have weak controls and what we meant by that is an individual inputting information into breeze doesn't necessarily have to follow the process. there's a process for them conducting an investigation and resolving a complaint, but when we were looking at the data in breeze, much of it was inaccurate, it didn't make sense if you were trying to align what was being put into breeze to their process. so, we actually had to take some of those entries out and eliminate them from our analysis. so, they're not monitoring their staff. one example we've pointed in two in the report is staff can assign a case to an investigator even though when you look in the breeze system, the case has been closed. it doesn't make sense. so there were entries like that, that really caused us to question the accuracy of the information in there, and the reason they need accurate information, of course is to be able to monitor this complaint process, but also to look at their work load to determine whether or not they have an off staff. do they need more investigators? where are again, the bottle next in the process occurring? so, we have three recommendations with respect to data accuracy and the breeze system. we felt they needed to work immediately with consumer affairs to set up input controls in the breeze system. so that if i'm someone trying to enter information into it and i'm trying to assign, for example, to use my example, a case to an investigator and the system says that case is closed, it won't allow me to enter that information. so, those types of controls to try to minimize the amount of inaccurate information being input into breeze. coupled with that, train staff who are required to input information. make sure they understand how to use breeze, how to input information, etc. once that information or those controls have been set up, the training has been established. then we're suggesting after about a six month window, get that information and now you will be able to do some analytics and do some analysis of workload, staffing, etc. again, similar to other recommendations, those have been partially implemented. again, i will defer to the board, in their action plan they do discuss steps they are taking and intend to take. they have to go through a variety of steps to make some modifications to the breeze system. the next area is related to the assignment of complaints. so it's very similar to what i talked about a few minutes ago. but they're not adhering to guidelines. so earlier when department of consumer affairs established this consumer protection enforcement initiative. they had guidelines for all of the boards to follow, all the health boards, but in 2016, state law was enacted that required boards to follow this guidance. so if it is a high priority or urgent matter it needs to go to a division of investigations investigator rather than a board investigator and the distinction as i said is the division of investigation, those are peace officers. they go through very specific training. they have more authority to arrest, to issue search warrants, etc. do a variety of things far beyond what a non-sworn investigator that works at the investigative unit within the board. so we were seeing that we were not doing a good job as i said earlier. about assigning those cases promptly, but also making sure that those of urgent or high priority are going to the appropriate investigator, and in the next area when i touch on that you'll understand why that's very important. so even though there was the requirement, the division of investigations was concerned because over a time frame they saw the number of complaints being referred to them drop. so they on their own initiatives said we need to do an analysis and a reconciliation and what they found is, they looked at about two and a half year window, two and a half window and looked at about 175 complaints, 171 complaints, i apologize. urgent or high priority, 111 of those were urgent. 60 of them were high priority, and these were not being referred to the division. so they were not being reviewed by the appropriate type of individual. that had the skill set or that the expertise to do that type of work. the board indicated to us they felt the guidelines were unclear, that they had discretion, but again as i mentioned in 2016 there was a state law enacted. that required the boards to follow the guidelines under that consumer protection enforcement initiative. the other issue that the board raised is that the division of investigations, their investigators, it's more costly because, of course, they have the post training, they're peace officers. it's more expensive for them to be conducting an investigation, but as we said in the audit report, although i'm sure cost is an issue. when you're talking about health and safety of individuals and the protection of the public and there's a state law that requires you to follow this guideline. you need to do so. so our recommendation, pretty much common sense, immediately comply with the law. adhere to this consumer protection enforcement initiative and work very close to the division investigation. so that you are referring the appropriate compliant to inappropriate individuals to investigate those complaints. the next area to talk about ties to that. what we found, is we found incomplete investigations were causing delays in discipline or resolution of a complaint, and the reason these were incomplete investigations is because some of them were being assigned to an appropriate individual. that individual did not gather sufficient evidence. so when there was discussion with the attorney general's office or with consumer affairs to take disciplinary action against a nurse. we don't have sufficient evidence to do that. we need to re-open this investigation and conduct additional work. so we found not only at the board but some at the division of investigations that required a supplemental investigation. they had to conduct additional work, so again that lengthens the time for resolution of that complaint. so what we suggested in our recommendation is by this month, march of 2017. board of registered nursing needed to work with consumer affairs to implement a mechanism to track and monitor supplemental investigation requests to determine why are those occurring. is it a training issue, is it an issue where it was assigned to the wrong unit? whether it was at brn and it should have been at division of investigations. again this recommendation has been partially implemented. so then that took us to training. so we looked at the board of registered nursing and did they have a formal training program? they do not. they lacked a formal training program for their enforcement staff and the risk there is you have inconsistent and inefficient processing and resolving of complaints. so they don't have that comprehensive program. what we saw that they are using is they have a checklist and if i'm a new investigator i'm using that checklist to learn how to conduct an investigation and then i'm shadowing someone. now that's certainly an approach to use, but what we were looking and hoping to see is very formal training, specific courses, specific training programs. now the division of investigations, again they're peace officers. so they have to go through post training, so they do receive some formal training, but the investigators at the board are not receiving that type of very specific and important training. consumer affairs also provides training resources to their boards and their enforcement academy. the concern we had here was not with the training program, but that the board of registered nursing is not tracking who's taking the training. when are they taking it? in fact, we asked management give us a comprehensive list of who's gone through the leadership academy, the training programs. what type of training classes are they taking? they couldn't provide us that information. so our recommendations here, we had four, and again, they are tied to training. the board needs to work with consumer affairs, and also collaborate with the attorney general's office to develop what we believe a biannual training program. that will include techniques for gathering evidence, ensuring that all investigators take this training, and they learn how to draft reports. just all of the different steps that they need to learn and develop a stronger skill set in conducting investigations. once they collaborate with consumer affairs and develop a training program and develop a published procedural guide. so that investigators can use that as a tool. it should include evidence gathering techniques, descriptions of what constitutes sufficient evidence. so we minimize the number of supplemental investigations or subsequent investigations we have to do. the final two recommendation related to training is just develop a system by march. that allows them to track the internal and external trainings that their staff participate in. the external would be the training that consumer affairs provide through their enforcement academy and then finally, by december of this year, we are suggesting that the board implement a very formal training program. in consultation with the division of investigations, the attorney general's office. get them all together, let's develop a very formal training program that will benefit all enforcement staff. similar to others, again, these are partially implemented or pending, and it's been a 60 day window. so, two or three more issues, one is related to fingerprints. the board of registered nursing, our conclusion has failed to conclude that all nurses have fingerprint records on file as required and as of march of 2009, this was a requirement that nurses provide fingerprints upon license renewal. if they weren't already in the system. and we weren't seeing that happening. we looked at the breeze system. and so breeze had a control in place that said if a nurse submitted a renewal application they didn't have fingerprints on in the system that that would be put on hold. their renewal would be point on hold. unfortunately what we found is that the board of registered nursing was overriding that because they went to their legacy system and saw well some of these individuals have fingerprints in the legacy system. so let's go ahead and override that particular control. the problem with that is if you're overriding all the time, and we found close to 60,000 instances where they overrode these controls. you may not necessarily have someone in the system and you've provided renewal to a nurse without them complying with the statutory requirement. so what consumer affairs started to do was reconcile between their various systems, their legacy system and breeze, and also data provided by the department of justice. and they identified about 24,000 individuals who did not have fingerprint records in the system and another 4700 who didn't have them either in breeze or in a system with department justice. so our recommendations were stop over writing unless you have a very specific reason and if you do need to overwrite it has to go through the executive officer for approval and document your rationale for doing so. the bottom line is we're suggesting don't override the system is breeze was established that control for very specific purpose. and then the other recommendation was related to the reconciliation, get it finalized and then once complete take those steps immediately to get those nurses who do not have fingerprints in the system. fingerprinted in the system so that in the event something is triggered in the fingerprint system that you can take action against a particular nurse. collaboration with other agencies, we have two more issues and then we can launch into questions. what the statute asked us to look at is whether or not the board was doing a good job of coordinating and collaborating with other state agencies. and health boards to ensure effective enforcement. so they do collaborate with other health boards and agencies, but it doesn't have formal agreements with these entities outlining circumstances under which a calibration should accrue, and making sure that is happening consistently. so they do interact with the medical board, the board of vocational nursing, psych tech board, and the board of pharmacy. these are all boards within consumer affairs. what we found is there are some employers state law does not require employers of nurses to report complains or discipline to brn. so we had a legislative recommendation related to that, but also there are vocational nurses. so employers of vocational nurses are required to report to the board of vocational nursing. any licensed vocational nurse that either resigns or is suspended or as terminated for cause so there is some leverage, but it's not comprehensive and specific to all nurses. so what we suggested is by june of this year brn should establish formal agreement with all of these agencies and health boards. that have any information that would be important when related to a nurses conduct. the other recommendation is again by june of this year brn should work with consumer affairs and other boards. to determine whether modifying breeze to include a capability that would allow it to properly notify brn. so if all of the boards are using breeze and a different board inputs information related to a nurse. that could be information that is triggers a report to the board of registered nursing. so it's my understanding that consumer affairs has worked on this particular recommendation and our assessment, my staff's assessment is that they have fully implemented that some of those modifications to breeze. so the last area is notifications. so what's state law requires the board to do is to notify complainants of initial action taken. if the complainant is known, if the complainant has voluntarily given their information. there's a requirement in state law that that person should be notified within 10 days that initial action has been taken on a complaint. similar once that complaint is finished and the issue has been resolved. there's a requirement that they should circle back to that particular complainant who is known to let them know what the final action taken has been. we weren't seeing that occurring consistently. so we had recommendations to the board. again to be completed by this month would developing desk procedures that really identify specific actions enforcement. staff need to take when processing complaints where the complainant is known. again notifying them of the initial actions and then certainly related to final disposition and then we also suggested that management needs to perform routine audits of complaint files. to monitor incoming complaints, final dispositions and tying that to the notifications. so members and that's amvery high level analysis or presentation of the key issues we identified. as i said we issued the report in december, mid of december last year we were required to have it done by january. so we wanted to get it done before members returned. we have received a 60 day response from the board that was effective the end of february our analysis. so of the 23 recommendations to the board we believe two have been fully implemented. the one related to the action plan and the one i just discussed related to breeze quite a few 12 or partially. so they've started, they've made progress, and then we have nine that are pending. those are, as i indicated pending because we need to see evidence of some of the action's they've assertive they've taken. so we fully intend to continue work with the board. since we received the 60 day response the next status report will be at six months. so that'll be about four months from now in june. so with that i will stop and we'll hopefully answer any questions members may have, thank you.
[{'start': 99, 'end': 104, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 158, 'end': 169, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Laura Courtney: Good morning, Mr. Chair and Committee Members. My name again is Laura Courtney and I'm an Audit Principle with the California State Auditor's Office. To address that issue the Board of Registered Nursing has developed and submitted to the Department of Consumer Affairs a system information request that spells out what needs to be done to address this issue with the input controls. Currently that is being reviewed and then will be approved by DCA as well as the system developer. I don't recall the date that BRN estimated that system request could be approved, but I do know that it's in the near future.
[{'start': 64, 'end': 78, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joseph Morris: Good morning, distinguished Members of the Committee. I am here and I'm Doctor Joseph Morris. It is a pleasure to be here this morning to present before the Committee. And on behalf of the entire Board of Registered Nursing, we thank you for this opportunity. In 2014 the BRN Sunset report and background paper highlighted several concerns and recommendations that included the licensing unit prolonged processing times and significant backlogs. The breeze functionality issues with online applications. And the issues with the renewal process, and the enforcement programs performance measures in which there were significant delays in the case closures and case referrals. Unfortunately, the concerns with enforcement unit prompted a 2016 state audit of the complaint intake unit with 26 recommendations for corrective action. In an effort to correct many of these deficiencies and areas of improvement, the Board began assessing its administrative and operational needs. In September 2016, the Board began working with Solit of DCA to map out several of the BRN's workflow and business processes. In order to be more efficient. In addition we conduct the staff satisfaction survey to identify the staff's unmet needs, concerns and departmental errors of improvements. We also adjusted our day to day operations. That included work schedules, flex time, reorganization, and reassignment of staff duties to provide better customer service to assist with monitoring our process improvements. And finally, we submitted budget change proposals to DCA to request additional staff to assist with the increased workloads of the department. Now moving on to the backlog, and the licensing unit. During the years of 2015, 2016, the board acknowledges that we did have a significant backlog in the licensing application time frame, which many of you may be aware of. In many cases, the processing of an application may have taken up to seven months to complete. During the fall of 2016, the BRN collaborated with DCA and adopted a process of submission of electronic transcripts via the cloud. As of today, 98% of the 143 nursing schools have subscribed to this process. Through the use of the cloud technology, the licensing application through process is enhanced. Staff is able to receive and process transcripts immediately. Data is easily tracked. The paper processes are eliminated, creating a more eco-friendly environment. The cloud also allows us to, again, transfer the transcripts more rapidly, new graduates are now employed in a timely manner, within two to three weeks post graduation. All of which has lead to increased customer satisfaction. In fact, we're currently processing applications for licensees on an average of 42 days now. This time frame is less than our regulatory time frame. Again, initially, we were up to seven months, so now 42 days and less. Moving on to the fingerprint renewal matters. It has taken some time to reconcile the fingerprint data between the BRN, Department of Consumer Affairs, and the Department of Justice. However, over the last five months the board has worked collectively with DCA to correct this matter. In October 2016, DCA provided the board with reconciled data from the Department of Justice which identifies the population of nurses requiring fingerprints. Initially in December 2016, the board identified a total of 29,000 licensees with incomplete fingerprint information. Over the past several months the board has implement a strategic plan to contact these licensees regarding the fingerprint renewal requirements. As of today, the board has identified now 12,000 remaining licensees with incomplete information. Each day the board continues to obtain and process fingerprint results for this population. We do recognize that this is an issue, and has caused concerns without constituent groups and therefore, have implemented a system information change request in the Breeze system to add fingerprint notification information into the online renewal transactions. This feature would notify the RNs upon license renewal if they need fingerprints. This notification feature is scheduled to be launched in May of 2017. Other areas the board is currently addressing include clinical displacement. The growing number of concerns regarding clinical displacement amongst public and private nursing programs has been brought to the board's attention. Therefore, the board is currently assembling a focus group with key state coders that includes dings, directors, hospital administrators, legislative representatives, and such, to discuss the prelicensure clinical displacement concerns. This meeting is scheduled for April 11, 2017. Now moving on to the enforcement issues, okay? In response to the 2016 audit of the enforcement complaint intake unit, the BRN has updated its business practices to be more efficient and effective with resolving complaints and moving enforcement cases through the disciplinary process in a timely manner. We've implemented a fast track process with the attorney's general's office to address that out of state discipline cases. We have also improved our communication efforts with our stakeholders on a routine basis. That includes the Division of Investigation, Department of Consumer Affairs and Attorney General's Office. We have now implemented former policies and procedures that consists of desktop manuals that are also stored on DCA's secured network. We now have a management monitoring plan. We also have ongoing staff training that is tracked and monitored by our supervisors. We are now able to create detailed reports to track the milestone of each enforcement case in order to resolve complaints in a timely manner. We have also collaborated with the Attorney General's Office, Division of Investigation and in the Department of Consumer Affairs to create a training program for the BRN and Department of Investigation- I'm sorry, Division of Investigation Unit. In fact, this training is expected to be completed by March 22nd of 2017. As of December 2016, the board became fully compliant with implementing the Consumer Protection Enforcement Initiative Guidelines. Adopting these guidelines, and increasing the number of cases assigned to staff has assisted the board with eliminating the backlog of unassigned investigative cases in which the Auditor mentioned earlier. And finally, each month the board continues to improve on its enforcement actions. And based on the current DCA published performance measure, the board's overall enforcement time frames are now within the top third of the 21 Healing Arts board. However, we combine at the top six board's workload volume of investigation cases. Their outcomes are less than one third of the board's total workload. Again, Committee, it's a pleasure to be here this morning. This concludes my opening statement and we are prepared to answer questions. After the series of questions, I would like to provide the Committee with a closing statement. Thank you, once again.
[{'start': 79, 'end': 92, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christina Spig: good morning. christina jonah spigg chief of licensing in administrative services. so i'm. in regards to issue number seven which is regarding fingerprints. the board acknowledges that fingerprint submission and licensing notification is an issue. we have worked with dca to reconcile the doj fingerprint data. and since december 2016 we have been in the process of notifying our licensees of the need to submit fingerprints. in december 2016 we initiated a roll out plan to notify approximately 4700 licensees with no fbi and no doj fingerprint results. to let them know that they need to submit fingerprints. two notification letters, over a 60-day period, were sent to these licensees. and those not in compliance are in the process of being referred to the enforcement unit, for potential disciplinary action. as of today, approximately 12,000 active licensees with one level of service. what that means is either a doj response or an fbi response. in debris system remain incomplete. for this remaining group, we have initiated a notification to approximately 1,400 licensees that are due to expire within the next four months. and we'll continue to notify the remaining group of licensees to ensure that it's completed prior to their renewal.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 35, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Stacie Berumen: Stacie Berumen, Assistant Executive Officer for the Board of Registered Nursing. So taking a note of the enforcement audit where training plans have been developed for all of the different staff levels and enforcement. We've also taken that to heart in all of the other areas of the Board. So in updating our procedure manuals for all of the other areas, we're also identifying official training plans for all the different levels of staff. And those areas that they will be required to follow as well.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joseph Pacheco: i'm joseph christina pacheco. i'm the deputy chief of complaint intake and investigations and i'm going to take this one. thankfully, the board has worked with dca. and their breeze team to come up with an incredible robust set of data reports that will track every key mile stone through the time that complaint comes into the board or submitted online. and through every input control that we've created in our policies and procedures. our managers have come up with individual team management monitoring plans to evaluate those data reports and every key milestone throughout the complaint process through the units i supervise and the units that shannon supervises, as well. through final discipline measures. the data is robust. we're starting to get this reports now. the time frames, we can, the hope is we haven't had full production version of this reports. although we do know what data is going to be in there and they will be able to touch on. every single staff, every single unit, all the way through the entire complaint resolution time frame.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 650, 'end': 657, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Stacie Berumen: stacie joseph berumen again. so this could be a two fold issue, it could be an issue that involves staff. it is also with our board members as well because staff make decisions on different types of outcomes for disciplinary cases based on our disciplinary guidelines. so staff follows disciplinary guidelines, but we also do training and orientation for our board members to help train them on the enforcement and discipline process so that they are aware of the different types of violations that could occur and what the types of disciplinary outcomes are. so we will be looking at those processes to see if there's any areas of improvement that we can find in order to resolve this issue.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Jackson: Doctor Pan, Michael Jackson, just to curtail on what Board member Gerber said, During our deliberations, we have DCA legal with us and they keep the Board members within the guidelines. And if there's any questions, the Board members are there to have legal and the staff present during our deliberations and there is healthy discussions from the vast amount of strong personalities on the Board to ensure that we come to a fair and equitable decision for our licensees and to ensure that we're protecting the public constantly.
[{'start': 12, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 66, 'end': 72, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Deborah Wolff-Baker: My name is Deborah Wolff-Baker. I'm a masters-prepared nurse family practitioner and have been a registered nurse for over 32 years. I hold two advanced practice national Board certifications, one in family practice and one in hospice and palliative care. Over most of my career, I have specialized in the care of older adults. I've always striven to provide the highest quality care for my patients, and have sought to create a model of care that recognizes their unique challenges and your unique needs. For the past nine years, I've worked with the distinguished Dr. Timothy Gieseke providing home-based palliative and primary care, complex chronic disease management as well as care of the elderly in long term care facilities through a multi specialty physician group in Sonoma County. In 2011, I had a complaint filed against me despite having met or exceeded every standard of care. One which should never have gone to an accusation stage, and should certainly have been dismissed by the administrative law judge when the accusation was made, but ended up taking on a life of its own, resulting in a three year probation A $20,000 fine, a severely diminished income and over a $120,000 spent on my defense and financial devastation for my family. While I can appreciate that the BRN's attempts to correct many identified issues, since the State Auditor's investigatory report on the California Board of Registered Nursing came out in December, it has begged for a companion document that describes the effects of this arbitrary and broken system of investigation, discipline, and enforcement on the nurses who have had a complaint submitted against them. In my case, the process took over eight months for a BRN investigator to even contact me in regard to a complaint. And I was never told the nature of the complaint against me in order to answer to it. From there, it took another 18 months to hear back from the BRN that an accusation had been made. During that entire 26 month period, the BRN investigators never spoke with my collaborating MD. They never spoke with any MD in regard to the case nor did they ask me for any clarifying information. During this time my case information was forwarded to a supposed BRN expert. This, quote, expert had no experience in the type of care I provide. She did not do geriatric care, complex chronic disease management, dementia care, palliative care, or house calls, all areas of specialty practice. She had no basis or demonstrated competency to make an opinion on any of the elements of this case. From complaint to hearing took an excruciating 47 months in my case. From the distortions that occurred during my hearing, it appears that truth and facts played very little part in the process after an accusation against a nurse is made and it doesn't matter that the investigation was incomplete or poorly done. At that point, the deputy Attorney General who prosecutes is only interested in winning, it seems, at any cost. Inaccuracies, twisted facts and outright untruths by the prosecution make a case so convoluted it's impossible for a nurse to win. No wonder the 53% in cost recovery fines in 2014 as referred to in the report. At the hearing the BRN expert witness, another one, had no demonstrated competency in the area of APRN practice I specialize in. He had obviously never heard of the McGeer Criteria on antibiotics stewardship utilized by both CNS and CDE-
[{'start': 11, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 570, 'end': 585, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Amy Farrell: absolutely, good morning ladies and gentlemen. thank you for your time today. my name is amy stacie farrell and in the interest of time i have already gone to the trouble of abridging my comments and i will leave them in full for the record. i'm doing the best i can.
[{'start': 89, 'end': 107, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Phil Greiner: Good morning. My name is Dr. Phil Greiner, I'm here as the President of the California Association of Colleges of Nursing. I am also the Director of the School of Nursing at San Diego State University where we have one of the three midwifery programs in the state. I'm here really to lend our support to the current Board. Keep in mind the board is all relatively new having been sunsetted and re-appointed. The Executive Director, executive officer has been doing a phenomenal job since he came on board and I want this group to recognize that as you have. And we have been impressed with the amount of change that has taken place in a relatively short period of time. In particular, our nurseries and graduate group, our graduating group, was processed in less than two weeks. That's phenomenal compared to what it had been in the past. We did cooperate with the Board. We continue to work with the board, meeting with them on a regular basis because we need more cooperation between the BRN and various constituencies on the education side and on the practice side and I think our new EO is doing that. So, I'm just here to lend our support to the work that is being done, the improvements that have been made, a lot of what you saw in the report was in prior years and I think we're on the right path. Thank you.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Murray: Good morning. My name is Laura Murray. I am here to speak as a mother of three children, all born out of hospital.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Evelyn Drinker: things that happened in sacramento. my name is evelyn, d-r-i-n-k-e-r. i'm a former rn/phn, public health nurse. i majored in nursing at san jose state university, graduated 1985, had a clean license until my scuffle with the board. i earned an administration of justice degree with honors in 2013, and all of my professors were local law enforcement, including sheriff john mcginnis. they were all interested in what i went through, but enough about me. rx staffing has been in at least 33 lawsuits since 2002. eda velasquez, now deceased, was a diabetic, slow healing patient. whose cancer went unrecognized by an rn openly practicing as an unlicensed medical doctor from rx staffing. there was no justice for mrs. velasquez. will you help raymond pierce? raymond pierce, until he was found, was living in a unheated, unfinished garage as temperatures dipped to a cold 38 degrees, with wind gusts up to 20 miles per hour here in sacramento on that chilly february. raymond is an older developmental disabled adult who needs help with all of his activities of daily living. and he's waited since 2010 for the authorities to take his situation very seriously. can you help him get justice for the life-threatening conditions he was trapped in, due to kenneth ermin, rn, at rx staffing? the board of nursing has been asked and refused to investigate kenneth ermin, his staff, and rx staffing, including the unlicensed doctor who worked there. i begged you to do that. atrocious infection control, and i use that term disparagingly, was practice with nurses ordered to keep supposedly sterile supplies in their home refrigerators. i refused to do that. i step on toes, i, sorry. i'm wrapping it up. it is amazing raymond pearce didn't die from patient neglect and malpractice, but his 2012 lawsuit is still waiting in the courthouse mere blocks away. if you can't, or refuse to help patients like ada valasquez and raymond pearce, you should be under sunset review every single year or just close down. and frankly you owe me an apology for investigating me, an lvn who didn't know what i was talking about and couldn't be expected to. i'm done.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 369, 'end': 382, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 511, 'end': 524, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 716, 'end': 725, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 741, 'end': 755, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 757, 'end': 771, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 966, 'end': 973, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1250, 'end': 1263, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1348, 'end': 1361, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1710, 'end': 1724, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1894, 'end': 1907, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1912, 'end': 1926, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Judy Berg: good afternoon. i'm berg. and i am the executive officer of healthimpact which is california's nationally recognized nursing workforce center. and i've had the pleasure of working with the board of registered nursing, the executive officers and staff for a while, and have to say that i am so impressed with the improvements that are being made recently under dr. morris's leadership. there is real progress being made and i hope that continues, we're here to partner with them in making that happen and looking forward to the process improvements that will happen in the future. i'm here to support them very strongly and glad that we're having this discussion here today.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 364, 'end': 370, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Marcia Faller: Good afternoon. I'm Marcia Faller, Chief Clinical Officer with AMN Healthcare. I'm a registered nurse and been licensed in California since 1983. AMN Healthcare is the largest supplier of temporary staffing in California. And as such, we bring several thousand nurses into the year every single year, many of which make the state their home on a continuing basis after working here. We, therefore, are highly experienced in the endorsement process in California, and pushed about 1,500 nurses through that process in 2016. I'm here to support the Board of Nursing as well and Dr. Morris's efforts at process improvement. And we have seen significant improvement since the summertime highs of 14 to 16 weeks to achieve a license by endorsement. To our experience in 2017, once we moved on to the online electronic processing, where that processing time has dropped there's 200 applicants we had in January and February of this to six weeks. So we continue to support the process improvements that the board, the current existing staff of executive and the board are putting through the process and continue to offer our support as well as we can. Thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 580, 'end': 586, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tina Ruffo: hi, good afternoon. my name is tina amy ruffo, i've been a nurse for 30 years. and i'm a registered nurse member of the california nurses association. there are more registered nurses in california than any other licensed health care professionals. the brn oversees more registered nurses than the total number of licenses of the medical board, the pharmacy board, and the dental board combined. we appreciate the brn staff, who are public sector employees who work hard to make sure that we get our licenses renewed and that we have resources about nursing practice on the brn website. thank you, brn, we appreciate that you keep your consumers safe and to keep us updated on our nursing practice requirements, thank you.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 598, 'end': 601, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sharlene Troy: good morning, my name is troy, i've been a nurse for 35 years, and i'm a member of california nurses association. i've read about the tax on the brn, that are supposedly being done in the interest of consumer safety. the nursing profession has one of the lowest percentages of complaints filled against licensees among the health professions. in addition, nurses have ranked as the most respected profession for the 15th year in a row. we definitely care about our patients and we would like to see the respect that the public has for nurses reflected in the way the legislature treats our licensee board. consumer protection is a mission of the board and it is the mandate of every registered nurse. please keep in mind our consumer advocacy is referred to under the law as patient advocacy, and patient advocacy is what we strive for every day. thank you. good afternoon. good afternoon. my name is pamela rouse, and i'm a registered nurse, member of the california nurses association. i've been a registered nurse for 40 years.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 901, 'end': 913, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Linda Walsh: Good afternoon. My name is Linda Walsh I'm a certified nurse midwife. I have been for 36 years and I'm the immediate past President of the California Nurse Midwives Association. I would like to thank the State Auditor for this very, very thoughtful and insightful report. I will quickly, this will be a quick delivery of, some people got that.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roxanne Goulde: good afternoon. i'm roxanne, representing the american nurses association of california. we're here to show our support for doctor morris and the board. we believe they've inherited the scars and flaws of the previous board and frankly much like you, we were cynical. we didn't know that it was possible to turn that ship around and we are so pleased with how seriously they've taken the reports recommendations. and the passion they've shown in just throwing themselves into trying to addressing this quickly as possible. we're elated and frankly amazed and i'd give them a virtual hug if i could. so thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 131, 'end': 137, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mia Ochoa: good morning, my name is mia. i'm a registered nurse and member of california nurses association. i have been licensed by the brn for 20 years. i know that both the legislature and the brn are working to protect california consumers, in other words, patients. and i don't think the brn staff needs to receive, i do think the brn staff needs to receive more kudos for their work. these public sector employees have had to deal with mandatory furloughs, unpaid of course. accusations by some in the legislature with not so subtle agendas that they are not doing their jobs well enough. the relatively new it system the brn, has been forced to use, is to put it mildly a hassle to deal with. i hope you are factoring in this incredibly difficult to deal with computer system in your overall assessment of the board registered nurses. brn staff needs to be supported in their important work. thank you brn staff for all that you do for californians and for the registered nurses.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marilyn Stevens: My name is Marilyn Stevens, I'm with the Association of California Nurse Leaders. And I just want to thank Doctor Morris for his dedication, passion, and we so appreciate everything that you're doing. I'm also here to speak in regards to one of the programs that you mentioned in the BRN report. It's called NurSys N-U-R-S-Y-S. And as an employer of over 500 registered nurses, this is a very valuable tool. And I really hope that it's promoted more in the future because many employers do not even know we have it. What it does, just so you understand, is that when an employer puts all of their registered nurses into this program, we are then notified any time that there is a status change on their license. Incredibly valuable because we get that information immediately. Therefore, if we have any nurses that are working that all of a sudden have their license suspended, we know it right away. So I really want to promote that and thank you again, Dr. Morris.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 114, 'end': 120, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 959, 'end': 965, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alice Mantanagara: good afternoon. my name is dr. alice. and i'm the california state director of nursing for western governors university. and our programs are nationally accredited across the us. in 2009, the wgu was invited into the state of california and given a grant to provide high quality, low cost, multi-state approach of higher education option for adult learners needing a pathway to a healthcare career. as a national university, we have experience with regulatory bodies across the nation. we serve the diverse nursing students across all 50 states including our military personnel overseas. in california, pre-licensure nursing education program requires a br in approval for initial in every five years regardless of national accreditation. the process requires duplicate processes and information that we provide to our national accreditation as well. each of these requirements add cost to the budget of the department of consumer affairs, and ultimately to our consumers and our students. yet there is no evidence to correlate these costs to a greater protection of the public. i rise here as a licensed registered nurse in the state of california, and on behalf of the university, to offer support for the california board of registered nursing. we are prepared to offer our support in providing recommendations on best practices to improve efficiency operations and their role to protect the public and the citizens of california, thank you.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Victoria Bermudas: Since my daughter is also a registered nurse, I entered her complete and correct information and the same flaw in the system told me, no results matched your search criteria. With more than 400,000 registered nurses in California this is a problem. The system does not seem to be able to handle more than simple information, the licensee's name without erroneously reporting that no results match that search criteria. My name is Victoria Bermudas, and I have been a registered nurse for 48 years. I'm a member of the California Nurses Association's retiree division, and I'm in support of extension of the BRN. I prepared documents for the Committee to demonstrate a significant glitch that is still in the BreEZe system. When news came out about the need for some nurses to resubmit fingerprints, I went to the website to look at my license in case there was information there indicating that I needed to submit a new set of fingerprints. When I completely and correctly filled out my full name in the city where I live, the website showed no results matched your search.
[{'start': 430, 'end': 447, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lynda Schneider: good afternoon my name is lynda tina schneider, i'm the senior assistant attorney general of the licensing section office of the attorney general. our section represents the board of registered nursing in its disciplinary actions and other associated litigation. the board of registered nursing is our largest client by volume and we are very involved in all of the board's disciplinary actions. like to tell you that the leadership of the board of registered nursing has established in excellent working relationship with our office. they're very committed to enforcement, and we work together like a well oiled machine. so, i wanted you to know about that.  also, the licensing section has provided trainings for the board of registered nursing over the last couple of years. on privacy, protection, pursuant to the state auditor's report, we have also been engaged by the board to provide training for their investigators. both for board registered nursing investigators and division of investigators, and in addition, we'll be working with the dca enforcement academy to provide trainings in disciplinary actions and witness testimony. i just wanted to commend the board of registered nursing for its excellent, moving forward in a very excellent way and establishing such a good working relationship with us which will improve enforcement and that is a point. thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alison Grimes: you would think as an audiologist, i would know how to manage a microphone. seriously, yes, and thank you, chairman, senator hill, as well, for the opportunity to address you this afternoon. i'm i'm dr. alison lynda grimes, i'm a dispensing audiologist and the board chair. i've been licensed by this board for more than 40 years. with me are dr. dee parker, speech language pathologist and board member. and mr. paul sanchez, our board executive officer. speech language pathology, audiology, and hearing aid dispensing are independent and rapidly expanding professions in both healthcare and educational systems. professional in this three fields work with people of all ages,from newborns to geriatric,to address and rehabilitate communication impairments. communication skills are essential for the well being and societal contribution of all americans,affecting quality of life including psycho social,educational and occupational endeavors. speech language pathologists provide assessment therapy and counseling for individuals and their family members. there is a wide range of disorders addressed by the speech pathologist including speech and language impairments, swallowing disorders or dispasia, strokes or other brain trauma, stuttering and voice and speech production. audiologists provide diagnosis, treatment, and rehabilitation and counseling for individuals with hearing and or balance disorders and their family members. we work with patients of all ages. audiologists provide diagnostic follow-up and treatment for infants who fail their newborn hearing screenings and subsequently fit hearing aids on infants found to have permanent hearing loss. we work closely with early intervention professionals and families to ensure the best speech language and psychosocial outcomes. in older children and adults, audiologists provide treatment and rehabilitative services, including communication counseling, provision of hearing aids, and assessment for cochlear implants, and post-implant management for infants and children and adults who receive cochlear implants. audiologists work with other assistive technologies to address handicap imposed by hearing loss, and provide communication rehabilitation and ongoing patient and family management. we carrying out hearing conservation programs for individuals in industries where there's risk of noise-induced hearing loss. hearing aid dispensers, test hearing in adults to select and fit hearing aids and provide post-fitting verification and validation of hearing aid amplification to ensure that the hearing aid is meeting the consumer specific hearing needs. speech language pathologists, audiologists and hearing aid dispensers in california provide services to linguistically and culturally diverse populations representing all age groups and must continually adapt to new developments. technologies and research findings, in all aspects of their respective professions. services are provided in both public and private agencies, including schools, hospitals and private practice settings. for the history of our board, the demand for regulation of these three professions has existed since the early 1970s. oversight of the professions of speech-language pathology and audiology has been governed by a combined board since it's inception in 1974. the regulation of hearing aid dispensing was enacted in 1970 originally under the jurisdiction of the medical board of california. but for the past 20 years has operated either as an independent board or a bureau under the department. on january 1st 2010, assembly bill 1535 created the speech language pathology, audiology and hearing aid dispensers board. this merged the hearing aid dispensers bureau into the speech-language pathology and audiology board. the newly merged board regulates the professions of speech-language pathology, audiology and hearing aid dispensing. each profession is separate and distinct. each has its own scope of practice. each has its own entry level requirements and professional settings with some overlap in groups and pathologies served. to balance the professional expertise and public input on the board, the government structure of the board consists of two speech language pathologists, two audiologists, one of whom must be a dispensing audiologist, two non-audiologist hearing aid dispensers, and a public member, who must be a licensed physician and surgeon board certified in otolaryngology. all of these members are appointed by the governor. in addition, one public member seat is appointed by the senate rules committee and one by the speaker of the assembly. members are appointed for four-year terms and no member may serve more than two consecutive terms. our board serves to protect the public through licensing and regulation of speech language pathologists, audiologists, and hearing aid dispensers. who provides speech and hearing services to california consumers. the boards sets entry level licensing standards which include examination requirements that measure the licensees' professional knowledge and clinical abilities. that are consistent with the demands of the current delivery systems. to ensure ongoing consumer protection, the board enforces standards of professional conduct by investigating applicant backgrounds. investigating complaints against licensed and unlicensed practitioners, and taking disciplinary action whenever appropriate. the board jurisdiction encompasses the regulation of 11 license types including speech-language pathology, audiology, hearing aid dispensing, paraprofessionals, and education programs offering degrees in speech-language pathology assistance. today the board licenses well over 25,000 individuals and has an operating budget of approximately $2.1 million. in the past four years, the board has face many challenges. since the last sunset review, the boards licencee population has grown by 28%. resulting an increase work load in all areas. despite it's challenges, the board continuous to make great improvements in all of it's operations. this year the board has made significant improvement in meeting all of its enforcement performance measures, excuse me. licensing cycle times have been very significantly reduced in the past two years from an estimated 8 to 12 week time frame previously. to approximately two weeks today. the board will continue to take steps to enhance this process to reduce application cycle times. access to the hearing aid dispensing profession has improved greatly due to the increase in the practical examinations offered by the board. prior to 2015-16, the board examined an average of 120 candidates annually. in 2015-16, the board examined 306 candidates for the hearing aid dispensing practical examination. there remain many initiatives and activities that the board plans to develop and accomplish to further support consumers. there is a growing demand for licensure and enforcement in our professions. additionally, with the population of california aging, demand for services has increased. the board staff works overtime to provide timely management of services. in conducting our hands on hearing aid dispensing exam, we must literally borrow real estate for the exam site. further, this examination program draws considerable resources in terms of staff preparation and time, pulling staff from other essential and time sensitive activities. the board deftly does more with the staff that is frankly, inadequate, given the desperate needs of regulating three separate professions and practices. i believe strongly that our board does an admirable job with limited staff and resources to protect the public as it accesses hearing and speech care.
[{'start': 125, 'end': 129, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 203, 'end': 222, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 347, 'end': 357, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 413, 'end': 425, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Paul Sanchez: Good afternoon, Assemblymember Salas, Senator Hill, Committee Members, and staff. Again, Paul Sanchez, executive officer of the board. I've been with the board since July of 2014, and this is my first Sunset. So I just wanted to thank you for allowing us to present our issues, respond to your issues that have been raised, and hopefully, fill gaps of information. I'll first start with issue number one. The board should advise the Committee of its long term expectations for its fund, especially in light of proposed licensing fee increases. As such, increases are not adopted. Does the board project insolvency before the next Sunset review? And the second part to that is VCA revenue projections show falling revenue and increasing expenditures, yet the board does not project insolvency. So, first off, I want to state that the status of the front condition is relatively healthy based on the current expenditure authority. However as Dr. Garns has explained, we do see a need to increase our staff and resources, just to keep up with the growing licensing population and maintain appropriate levels of service to consumers, applicants, and licensees. Adding additional staff to the board means we will have to increase renewal and licensing fees. I would like to add that the last time we increased our fees to our largest licensing populations goes back to 2001. This will help us prevent a structural fiscal imbalance and ensure solvency in the coming years. And we have received support from all three professions on this fee increase. I did want to explain why it appeared that our revenue was actually falling. And that has to do with the actual projections that the Department of Consumer Affairs Budget's Office provides us. It's typically based on a couple of assumptions, and one is that the board will expend all of its budget. And the second one is that the future projections are based on previous licensing numbers and workload. So, as you can imagine, both of these would result in conservative projections. Our board, for instance, typically reverts $200 to $300,000 a year. And we have seen a pretty dramatic increase in our licensing population, 28% over the last four years and 13% just over the last year. So if you actually were to straight line the revenue, just based on the previous two years, it would show increased revenue and not decreasing revenue. Just to summarize, the board's revenue isn't falling, and we will have to increase our fees to keep up with the growth of the board. And we do believe that based on our current expenditures, our fund is healthy. We also plan to increase fees, so that we can keep it healthy. Thank you. I will now address issue number three, and that has to do with the current training and examination for hearing aid dispensers limiting access to the profession. This is kind of a two part question, so I'll start with the first part. The board should advise committees on whether it feels that access is being limited to the hearing care profession, particularly hearing aid dispensers and dispensing audiologists by the low pass rate of the licensing examination in the absence of a training manual. So we're actually talking about two issues here. We're talking about what have been low pass rates in the past to the written and practical hearing aid dispensers exam. And we're talking about a proposed supervisor training manual for hearing aid dispensers. The background document discusses these pass rates compared to speech language pathologists and audiologists. When I first came to the board, I too thought those rates were low, and I asked the same questions. And we did some research to find out what was involved there. I think the important thing is to determine the effectiveness of any exam. You don't want it to be too easy and allow unqualified people in, but you also don't want it to be too difficult and keep qualified people out. So the board strives to ensure that licensing standards are met that protect consumers, while permitting access into its professions. In support of this strategic goal, the board's done the following. We've addressed and eliminated long standing licensing back logs. We've reduced licensing cycle times to its current average of two weeks. It's actually much Shorter for hearing aid dispensers. We've improved access to the hearing aid dispensing profession by doubling the number of practical exams that have been held in the past three years. To better understand the issue of the disparities in the examination scores, it's important to understand the differences in the qualifications required. For the hearing aid dispenser's exam and licensing qualifications, there are no formal training or educational requirements beyond that of a high school diploma or a GED. In addition, an applicant may work as a trainee, but that is not required as a condition for licensor. In comparison, speech language pathology applicants must possess a masters degree. And audiology applicants must possess a doctoral degree in their respective fields of study. In addition, applicants are required to complete specified hours of clinical practice and a year of professional experience under the supervision of a licensed professional. Many licensed dispensers in California do possess great qualifications. However, because they are not required as a condition to licensure, the result of any examination can vary based on the diversity of the applicant pool. Having said that, the board does acknowledge that continuous improvement has been necessary and continues to be necessary for the examination. And that has been the main focus of this board for the last three to four years. And as a result of that, we have seen positive changes in the rates. In 2008, from the last Sunset report period to the current reporting period, we've seen the written exam rise from 45% to 60% and the practical exam rate rise from 33% to 54%. Although the supervisor training manual hasn't been completed, the board does make available on its website candidate information booklets and examination outlines for both the written and practical examination. The second part of the question is does the board feel that the exam continues to be an accurate assessment of the skills and knowledge necessary to practice in the field? And what evaluations have we pursued on this issue and of the examination itself? So with the help of subject matter experts in licensing and testing specialists from the Office of Professional Exam Services, the board conducts ongoing evaluations of both exams. These evaluations can ensure the exams are an accurate assessment of the knowledge and skills necessary to practice safely and competently. In addition, statistical analyses are conducted by the board after each examination to ensure that the test questions are functioning within the expected parameters. The board also conducts a periodic occupational analysis for each profession it regulates. The next analysis for these exams is scheduled for 2018/19. I wanted to highlight some recent changes. Recently, we have actually redesigned our practical exam, and the new and improved exam just launched in 2017. Enhancements were made to streamline the testing process, including the elimination of information that was already tested in each of the examinations and some clarifying instructions to the exam. We have actually seen some real positive improvements, but since we've only held two exams, we're kind of holding off to celebrate just yet. We need a little more time to study what those improvements have been. The last part of the question is, when is the board anticipating, anticipate completing its handbook? The background paper refers to the proposed training manual for supervisors of hearing aid dispensing trainees, and that is not to be confused with the information that the board already provides in its exam handbooks. In the coming year, the board will explore training guidelines, possibly incorporating national training guidelines to discuss and discuss the potential need for acquiring hearing aid dispenser training ships in California as a condition for examination and licensure. Not just toward the goal of improving rates but for the purpose of ensuring safety for consumers. In addition, the board will continue to develop and update it's current examination handbooks as needed. The emphasis in improving all there is of the exam has resulted in an enhanced exam, the development of resources that are available to all applicants, and the expansion of examiner training. These improvements have addressed the board's concerns and we look forward to working with the Committee on discussing potential training requirements for hearing aid dispensers in the future.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 36, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 46, 'end': 50, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 89, 'end': 101, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 944, 'end': 949, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sean Green: good afternoon, i'm green i'm a speech and language pathologist. i'm here on behalf of the california speech and hearing association and this smile is just from the news i heard about the aud program because i'm also a faculty member here at california state university sacramento. some so excited to hear that news and i'm here to lend support to the work that this bore over the last two years and continues to monitor and work with this sport to support professionals and consumers and navigating book concerns as well as advancing improvements in our profession. this board has continued to work closely with captcha to ensure that professionals receive appropriate evidence based training and that students are receiving appropriate education at both our colleges and universities and of course all this is done in order to ensure that we as professionals are providing the highest level of care to our consumers. this board and its staff have shown advances, and this part i really, really am happy to see, in the proficiency and processing of new licenses and renewals. i remember over 10 years ago when i first started in this profession, it was taking two to three months to get new licenses approved. now i have new graduates who are getting their licenses, in less than a month's time. so those advances are really impacting our field and those new graduates coming into the field because, as we all know, delays in the licensing process, in some cases, may have the potential to directly impact services provided to the consumers, since oftentimes it's school districts that are waiting for those new graduates. the students may not be receiving the appropriate services that they need. so it's really nice to see that direct impact you're having in our field and of course many professionals, students, and consumers are still concerned with the shortages of speech pathologists and the california speech and hearing association board looks forward to monitoring and working collaboratively with the licensing board to address this shortage and i'll be having on behalf, i would like to say thank you to the board for the advancements made to support professionals and consumers.
[]
Vanessa Cajina: Good afternoon Mr. Chair, Vanessa Cajina on behalf of the Hearing Healthcare Providers of California. The states licensed hearing aid dispensers. We're here today in support of the board and the big steps that they've taken over the past three years. In order to decrease licensing times and get those time frames really up to speed. Is well on enforcement process used. We also believe that the steps taken to increase the number of exams that are given on annual basis. Hearing aid dispensers have been increased and increasing the number of licensed professionals in the state. On behalf of HHP, we've worked closely with our national body, the International Hearing Society on some training manuals, and I think that California has a very strong practice act, and it's been difficult to apply what's worked in other states in California. On licensing standards for hearing aid dispensaries, but we do believe that the board is taking proper steps forward in order to ensure that more people are ready to take the test. We believe in traineeships and apprenticeships. And really appreciate the initial conversations that we've been having with the board and look forward to working with them in the next coming years.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nick Broca: good afternoon mr. chairman and members, my name is broca, here on behalf of the california academy of audiology, which represents the state's licensed audiologists. the academy supports your staff's recommendation that the licensing board be extended for an additional four years and hopefully we're on to the future. the board professional and public members are actively engaged in their duty to ensure the highest and best practices the professions regulate the protection of the consumer. the board's executive officers energetic and focus on fulfilling the mission with the board and providing strong support for the board members. for these reasons california academy of audiology urges you to support the extension. thank you.
[{'start': 52, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Denise Miller: good afternoon senator hill, committee and staff. i'm denise alison miller board president appointed by governor brown, with me our executive director heather martin and vice president richard bookwalter. i'd also like to thank and acknowledge our very hard working and dedicated board, who along with me know that this is an honor and privilege to serve the people in the state of california in this manner. i've been practicing for 27 years. i worked at adventist health in glendale southern california at the director of live well senior program. it is a wellness program designed to help seniors and their caregivers navigate the health care system. i'd like to first start out with some background about occupational therapy. the profession was established in 1917 and is one of the oldest allied health professions in the united states. currently, we are in our centennial year, having been practicing for well over a hundred years. i'd like to, sb 1046 created the california board of occupational therapy effective january 1st, 2001. the board is responsible for the licensure and regulation of occupational therapist and occupational therapy assistance in the state of california. our mission is to regulate occupational therapy by serving and protecting california's consumers. today, we have over 16,000 allied healthcare professionals licensed in occupational therapy practicing in our state. we provide important health and rehabilitation services to people of all ages, who because of illness, injury, or developmental or psychological impairment, need specialized interventions to regain, develop, or build the skills necessary for an independent functioning and a full life. a recent independent study by the health policy researchers identifies that occupational therapy is the only spending category that reduces hospital re-admissions. the authors point out that occupational therapy places a unique and immediate focus on patient's functional and social needs, which can be important drivers of readmission if left unaddressed. the use of occupations, which is where i'd really like to draw your focus, are the activities in which clients, patients engage and occur throughout the lifespan, including many elements. some of those elements are related to instrumental activities of daily living, self-care, or activities to support an independent life, either in the home or in the community, work or activities for people who want to return to employment, or even social participation or the ability to exhibit behaviors and characteristics expected during interactions with others in an orderly social system. within our domain of practice, occupational therapists and occupational therapy assistants consider the repertoire of occupation in which the client engages, the performance, skills, and patterns the client uses, and the client's body functions and structures. our board is composed of seven members by law, and includes four licensed members, three occupational therapists, and one occupational therapy assistant. there are three public members, and i'm very pleased to announce that there are no vacancies and have not been for the past few years. the governor appoints the four licensed members and one of the public members. one public member appointed by the assembly and the one the others appointed by the senate rules committee. going into last year, our board met to establish a 2016-2019 strategic plan. as part of that process environmental scanning and analysis took place. we sought stake holder input. we looked at the board's performance in the areas of enforcement, application qualifications, laws and regulations, outreach communication, and organizational effectiveness. we have put plans in order with this strategic plan in order to meet these goals. for example, outreach and education was a goal that we very much wanted to work on. i can identify for you that we hold all of our board meetings at universities, which then are connected to students coming to hear about the board of occupational therapy, to understand what it means to be a license holder in the state of california and all of the things that go with that privilege. after the process concluded the survey included the process 900 stakeholders. so there are all sorts of people on our interested parties list that were included. we also included other state licensing boards, associations, program directors, and all of the california occupational education programs. after the culmination of two plus years in mapping the boards business processes and designing, developing, and testing a new computer system database, the board successfully transitioned to the new computer system, breeze, in january 2016. the business and profession's code bpc section 2570.25 mandates that the protection of the public shall be the highest priority for california. board of occupational therapy in exercising our right to license, regulate and discipline. the board needs this mandate by effectively and evaluating applicants, efficient investigation of complaints, and imposing discipline where appropriate. thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 54, 'end': 74, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 113, 'end': 118, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 151, 'end': 165, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 185, 'end': 203, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Richard Bookwalter: Wonderful, thank you. Good afternoon. Members, sorry. Good afternoon. I'm Richard Bookwalter. I'm Vice President of the Board of Occupational Therapy and a practitioner appointed by Governor Brown. I'd like to thank the Joint Committee for providing us with an opportunity to report on the licensing regulatory enforcement activities of the board over the past four years. Board President Denise Miller's given a brief overview of some of the activities, and they're in the sunset report as well of course, submitted to the Committee. I hope you'll allow me to talk for a moment a little bit more about the question that's on most people's minds when they hear occupational therapy. And that is, what is it really, again. I generally tell people that we help folks with problems with their daily business. School-based occupational therapy practitioners, for example, help students lengthen their attention span in class, grasp and use writing implements, blunt the impact of their physical or learning disabilities on the process of going to school, for example. A neonatal occupational therapist help children develop oral skills for breast feeding or bottle feeding, developing the lips ability to suck. At California Children Services in the regional developmental centers occupational therapy is practitioners work with children on crawling, sitting up right, feeding themselves, using their hands to play and manipulate objects and toys. And reach all the developmental milestones that other children achieve through play and teaching. On the other hand, I'm an occupational therapist practitioner member and I haven't ever done any of those things, and I've been practicing for 20 years, I worked with adults. I've retrained mostly adults with neurological and orthopedic conditions to dress, bathe, clean themselves after toileting, those kinds of very, very basic activities after a disability. I've also trained with the psychiatric occupational therapist at San Francisco General Hospital behind the locked unit. And worked with veterans with mental illness in an outpatient veterans administration program in San Francisco. I've worked at an adult health program, the unlocked program in San Fransisco, which is a all-inclusive care for the elderly program and I've also done ergonomic evaluations for office workers. So that gives you an idea of the breath of some of the settings that people can work in. Let me also take a moment to talk about our clients and I'll talk particularly about mine, because I don't mean to make it about me, but it may be helpful to understand who the consumers are of our services. I currently work with Kaiser members in San Francisco and South San Francisco, those two Kaiser medical centers, sometimes in Morin and Sonoma counties, on complex wheelchair seating and mobility and a couple of examples, I've recently met a toddler and her mother. The toddler needs her first wheel chair. She needs an adaptive stroller, because she's outgrown the regular commercial stroller and her parents can't carry her around anymore, but that's the only way to get around. I'll soon be meeting a young man in the tech industry who went snowboarding last month and had a spinal chord injury and he's getting his first wheelchair as well. I'm working with a young woman with multiple sclerosis on modifying her power wheelchair to accommodate her changing needs, as her disease progresses and in a couple weeks I'm meeting an elderly woman and her daughter, the woman has Alzheimer's disease, and has forgotten how to grasp and hold and use a walker. So she gets up and she falls and her daughter's at her wit's end. And she's coming to see me to figure out how to keep her mother off the floor. So those are the consumers that I have day to day. Through this work I get to know the families, I get to learn about their homes, their support systems, their finances, their financial limitations, and sort of the daily struggles that they have, and this is why consumer protection is important to me as a practitioner. So by licensing occupational therapy practitioners and enforcing education and training requirements, by establishing appropriate regulation and diligently pursuing appropriate enforcement actions, the Board of Occupational Therapy has fulfilled it's mission of consumer protection, cost effectively, within the performance standards. And I hope you will agree and thank you for hearing our testimony today. At this point, we'll be happy to answer any questions the Committee has.
[{'start': 74, 'end': 92, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 191, 'end': 196, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 389, 'end': 402, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Heather Martin: Heather Martin, executive officer for the board, and thank you for the opportunity to appear today. I'll just go into our response. Very good, thank you. We have other questions as well, so thank you. Specifically regarding the board's fund conditions and the proposed fee increases, the board did begin the regulatory fee increase process in early last year. The fee increase amounts were established such to ensure sufficient revenue and the boards long term financial stability. With the biannual renewal being the boards primary revenue source, we did actually approve a two step renewal fee increase. This will ensure that the board maintains a four month reserve at least into fiscal year '25/'26, perhaps longer depending on ongoing revenue and expenditure trends. Also just to touch briefly on one of the staff recommendations regarding the inactive license fee, the inactive license fee has been at a lower amount than the biannual active renewal fee. That's consistent with BNP code section 462. It's also consistent with what almost all the other healthcare boards do except for two. There's only two that have an actual lower amount. The board didn't consider a statutory change to increase that inactive fee, but instead, proposed that, consistent with 462, it'd be consistent for both active and inactive renewals. Any other change to that, if the committee went that direction, we would have to reevaluate the fee increases as proposed. Okay. In the interest of time, I'll just keep responding.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Heather Kitching: good afternoon. my name is heather denise kitching. i'm the president of the occupational therapy association of. california. i do believe that you have a letter before you dated february 28th. if you did not have that, please let us know if we can get copies of that to you. but really, i'm speaking on behalf of the whole association and all of the 18,000 plus license holders in the state in support of our licensing board. i'm very proud to tell you that i've been practicing in the state of california for over 25 years, and that span is longer than the time i've held the license because i've had the great honor of seeing this board come to fruition. i've held many appointed and elected positions in our state association and i've had an active role as an individual to bring this board to its current state of existence and all of the good work that it's doing. so i really would like to, on behalf of our association, say that we appreciate the board's existence, we feel very positive about the future of collaboration with them. we feel that in the past year we have done significant work and collaboration over shared agendas that ensures strong provision of services in the state collaborating, obviously, from two different primary angles. the longevity and sustaining of the profession in terms of our work in the association, as well as protection of the public that the board oversees. and of course there's overlap, there's inherent overlap, and for that i am very grateful that we worked together in a very positive fashion. so having said that, i thank you for your attention and we're in full support of the board's existence.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Woo: Good afternoon, Senator Hill and Committee Members, and staff. My name is Laura Woo, I'm an occupational therapist and have been for over 30 years. I've also been a member of my state professional association, the Occupational Therapy Association of California, and I have been, excuse me, a licensed occupational therapist since the board's inception. I practice primarily in the area of pediatrics, so I work with the little itty bits, all the way up to adolescents, and primarily with children with physical disabilities. I have kind of two hats. I am in clinical practice but primarily in administration, and in also clinical and academic education. I work with over 60 occupational therapy practitioners in my role in insuring education and training for the competence of my staff in providing occupational therapy services to these children. I am appreciative of the Board for the assistance that they have lent me over the years in addressing some of the concerns I hear from my staff in regards to their practice. And with my academic hat as an educator, I teach an ethics course and an occupational therapy program in Southern California and I've been very appreciative also of the Board in lending me a hand in making sure that the future of our profession understands their role in providing safe and competent services to, for some of us, our most vulnerable population. So I'm here to publicly acknowledge and thank our Board for not only ensuring the safety of our consumers, but in providing the resources, assistance and support for me as the clinician and as an educator in doing what I do. Thank you very much
[{'start': 24, 'end': 28, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 74, 'end': 83, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Doug Stead: Yes. Good afternoon. My name is Doug Stead. I am the Executive Director of CCIDC. I've been in that position for quite a long time. I've been involved with this organization since its inception 27 years ago, part of the coalition that helped create it, and get it up and running, and then eventually became an employee and I am serving at the pleasure of my Board. The fact that we only have 15 minutes, I have a lot to cover and I'm not going to cover it in 15 minutes. So, what I took the liberty of doing was writing out all of the testimonies. So, I will give that to Mark, and you will have the written testimony that I would like to share with this Committee. So, what I'll try to do, because of the time constraints, is be brief and try to give you issue number one, the acceptance of the stamp. And I'll try to, sort of, summarize that as best I can. It's a very complex issue. As Rose pointed out, 27 years ago, one of the primary factors of creating certification was with the intent of identifying interior designers with qualifications that would let building officials know that these people had an expertise in order to do this. We operate, as interior designers, under exemptions that are codified into the Architects Practice Act, specifically 5537 and 5538. This is a line, we look at it as a line. Everything above this line architects, that's architecture. And you don't go there unless you are a licensed architect. Everything below that line is an exemption. And, technically, that's really none of their business, because it's exempt. And so, really under the exemptions, and these exemptions have been in effect since 1939 and they've been updated a few times, these exemptions really allow the general public to operate without an architect or without an engineer. Now in 1990, when certification came into effect, the state set a standard for interior designers. Education, work experience, and an examination in order to raise that level to identify those people both to the public and to building officials. That these people were competent and qualified to do this kind of work. So, that's sort of how we operate. Now, with all good intentions what's happened over 27 years is there is no consistency with building departments. There's 450 building departments in the state. Probably 95% of them don't really have a problem with certified interior designers submitting commercial interior design work and residential interior design work. And we're talking significant projects. I mean, the projects involve laying out offices and office buildings, and exiting corridors, and reflected ceiling plans. A whole host of elements that go to the making up the interior of a vacant building. It's non-structural and it's non-seismic. And it falls under the exemptions of the Architects Practice Act. That's where we practice. And some building officials say, nope, we won't accept that, we need architects only. And that's probably about 5% of the building officials. Unfortunately, that 5% are in the major city centers: Los Angeles, San Francisco, and San Jose. There are some surrounding jurisdictions to them that also go along that way, but for the most part those are the three big ones. And we understand all of that. We understand that that's their prerogative under the law and under the California Building Code to do that. The acceptance of the stamp issue, and we tried to address this four or five years ago, at the last Sunset review hearing. And we were turned down at that point, or it wasn't put forward, shall I say, because there was a lot of opposition. It appears we're at the same impasse. We were at a meeting last Thursday with the Architect's Board. I was informed that CALBO, which is the organization of building officials, are somewhat opposed to us making these amendments that are in the background paper and in our Sunset Review report. The California Architects Board has also taken a position of opposition. And, not surprisingly, the American Institute of Architects California Council has also taken an opposition. So, the architects generally, and with the building officials, kind of following along, are all taking an opposition to the amendments that we have proposed to our statute to clarify what certified interior designers and all interior designers can do under the exemptions. So, in following all of this, what we raised the question of where is the evidence? Where is the proof? We've got 27 years of operating under these exemptions. We have been doing horizontal exiting for longer than that. We have been doing one hour corridors for longer than that. We've been doing reflected ceiling plans. We've been building out buildings, in major cities across this state, for over 27 years. There is not one instance of a safety violation. Not one instance of consumer harm, bodily harm, or a death. That's not what we do. We operate under the exemptions. If it's structural, if it's seismic, if it has a real safety issue, then it falls under architecture or engineering. If it doesn't, it falls under the exemptions. So, what we're here today is to, sort of, we want to keep pushing this forward. We've been here before. If we don't get it, we'll be back again. It is just part of what we do in order to continue our practice, and it's what we settled for, or negotiated for, 27 years ago, so that's where we're at, issue number 1.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 572, 'end': 576, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 889, 'end': 893, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Roze Wiebe: again, my name is roze heather wiebe, i'm the administrative director.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Patricia Johnson: Hello, my name is Patricia Johnson and I am a former fire marshal. I have met with this Board in the past. I'm in the process of transitioning from a retired fire marshal into the interior design field. And I wanted to say that as a code reviewer for 17 years, I reviewed plans for the University of California at Davis, as well as jurisdictions in Sacramento and Santa Clara County. I would like to say that it is the job of the plan reviewer to determine whoever submits a drawing or a document as to whether or not they are violating safety requirements and/or interior requirements. We look at things in terms of fire, whether or not things are flammable. We look at things in terms of if they change doorways, and exiting, and all a myriad of things. But, my point would be specifically, that I would suggest that this proposal be accepted in terms of them having a stamp. The interior design professionals having it stamped, so that they can submit drawings that are reviewed by a code official, and it is the code official and the inspectors out in the field, to determine whether or not they meet those requirements. I don't think that holding this profession up for any particular reason, would benefit the public in any particular way, because you've already got the balances in place, for people to review their work and determine whether or not, it will be stamped and approved and permitted or whether it will not.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Panettone: i'm linda roze panettone and i am the legislative advocate for the california legislative coalition for interior design, and with the same association that molly anne spoke about and we do support the clarifying language that is being proposed. we also publish a manual that has the codes and barriers for the interior designers for the state of california. and this is what they have to know in order to take that idex test. thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 156, 'end': 166, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Doug McCauley: Good afternoon, Doug McCauley with the California Architects Board. At the outset, let me say the Board supports the extension of the Sunset date for CCIDC. We think it's a very effective organization, quality staff, well-run organization. That being said, as Doug Stead alluded to, the board did meet last week on Thursday and voted to oppose the proposed amendments to the definition. The Board felt that there would, indeed, be a potential threat to the public health, safety and welfare, and therefore the opposition. On the issue of settlement reports, just as a side note, we have found those to be an invaluable tool in terms of consumer protection activities. Simply stated if we don't know about things going on in the marketplace, we cant do anything about them.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 260, 'end': 270, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alma Gardner: my name is alma, and i am a certified interior designer. i have my own professional practice and i'm here as a member of the national kitchen and bath association's local chapter board. i hold the position of vice president of government affairs and i'm here to support the clarifying language. i think as stated, i think all of the membership of the nkba fully supports it as well.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Christian: thank you, mr. chairman. christian with the american institute of architects california council. first, we support the sunset extension on this body of law. we think ccidc and their staff and their members have done very good work, and they deserve to have that law extended.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Christian: thank you, mr. chairman. mark linda christian with the american institute of architects california council. first, we support the sunset extension on this body of law. we think ccidc and their staff and their members have done very good work, and they deserve to have that law extended. second, we join the california architects board and california building officials in opposing the language. i think it was issue one in your report. as mr. stead has said, the interior designers operate under the exemption in the architects practice act, section 5538 of the business and professions code. and if i may summarize it very simply, it says that this work can not involve the seismic, or structural elements, or the safety of the building. with all due respect, we believe that horizontal exiting and rated corridors go to the very heart of the safety of the building. and by putting that in the interior design, the cid law, it would be in conflict with the exemption that is within the architects practice act section 5538. for that reason we must respectfully oppose the inclusion of that language, thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 443, 'end': 448, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bill Weeman: Good afternoon, my name is Bill Weeman. I represent the Interior Design Coalition of California, IDCC. We do support the reauthorization of the current interior design codes, under the Architects Practice Act. The current codes have existed for decades and have amended over the years and provide the basic requirements for interior designers to practice interior design in California. CCIDC, in the issuance of the CID stamp, provides a certification for interior designers to demonstrate education, experience, and passage of an exam testing for knowledge of the California Building Codes and Ethics of Practice. The process is critical for interior designers entering the profession to demonstrate to their clientele their ability to work with a non-structural, non-seismic environment. The IDEX exam required for issuance of the CID is currently the only interior design exam in California which tests for knowledge of the California Building Codes. Although the IDEX, a multiple choice test, requires California Building Code knowledge, it does not test the ability to create complex drawings. However, a national test, the NCIDQ, exists as an option for designers who work in an environment requiring this kind of skill, this kind of skill, excuse me, mid-rise, high-rise, medical facilities, industrial facilities, and the like. The NCIDQ, is an optional three day exam containing a drawing practicum and is taken by a majority of interior designers working in the commercial environment. CID is appropriate for designers working in residential space and small commercial space. Within the profession, there are interior designers specialize in different areas. As an example, the kitchen and bath designers have developed their own certification and separate stamp. Although designers working on large commercial projects have passed the NCIDQ, no additional certification for these professionals currently exists. We believe another category and certification would be beneficial to these commercial designers and their clientele. Such a certification would require passage of NCIDQ and California codes-based test, education experience, qualifications and an ongoing education competency requirements. The certification could be one of many forms. Private certification through the CCIDC as part of an existing licensing board or perhaps other options. Although we don't have agreement among the different segments of the profession at this time, we will continue to have these discussions. Thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susan Stuart: Good afternoon, Senator Hill and Members of the Committee. I'm Susan Stuart representing IIDA, which is the International Interior Design Association, and this Association is comprised of almost exclusively commercial designers. We concur with IDCC's statements, so I will not go through some of those again. We definitely support the Sunset Extension for the CID by the CCIDC. We think they're doing a great job. We do, though, believe very strongly that an additional certification for commercial designers is necessary and would be very beneficial to members and their clientele. Although there's no consensus on how or along the groups in the interior design community, or even in the design profession with other design professionals, we look forward to having those continued discussions and see if we can come up with a further certification.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 28, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 63, 'end': 75, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alan Roth: i will give my brief comments of our testimony for this morning. good morning to chairman hill, chairman salas and members of the committee and staff. i am alan jonah roth. i'm president of the respiratory care board. i'm joined by tom wagner, my vice president and stephanie nunez, our executive officer. i know you have a lot to cover today so i will provide you with a brief overview. the respiratory care board was created by the legislature in 1982 to protect the vulnerable population from the unqualified practice of respiratory care. the composition of the board consists of nine members. four respiratory care practitioners, four public members and one physician/surgeon. appointments to the board are made equally by the governor, the senate rules committee and the speaker of the assembly, each authority appointing three members to the board. the board is responsible for enforcing state laws pertaining to the practice of respiratory care, and regulates a single category of healthcare specialists, respiratory care practitioners. the rcps are specialized healthcare practitioners who work under the supervision of medical directors and are involved in the prevention, diagnosis, treatment, management or re-rotation of problems affecting the heart and the lungs and other disorders as well as providing diagnostic, educational and rehabilitation services. pcp's provide care for those who are dependent upon life support and that cannot breathe on their own. rcp's treat patients with acute and chronic diseases including chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, trauma victims and surgical patients. they are typically employed in hospitals, however, a growing number of rcp's work in alternate care settings like subacute facilities, home medical device retail facilities, hyperbaric oxygen facilities, and sleep laboratories along with transport. the law governing rcps, the respiratory care practice act requires licensure for individuals performing respiratory care. in carrying out its mandate to ensure the protection of the public shall be the highest priority in exercising the licensing, regulatory and disciplinary functions of the board. in that sense, we screen every applicant for licensure to ensure minimum education and competency standards are met and conduct a thorough criminal background check with each applicant. we investigate complaints against licensees including those generated from updated criminal history reports and mandatory reporting of violations by licensees and employers. we aggressively monitor our cps placed on probation. we exercise the authority of the penalized or disciplined applicants and licensees including issuance of citations and fines while public reprimands ordering denial, probation, or revocation of a license. we address current issues related to the unlicensed and/or unqualified practice of respiratory care. we promote public awareness of the mandate and its function as well as current issues affecting respiratory care. since 1985, when the first license was issued, the board has licensed over 39,000 licensees, of which over 20,000 remain active. the board has a $3.8 million budget to which it manages closely. the last renewal fee increase was made by statute in the 1999 and was not implemented until 2002, over 15 years ago. since our last sunset review four years ago, the most significant changes have taken place include the establishment of two additional respiratory baccalaureate degree programs as a result of sb 850, one of which i am involved with, raul modesto junior college and skyline college. improving respiratory care competency standards by requiring the passage of an advanced competency exam for licensure ab 1972. successfully implementing breeze with our new database. entering into a contract with uc san francisco to delve further into the issues that the board believes may significantly improve consumer protection. that's the end of my remarks, i will pass it on to stephanie nunez to continue. wait, i apologize. i have one more thing. the board is proud to share its success in meeting the performance targets. in early 2016, they were developed as part of the consumer protection enforcement initiative. the board's performance targets for its enforcement program are 7 days to complete the complaint intake cycle, 210 days for the investigative cycle and 540 days for the formal discipline cycle. for years, the board has consistently met all of its performance measure targets, with the exception of the formal discipline cycle, which includes processing time by the office of attorney general and the office of administrative hearings. however, in 2016, for the first time, the board met its formal discipline target with an average of 538 days to process a case from beginning to end. the board is working closely with the office of the attorney general to improve processes and communication so that this target can be met on a more consistent basis. the board is committed to conducting business in an efficient and effective manner, and responding to practice in operational issues in a proactive, forward-thinking manner. moreover, the board is committed to ensuring that consumer protection is always its highest priority. now, i'm going to turnover to stephanie nunez, our executive officer.
[{'start': 90, 'end': 94, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 105, 'end': 110, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 156, 'end': 171, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 232, 'end': 242, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 266, 'end': 281, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3973, 'end': 3988, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5272, 'end': 5287, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Tannehill: good morning, chairman and members. jennifer with aaron reardon associates, on behalf of the california society for respiratory care. csrc fully supports extending the sunset for the respiratory care board we're pleased that this board operates well and the public is protected, unlike some boards their drcb was able to implement the system and make it work for them and work for vast numbers of practitioners who look forward to continued improvements and to the work the board is going to do on this strategic plan. csrc recognizes that there has not been a statutory fee increase in over 15 years. yet, the administration cost reads implementation cost of livings, staffing cost, et cetera, have all definitely risen over that time. we support increasing the fees necessary to keep a healthy and physically stable board. that has the resources to adequately protect the public and enforce the respiratory care act. csrs looks forward to discussions with the rcb and the committee as the best way forward in this regard. thank you for considering our position.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Monasky: thank you, my name is monasky. i'm a respiratory therapist licensed by the state of california. i'm a member of the american association for respiratory care and i'm a peer review, i've done peer review on a few scholarly journal articles. i'm not a member of the california society for respiratory care because i don't believe they represent my needs. i disagree with the stand that has been taken by them that we should increase the fees. for the last five years, the respiratory care board has been losing its funding reserve and complained that it must yet again increase fees. for therapist from $230 to $250 compared to the $190 for registered nurses and shout out to all of you here. meanwhile private schools have created an oversupply of respiratory graduates who cannot find employment. according to this commission on accreditation for respiratory care acore, which is a bill by mr. roth. according to that, four private central valley for-profit schools, four of them, and three of them are san joaquin valley college, yeah, san joaquin valley college, have graduated more practitioners than 10 public community colleges in the central valley and bay area combined. you can see that on your chart that i've provided. when i graduated from american river college in december 2010. it would be a whole lot easier to be able to use the dias. this is really an unfair advantage for us giving testimony from paper. when i graduated from american river college in december 2010 the unemployment rate for respiratory care practitioners in the central valley, was over 30% due to layoffs in the healthcare industry after the great recession in 2008. unemployment rates remain to this day at 25% unemployment rate statewide and at least 20% in the central valley. it makes no sense to attend respiratory care classes in schools like san joaquin valley college while incurring $40,000 in tuition costs. a better education exists at state community colleges, which grant real transferable units toward a degree and at less than one-third of the cost, about $13,000. for-profit students end up with higher unemployment and idleness rates, and lower earnings six years after entering programs than do comparable students from other schools, and they have far greater student debt burdens and default rates on their student loans. student debt at this point is $1.2 trillion in the united states. although the respiratory care board has launched a workforce study through ucsf, it has doggedly refused to consider the lag in employment for its graduates and the structural unemployment of its licensees. the board has also ignored my request, which you have a copy of on the back from june of last year, that the workforce study include non-acute, community and public health interventions and preventative measures in expanding the scope of practice for respiratory therapists. the greatest source of personal bankruptcy is unpaid healthcare costs. i encourage and ask the numbers off topic, slightly, to consider, to review and support senator richard burr sb 562 a universal health care bill, and actually i'm going to have to ask you, which consolidates low and high risk. another 20 seconds or so and that would. this is a time. stay on point. well, i think we're talking about health care costs and this is a business and professions and economic development committee and i believe that these do interplay. this is a time when consolidation of licensing services as well consolidating low and high risk citizens in our country could find a result, could result in significant savings. renewing an individual board's power isn't as important as maintaining affordable healthcare resources and providing a well-educated workforce to fulfill our needs. i trust that the state dca can license healthcare workers without special like the respiratory care board that turned a blind eye to the reality of runaway costs, and the high unemployment of the very people they licensed. thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 894, 'end': 898, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3044, 'end': 3056, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Elaine Howle: Good morning. Morning, thank you, Mr. Chairman or Chairman and members. For the record, my name is Elaine Howle. I'm the California State Auditor accompanying me is Laura Keane she is the audit manager who worked on this particular project with the audit team, conducting the work at the Board of Registered Nursing. As you indicated, Mr. Chairman, we issued an audit report in December of last year. We were required by statute, business and professions code asked us to conduct an audit looking at various processes that the Board of Registered Nursing uses to resolve complaints. Asked us to look at training of staff, coordinating with other agencies related to complaints or related to disciplining nurses and a variety of other issues. So what I'd like to do for you is step you through key issues. Go through recommendations and then talk a little bit about what our view as the status of implementation of those recommendations. One thing I do want to mention is for those members who are new to the legislature, new to the State Auditors Office, after we conduct an audit an agency is required to respond to us at at least three intervals. 60 days after the report has been issued, six months, and one year, and of course they've always provided an initial response that's published with the audit report. So when I'm referring to the status of their implementation, it's only been a very short period of time. This is their 60 day response. So what you'll hear from me is a lot of these either been partially implemented or pending. The agency is working on a variety of the recommendations. They have put together an action plan that was a key recommendation that we made, we have looked at the action plan and we think the status of that recommendation's fully implemented. We think there could've been a little bit more detail in that plan, but certainly it is very robust and we're pleased to see the Board of Registered Nursing taking that recommendation very seriously. So with that I'll launch into I have about six or seven issues and I will go through them relatively quickly. Very high level and then certainly if you have detailed questions or want us to get into more detail we're happy to do that. So the first area that we looked at is the processing of complaints and how well the Board of Registered Nursing was doing in completing and resolving complaints in a timely manner. And our first conclusion is they are failing to do that. In 2010 the Department of Consumer Affairs came up with what was called the Consumer Protection Enforcement Initiative. What that required all of the health boards to do is to try to resolve complaints within an 18 month window, so we use that as our benchmark when we looked at some complaints, and we found that for the majority of the complaints we looked at, of course, we took a sample of about 40. 31 of those, so 70 some odd percent of those complaints were not completed within that 18 month window. What was more concerning to us, some of those complaints actually took up to three years to be completed and fully resolved. So why is that happening? Of course, we ask that question. One of the key issues we identified is that the board is had not established specific milestones or goals for each stage of complaint resolution. So they weren't able to monitor or track how well are we doing or where are the bottlenecks occurring? Why is it taking us so long to resolve and solve these complaints? Another issue related to the timeliness of resolving complaints is how quickly they actually assign a complaint after intake to an investigator. And there's two avenues where a complaint could be assigned, either to an investigator at the Board of Registered Nursing or an investigator with the Division of Investigations in Consumer Affairs. The distinction there is it depends upon the severity of the complaint. There are a variety of categories, four different categories. Urgent, high priority and then there are two that are routine. Urgent high priority needs to go to the division of investigations. They have peace officers who have a variety of skill sets and authority. That's stronger than the investigators at the board. The board investigators should be handling routine complaints, but what we found is these complaints are coming into the board and it's taking a long time for them to be assigned to an investigator. In fact, we found that they were not meeting their goal of 45 days. So, they receive a complaint. They need to get a decision made, do an analysis of the complaint. Is this a urgent or high priority that needs to go to the division? If it's not, it needs to go to an Investigator within the board. They're not getting that done within that 45-day window, again of the 40. We looked at, 60%, 24 of those were still not assigned to someone after that 45-day window. So again, taking too long to not only assign the complaints, but as I said a minute ago, resolving those complaints. What that lead us to see is one of the questions that was in the B&P request in the statute, is there a backlog? Well, as of July of 2016, they had a backlog 184 complaints that had not yet been assigned to anyone. What was concerning is 71 of those complains were of urgent or high priority. So these are issues that are health and safety issues for patients that could be related to substance abuse issues. Very serious issues or allegations that has come to the board and these are in a backlog. Another issue related to resolving complaints is getting expert witnesses to assist. There are some situations where a complaint may have been completely investigated and they need an expert witness to evaluate that particular complaint, that particular investigation in the event. It goes to court. They need to have someone who has that type of expertise, an expert witness could be a nurse in a particular specialty, such as oncology, psychiatry, some of those sorts of areas of expertise. Oncology, hospice, psychiatry, psychology are examples that we identified in the report. So, they were exceeding their goal again in trying to get expert witnesses to review some of these complaints that they had at least investigated. Reasons for the delay for not getting an expert witness is the availability. One of the things the board said is they just don't have enough expert witnesses to handle the volume of complaints. As you heard from me, there were a lot of complaints that were of this high and urgent priority where they perhaps would need an expert witness. Another issue the board raised with us was the pay, the hourly rate for nurses and particularly some of the expert witnesses was not high enough to really attract individuals to want to participates in that aspects of resolution. So that is in a nutshell, the issues related to processing complaints. We made six recommendation in this area. Three of those relate to process. So, we suggested to the board or recommended by March of this year get formal policies established for specific timeframes for each key stage of a complaint resolution process. Make sure that management is monitoring each of those stages to see if there are bottlenecks, to see if there are concerns with how investigators are conducting their investigations. Establish a plan to eliminate the backlog awaiting assignment to investigators. Those are related to process. Related expert witnesses by June of this year, we recommended that the board develop a process to track its effectiveness and recruiting expert witnesses. Look at its licensing renewal process to include questions or inquiries to nurses who are renewing their license as to whether, or not they would like to participate as. Or be an expert witness on behalf of the board and then take steps to address the hourly pay rate issue. So three recommendations in that area. Again, as I indicated in my opening comments, this is very early, it's only been six months. I mean 60 days, I apologize for the process recommendations, those three. We think they've partially implemented. They have taken this very seriously. They're working on developing some timeframes and included some of that in their action plan. Again, I will defer to the board to get into more specifics, but we've seen some progress there. With respect to expert witnesses, they've also provided some assertions to us that they're looking at the hourly rate, that they are working on modifying some of their materials for renewals. So we're saying, pending. The reason it's pending versus partial pending as we just need to see evidence and once we see that evidence and we've look at it, we can perhaps make an assessment that's been fully implemented. So it's a little stronger than I partially implemented, just to educate you a little bit about the distinction there. The next area that we looked at is their analysis of data and this really ties to the BreEZe system where the board lacks accurate data that it's important for them to assess their efficiency, and effectiveness in resolving these complaints. Again, when I talked earlier about not monitoring and not having key milestones in their resolution process, they also don't have good accurate information in the BreEZe system. So, we had a couple of issues there that I wanted to comment on. They lack a reliable way to monitor the performance, because they have weak controls and what we meant by that is an individual inputting information into BreEZe doesn't necessarily have to follow the process. There's a process for them conducting an investigation and resolving a complaint, but when we were looking at the data in Breeze, much of it was inaccurate, it didn't make sense if you were trying to align what was being put into BreEZe to their process. So, we actually had to take some of those entries out and eliminate them from our analysis. So, they're not monitoring their staff. One example we've pointed in two in the report is staff can assign a case to an investigator even though when you look in the BreEZe system, the case has been closed. It doesn't make sense. So there were entries like that, that really caused us to question the accuracy of the information in there, and the reason they need accurate information, of course is to be able to monitor this complaint process, but also to look at their work load to determine whether or not they have an off staff. Do they need more investigators? Where are again, the bottle next in the process occurring? So, we have three recommendations with respect to data accuracy and the BreEZe system. We felt they needed to work immediately with consumer affairs to set up input controls in the BreEZe system. So that if I'm someone trying to enter information into it and I'm trying to assign, for example, to use my example, a case to an investigator and the system says that case is closed, it won't allow me to enter that information. So, those types of controls to try to minimize the amount of inaccurate information being input into BreEZe. Coupled with that, train staff who are required to input information. Make sure they understand how to use BreEZe, how to input information, etc. Once that information or those controls have been set up, the training has been established. Then we're suggesting after about a six month window, get that information and now you will be able to do some analytics and do some analysis of workload, staffing, etc. Again, similar to other recommendations, those have been partially implemented. Again, I will defer to the board, in their action plan they do discuss steps they are taking and intend to take. They have to go through a variety of steps to make some modifications to the BreEZe system. The next area is related to the assignment of complaints. So it's very similar to what I talked about a few minutes ago. But they're not adhering to guidelines. So earlier when Department of Consumer Affairs established this consumer protection enforcement initiative. They had guidelines for all of the boards to follow, all the health boards, but in 2016, state law was enacted that required boards to follow this guidance. So if it is a high priority or urgent matter it needs to go to a division of investigations investigator rather than a board investigator and the distinction as I said is the division of investigation, those are peace officers. They go through very specific training. They have more authority to arrest, to issue search warrants, etc. Do a variety of things far beyond what a non-sworn investigator that works at the investigative unit within the board. So we were seeing that we were not doing a good job as I said earlier. About assigning those cases promptly, but also making sure that those of urgent or high priority are going to the appropriate investigator, and in the next area when I touch on that you'll understand why that's very important. So even though there was the requirement, the division of investigations was concerned because over a time frame they saw the number of complaints being referred to them drop. So they on their own initiatives said we need to do an analysis and a reconciliation and what they found is, they looked at about two and a half year window, two and a half window and looked at about 175 complaints, 171 complaints, I apologize. Urgent or high priority, 111 of those were urgent. 60 of them were high priority, and these were not being referred to the division. So they were not being reviewed by the appropriate type of individual. That had the skill set or that the expertise to do that type of work. The board indicated to us they felt the guidelines were unclear, that they had discretion, but again as I mentioned in 2016 there was a state law enacted. That required the boards to follow the guidelines under that consumer protection enforcement initiative. The other issue that the board raised is that the division of investigations, their investigators, it's more costly because, of course, they have the post training, they're peace officers. It's more expensive for them to be conducting an investigation, but as we said in the audit report, although I'm sure cost is an issue. When you're talking about health and safety of individuals and the protection of the public and there's a state law that requires you to follow this guideline. You need to do so. So our recommendation, pretty much common sense, immediately comply with the law. Adhere to this consumer protection enforcement initiative and work very close to the division investigation. So that you are referring the appropriate compliant to inappropriate individuals to investigate those complaints. The next area to talk about ties to that. What we found, is we found incomplete investigations were causing delays in discipline or resolution of a complaint, and the reason these were incomplete investigations is because some of them were being assigned to an appropriate individual. That individual did not gather sufficient evidence. So when there was discussion with the Attorney General's Office or with Consumer Affairs to take disciplinary action against a nurse. We don't have sufficient evidence to do that. We need to re-open this investigation and conduct additional work. So we found not only at the board but some at the division of investigations that required a supplemental investigation. They had to conduct additional work, so again that lengthens the time for resolution of that complaint. So what we suggested in our recommendation is by this month, March of 2017. Board of Registered Nursing needed to work with Consumer Affairs to implement a mechanism to track and monitor supplemental investigation requests to determine why are those occurring. Is it a training issue, is it an issue where it was assigned to the wrong unit? Whether it was at BRN and it should have been at Division of Investigations. Again this recommendation has been partially implemented. So then that took us to training. So we looked at the Board of Registered Nursing and did they have a formal training program? They do not. They lacked a formal training program for their enforcement staff and the risk there is you have inconsistent and inefficient processing and resolving of complaints. So they don't have that comprehensive program. What we saw that they are using is they have a checklist and if I'm a new investigator I'm using that checklist to learn how to conduct an investigation and then I'm shadowing someone. Now that's certainly an approach to use, but what we were looking and hoping to see is very formal training, specific courses, specific training programs. Now the Division of Investigations, again they're peace officers. So they have to go through post training, so they do receive some formal training, but the investigators at the board are not receiving that type of very specific and important training. Consumer Affairs also provides training resources to their boards and their enforcement academy. The concern we had here was not with the training program, but that the Board of Registered Nursing is not tracking who's taking the training. When are they taking it? In fact, we asked management give us a comprehensive list of who's gone through the leadership academy, the training programs. What type of training classes are they taking? They couldn't provide us that information. So our recommendations here, we had four, and again, they are tied to training. The board needs to work with Consumer Affairs, and also collaborate with the Attorney General's Office to develop what we believe a biannual training program. That will include techniques for gathering evidence, ensuring that all investigators take this training, and they learn how to draft reports. Just all of the different steps that they need to learn and develop a stronger skill set in conducting investigations. Once they collaborate with Consumer Affairs and develop a training program and develop a published procedural guide. So that investigators can use that as a tool. It should include evidence gathering techniques, descriptions of what constitutes sufficient evidence. So we minimize the number of supplemental investigations or subsequent investigations we have to do. The final two recommendation related to training is just develop a system by March. That allows them to track the internal and external trainings that their staff participate in. The external would be the training that consumer affairs provide through their enforcement academy and then finally, by December of this year, we are suggesting that the board implement a very formal training program. In consultation with the Division of Investigations, the Attorney General's Office. Get them all together, let's develop a very formal training program that will benefit all enforcement staff. Similar to others, again, these are partially implemented or pending, and it's been a 60 day window. So, two or three more issues, one is related to fingerprints. The Board of Registered Nursing, our conclusion has failed to conclude that all nurses have fingerprint records on file as required and as of March of 2009, this was a requirement that nurses provide fingerprints upon license renewal. If they weren't already in the system. And we weren't seeing that happening. We looked at the BreEZE System. and so BreEZE had a control in place that said if a nurse submitted a renewal application they didn't have fingerprints on in the system that that would be put on hold. Their renewal would be point on hold. Unfortunately what we found is that the Board of Registered Nursing was overriding that because they went to their legacy system and saw well some of these individuals have fingerprints in the legacy system. So let's go ahead and override that particular control. The problem with that is if you're overriding all the time, and we found close to 60,000 instances where they overrode these controls. You may not necessarily have someone in the system and you've provided renewal to a nurse without them complying with the statutory requirement. So what consumer affairs started to do was reconcile between their various systems, their legacy system and BreEZE, and also data provided by the Department of Justice. And they identified about 24,000 individuals who did not have fingerprint records in the system and another 4700 who didn't have them either in BreEZE or in a system with department justice. So our recommendations were stop over writing unless you have a very specific reason and if you do need to overwrite it has to go through the executive officer for approval and document your rationale for doing so. The bottom line is we're suggesting don't override the system is BreEZE was established that control for very specific purpose. And then the other recommendation was related to the reconciliation, get it finalized and then once complete take those steps immediately to get those nurses who do not have fingerprints in the system. Fingerprinted in the system so that in the event something is triggered in the fingerprint system that you can take action against a particular nurse. Collaboration with other agencies, we have two more issues and then we can launch into questions. What the statute asked us to look at is whether or not the board was doing a good job of coordinating and collaborating with other state agencies. And health boards to ensure effective enforcement. So they do collaborate with other health boards and agencies, but it doesn't have formal agreements with these entities outlining circumstances under which a calibration should accrue, and making sure that is happening consistently. So they do interact with the medical board, the board of vocational nursing, psych tech board, and the board of pharmacy. These are all boards within consumer affairs. What we found is there are some employers state law does not require employers of nurses to report complains or discipline to BRN. So we had a legislative recommendation related to that, but also there are vocational nurses. So employers of vocational nurses are required to report to the board of vocational nursing. Any licensed vocational nurse that either resigns or is suspended or as terminated for cause so there is some leverage, but it's not comprehensive and specific to all nurses. So what we suggested is by June of this year BRN should establish formal agreement with all of these agencies and health boards. That have any information that would be important when related to a nurses conduct. The other recommendation is again by June of this year BRN should work with consumer affairs and other boards. To determine whether modifying BreEZE to include a capability that would allow it to properly notify BRN. So if all of the boards are using BreEZE and a different board inputs information related to a nurse. That could be information that is triggers a report to the Board of Registered Nursing. So it's my understanding that Consumer Affairs has worked on this particular recommendation and our assessment, my staff's assessment is that they have fully implemented that some of those modifications to BreEZE. So the last area is notifications. So what's state law requires the board to do is to notify complainants of initial action taken. If the complainant is known, if the complainant has voluntarily given their information. There's a requirement in state law that that person should be notified within 10 days that initial action has been taken on a complaint. Similar once that complaint is finished and the issue has been resolved. There's a requirement that they should circle back to that particular complainant who is known to let them know what the final action taken has been. We weren't seeing that occurring consistently. So we had recommendations to the board. Again to be completed by this month would developing desk procedures that really identify specific actions enforcement. Staff need to take when processing complaints where the complainant is known. Again notifying them of the initial actions and then certainly related to final disposition and then we also suggested that management needs to perform routine audits of complaint files. To monitor incoming complaints, final dispositions and tying that to the notifications. So members and that's amvery high level analysis or presentation of the key issues we identified. As I said we issued the report in December, mid of December last year we were required to have it done by January. So we wanted to get it done before members returned. We have received a 60 day response from the board that was effective the end of February our analysis. So of the 23 recommendations to the board we believe two have been fully implemented. The one related to the action plan and the one I just discussed related to BreEZE quite a few 12 or partially. So they've started, they've made progress, and then we have nine that are pending. Those are, as I indicated pending because we need to see evidence of some of the action's they've assertive they've taken. So we fully intend to continue work with the board. Since we received the 60 day response the next status report will be at six months. So that'll be about four months from now in June. So with that I will stop and we'll hopefully answer any questions members may have, thank you.
[{'start': 99, 'end': 111, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 165, 'end': 176, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Laura Courtney: Good morning, Mr. Chair and Committee Members. My name again is Laura Courtney and I'm an Audit Principle with the California State Auditor's Office. To address that issue the Board of Registered Nursing has developed and submitted to the Department of Consumer Affairs a system information request that spells out what needs to be done to address this issue with the input controls. Currently that is being reviewed and then will be approved by DCA as well as the system developer. I don't recall the date that BRN estimated that system request could be approved, but I do know that it's in the near future.
[{'start': 64, 'end': 78, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joseph Morris: good morning, distinguished members of the committee. i am here and i'm doctor joseph alan morris. it is a pleasure to be here this morning to present before the committee. and on behalf of the entire board of registered nursing, we thank you for this opportunity. in 2014 the brn sunset report and background paper highlighted several concerns and recommendations that included the licensing unit prolonged processing times and significant backlogs. the breeze functionality issues with online applications. and the issues with the renewal process, and the enforcement programs performance measures in which there were significant delays in the case closures and case referrals. unfortunately, the concerns with enforcement unit prompted a 2016 state audit of the complaint intake unit with 26 recommendations for corrective action. in an effort to correct many of these deficiencies and areas of improvement, the board began assessing its administrative and operational needs. in september 2016, the board began working with solit of dca to map out several of the brn's workflow and business processes. in order to be more efficient. in addition we conduct the staff satisfaction survey to identify the staff's unmet needs, concerns and departmental errors of improvements. we also adjusted our day to day operations. that included work schedules, flex time, reorganization, and reassignment of staff duties to provide better customer service to assist with monitoring our process improvements. and finally, we submitted budget change proposals to dca to request additional staff to assist with the increased workloads of the department. now moving on to the backlog, and the licensing unit. during the years of 2015, 2016, the board acknowledges that we did have a significant backlog in the licensing application time frame, which many of you may be aware of. in many cases, the processing of an application may have taken up to seven months to complete. during the fall of 2016, the brn collaborated with dca and adopted a process of submission of electronic transcripts via the cloud. as of today, 98% of the 143 nursing schools have subscribed to this process. through the use of the cloud technology, the licensing application through process is enhanced. staff is able to receive and process transcripts immediately. data is easily tracked. the paper processes are eliminated, creating a more eco-friendly environment. the cloud also allows us to, again, transfer the transcripts more rapidly, new graduates are now employed in a timely manner, within two to three weeks post graduation. all of which has lead to increased customer satisfaction. in fact, we're currently processing applications for licensees on an average of 42 days now. this time frame is less than our regulatory time frame. again, initially, we were up to seven months, so now 42 days and less. moving on to the fingerprint renewal matters. it has taken some time to reconcile the fingerprint data between the brn, department of consumer affairs, and the department of justice. however, over the last five months the board has worked collectively with dca to correct this matter. in october 2016, dca provided the board with reconciled data from the department of justice which identifies the population of nurses requiring fingerprints. initially in december 2016, the board identified a total of 29,000 licensees with incomplete fingerprint information. over the past several months the board has implement a strategic plan to contact these licensees regarding the fingerprint renewal requirements. as of today, the board has identified now 12,000 remaining licensees with incomplete information. each day the board continues to obtain and process fingerprint results for this population. we do recognize that this is an issue, and has caused concerns without constituent groups and therefore, have implemented a system information change request in the breeze system to add fingerprint notification information into the online renewal transactions. this feature would notify the rns upon license renewal if they need fingerprints. this notification feature is scheduled to be launched in may of 2017. other areas the board is currently addressing include clinical displacement. the growing number of concerns regarding clinical displacement amongst public and private nursing programs has been brought to the board's attention. therefore, the board is currently assembling a focus group with key state coders that includes dings, directors, hospital administrators, legislative representatives, and such, to discuss the prelicensure clinical displacement concerns. this meeting is scheduled for april 11, 2017. now moving on to the enforcement issues, okay? in response to the 2016 audit of the enforcement complaint intake unit, the brn has updated its business practices to be more efficient and effective with resolving complaints and moving enforcement cases through the disciplinary process in a timely manner. we've implemented a fast track process with the attorney's general's office to address that out of state discipline cases. we have also improved our communication efforts with our stakeholders on a routine basis. that includes the division of investigation, department of consumer affairs and attorney general's office. we have now implemented former policies and procedures that consists of desktop manuals that are also stored on dca's secured network. we now have a management monitoring plan. we also have ongoing staff training that is tracked and monitored by our supervisors. we are now able to create detailed reports to track the milestone of each enforcement case in order to resolve complaints in a timely manner. we have also collaborated with the attorney general's office, division of investigation and in the department of consumer affairs to create a training program for the brn and department of investigation- i'm sorry, division of investigation unit. in fact, this training is expected to be completed by march 22nd of 2017. as of december 2016, the board became fully compliant with implementing the consumer protection enforcement initiative guidelines. adopting these guidelines, and increasing the number of cases assigned to staff has assisted the board with eliminating the backlog of unassigned investigative cases in which the auditor mentioned earlier. and finally, each month the board continues to improve on its enforcement actions. and based on the current dca published performance measure, the board's overall enforcement time frames are now within the top third of the 21 healing arts board. however, we combine at the top six board's workload volume of investigation cases. their outcomes are less than one third of the board's total workload. again, committee, it's a pleasure to be here this morning. this concludes my opening statement and we are prepared to answer questions. after the series of questions, i would like to provide the committee with a closing statement. thank you, once again.
[{'start': 79, 'end': 97, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christina Spig: good morning. christina joseph spigg chief of licensing in administrative services. so i'm. in regards to issue number seven which is regarding fingerprints. the board acknowledges that fingerprint submission and licensing notification is an issue. we have worked with dca to reconcile the doj fingerprint data. and since december 2016 we have been in the process of notifying our licensees of the need to submit fingerprints. in december 2016 we initiated a roll out plan to notify approximately 4700 licensees with no fbi and no doj fingerprint results. to let them know that they need to submit fingerprints. two notification letters, over a 60-day period, were sent to these licensees. and those not in compliance are in the process of being referred to the enforcement unit, for potential disciplinary action. as of today, approximately 12,000 active licensees with one level of service. what that means is either a doj response or an fbi response. in debris system remain incomplete. for this remaining group, we have initiated a notification to approximately 1,400 licensees that are due to expire within the next four months. and we'll continue to notify the remaining group of licensees to ensure that it's completed prior to their renewal.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 36, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Stacie Berumen: Stacie Berumen, Assistant Executive Officer for the Board of Registered Nursing. So taking a note of the enforcement audit where training plans have been developed for all of the different staff levels and enforcement. We've also taken that to heart in all of the other areas of the Board. So in updating our procedure manuals for all of the other areas, we're also identifying official training plans for all the different levels of staff. And those areas that they will be required to follow as well.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joseph Pacheco: i'm joseph christina pacheco. i'm the deputy chief of complaint intake and investigations and i'm going to take this one. thankfully, the board has worked with dca. and their breeze team to come up with an incredible robust set of data reports that will track every key mile stone through the time that complaint comes into the board or submitted online. and through every input control that we've created in our policies and procedures. our managers have come up with individual team management monitoring plans to evaluate those data reports and every key milestone throughout the complaint process through the units i supervise and the units that shannon supervises, as well. through final discipline measures. the data is robust. we're starting to get this reports now. the time frames, we can, the hope is we haven't had full production version of this reports. although we do know what data is going to be in there and they will be able to touch on. every single staff, every single unit, all the way through the entire complaint resolution time frame.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 650, 'end': 657, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Stacie Berumen: stacie joseph berumen again. so this could be a two fold issue, it could be an issue that involves staff. it is also with our board members as well because staff make decisions on different types of outcomes for disciplinary cases based on our disciplinary guidelines. so staff follows disciplinary guidelines, but we also do training and orientation for our board members to help train them on the enforcement and discipline process so that they are aware of the different types of violations that could occur and what the types of disciplinary outcomes are. so we will be looking at those processes to see if there's any areas of improvement that we can find in order to resolve this issue.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Jackson: doctor pan, michael, just to curtail on what board member gerber said, during our deliberations, we have dca legal with us and they keep the board members within the guidelines. and if there's any questions, the board members are there to have legal and the staff present during our deliberations and there is healthy discussions from the vast amount of strong personalities on the board to ensure that we come to a fair and equitable decision for our licensees and to ensure that we're protecting the public constantly.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 10, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 12, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 58, 'end': 64, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Deborah Wolff-Baker: My name is Deborah Wolff-Baker. I'm a masters-prepared nurse family practitioner and have been a registered nurse for over 32 years. I hold two advanced practice national Board certifications, one in family practice and one in hospice and palliative care. Over most of my career, I have specialized in the care of older adults. I've always striven to provide the highest quality care for my patients, and have sought to create a model of care that recognizes their unique challenges and your unique needs. For the past nine years, I've worked with the distinguished Dr. Timothy Gieseke providing home-based palliative and primary care, complex chronic disease management as well as care of the elderly in long term care facilities through a multi specialty physician group in Sonoma County. In 2011, I had a complaint filed against me despite having met or exceeded every standard of care. One which should never have gone to an accusation stage, and should certainly have been dismissed by the administrative law judge when the accusation was made, but ended up taking on a life of its own, resulting in a three year probation A $20,000 fine, a severely diminished income and over a $120,000 spent on my defense and financial devastation for my family. While I can appreciate that the BRN's attempts to correct many identified issues, since the State Auditor's investigatory report on the California Board of Registered Nursing came out in December, it has begged for a companion document that describes the effects of this arbitrary and broken system of investigation, discipline, and enforcement on the nurses who have had a complaint submitted against them. In my case, the process took over eight months for a BRN investigator to even contact me in regard to a complaint. And I was never told the nature of the complaint against me in order to answer to it. From there, it took another 18 months to hear back from the BRN that an accusation had been made. During that entire 26 month period, the BRN investigators never spoke with my collaborating MD. They never spoke with any MD in regard to the case nor did they ask me for any clarifying information. During this time my case information was forwarded to a supposed BRN expert. This, quote, expert had no experience in the type of care I provide. She did not do geriatric care, complex chronic disease management, dementia care, palliative care, or house calls, all areas of specialty practice. She had no basis or demonstrated competency to make an opinion on any of the elements of this case. From complaint to hearing took an excruciating 47 months in my case. From the distortions that occurred during my hearing, it appears that truth and facts played very little part in the process after an accusation against a nurse is made and it doesn't matter that the investigation was incomplete or poorly done. At that point, the deputy Attorney General who prosecutes is only interested in winning, it seems, at any cost. Inaccuracies, twisted facts and outright untruths by the prosecution make a case so convoluted it's impossible for a nurse to win. No wonder the 53% in cost recovery fines in 2014 as referred to in the report. At the hearing the BRN expert witness, another one, had no demonstrated competency in the area of APRN practice I specialize in. He had obviously never heard of the McGeer Criteria on antibiotics stewardship utilized by both CNS and CDE-
[{'start': 11, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 570, 'end': 585, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Amy Farrell: Absolutely, good morning ladies and gentlemen. Thank you for your time today. My name is Amy Farrell and in the interest of time I have already gone to the trouble of abridging my comments and I will leave them in full for the record. I'm doing the best I can.
[{'start': 89, 'end': 100, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Phil Greiner: good morning. my name is dr. phil stacie greiner, i'm here as the president of the california association of colleges of nursing. i am also the director of the school of nursing at san diego state university where we have one of the three midwifery programs in the state. i'm here really to lend our support to the current board. keep in mind the board is all relatively new having been sunsetted and re-appointed. the executive director, executive officer has been doing a phenomenal job since he came on board and i want this group to recognize that as you have. and we have been impressed with the amount of change that has taken place in a relatively short period of time. in particular, our nurseries and graduate group, our graduating group, was processed in less than two weeks. that's phenomenal compared to what it had been in the past. we did cooperate with the board. we continue to work with the board, meeting with them on a regular basis because we need more cooperation between the brn and various constituencies on the education side and on the practice side and i think our new eo is doing that. so, i'm just here to lend our support to the work that is being done, the improvements that have been made, a lot of what you saw in the report was in prior years and i think we're on the right path. thank you.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Murray: good morning. my name is laura phil murray. i am here to speak as a mother of three children, all born out of hospital.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Evelyn Drinker: Things that happened in Sacramento. My name is Evelyn Drinker, D-R-I-N-K-E-R. I'm a former RN/PHN, public health nurse. I majored in nursing at San Jose State University, graduated 1985, had a clean license until my scuffle with the board. I earned an Administration of Justice Degree with Honors in 2013, and all of my professors were local law enforcement, including Sheriff John McGinnis. They were all interested in what I went through, but enough about me. RX Staffing has been in at least 33 lawsuits since 2002. Eda Velasquez, now deceased, was a diabetic, slow healing patient. Whose cancer went unrecognized by an RN openly practicing as an unlicensed medical Doctor from RX Staffing. There was no justice for Mrs. Velasquez. Will you help Raymond Pierce? Raymond Pierce, until he was found, was living in a unheated, unfinished garage as temperatures dipped to a cold 38 degrees, with wind gusts up to 20 miles per hour here in Sacramento on that chilly February. Raymond is an older developmental disabled adult who needs help with all of his activities of daily living. And he's waited since 2010 for the authorities to take his situation very seriously. Can you help him get justice for the life-threatening conditions he was trapped in, due to Kenneth Ermin, RN, at RX Staffing? The Board of Nursing has been asked and refused to investigate Kenneth Ermin, his staff, and RX staffing, including the unlicensed Doctor who worked there. I begged you to do that. Atrocious infection control, and I use that term disparagingly, was practice with nurses ordered to keep supposedly sterile supplies in their home refrigerators. I refused to do that. I step on toes, I, sorry. I'm wrapping it up. It is amazing Raymond Pearce didn't die from patient neglect and malpractice, but his 2012 lawsuit is still waiting in the courthouse mere blocks away. If you can't, or refuse to help patients like Ada Valasquez and Raymond Pearce, you should be under Sunset Review every single year or just close down. And frankly you owe me an apology for investigating me, an LVN who didn't know what I was talking about and couldn't be expected to. I'm done.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 377, 'end': 390, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 519, 'end': 532, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 724, 'end': 733, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 749, 'end': 763, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 765, 'end': 779, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 974, 'end': 981, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1258, 'end': 1271, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1356, 'end': 1369, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1718, 'end': 1732, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1902, 'end': 1915, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1920, 'end': 1934, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Judy Berg: Good afternoon. I'm Judy Berg. And I am the Executive Officer of HealthImpact which is California's nationally recognized nursing workforce center. And I've had the pleasure of working with the Board of Registered Nursing, the executive officers and staff for a while, and have to say that I am so impressed with the improvements that are being made recently under Dr. Morris's leadership. There is real progress being made and I hope that continues, we're here to partner with them in making that happen and looking forward to the process improvements that will happen in the future. I'm here to support them very strongly and glad that we're having this discussion here today.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 369, 'end': 375, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Marcia Faller: Good afternoon. I'm Marcia Faller, Chief Clinical Officer with AMN Healthcare. I'm a registered nurse and been licensed in California since 1983. AMN Healthcare is the largest supplier of temporary staffing in California. And as such, we bring several thousand nurses into the year every single year, many of which make the state their home on a continuing basis after working here. We, therefore, are highly experienced in the endorsement process in California, and pushed about 1,500 nurses through that process in 2016. I'm here to support the Board of Nursing as well and Dr. Morris's efforts at process improvement. And we have seen significant improvement since the summertime highs of 14 to 16 weeks to achieve a license by endorsement. To our experience in 2017, once we moved on to the online electronic processing, where that processing time has dropped there's 200 applicants we had in January and February of this to six weeks. So we continue to support the process improvements that the board, the current existing staff of executive and the board are putting through the process and continue to offer our support as well as we can. Thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 580, 'end': 586, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tina Ruffo: Hi, good afternoon. My name is Tina Ruffo, I've been a nurse for 30 years. And I'm a registered nurse member of the California Nurses Association. There are more registered nurses in California than any other licensed health care professionals. The BRN oversees more registered nurses than the total number of licenses of the medical board, the pharmacy board, and the dental board combined. We appreciate the BRN staff, who are public sector employees who work hard to make sure that we get our licenses renewed and that we have resources about nursing practice on the BRN website. Thank you, BRN, we appreciate that you keep your consumers safe and to keep us updated on our nursing practice requirements, thank you.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 594, 'end': 597, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sharlene Troy: Good morning, my name is Sharlene Troy, I've been a nurse for 35 years, and I'm a member of California Nurses Association. I've read about the tax on the BRN, that are supposedly being done in the interest of consumer safety. The nursing profession has one of the lowest percentages of complaints filled against licensees among the health professions. In addition, nurses have ranked as the most respected profession for the 15th year in a row. We definitely care about our patients and we would like to see the respect that the public has for nurses reflected in the way the Legislature treats our licensee board. Consumer protection is a mission of the board and it is the mandate of every registered nurse. Please keep in mind our consumer advocacy is referred to under the law as patient advocacy, and patient advocacy is what we strive for every day. Thank you. Good afternoon. Good afternoon. My name is Pamela Rouse, and I'm a registered nurse, member of the California Nurses Association. I've been a registered nurse for 40 years.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 910, 'end': 922, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Linda Walsh: Good afternoon. My name is Linda Walsh I'm a certified nurse midwife. I have been for 36 years and I'm the immediate past President of the California Nurse Midwives Association. I would like to thank the State Auditor for this very, very thoughtful and insightful report. I will quickly, this will be a quick delivery of, some people got that.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roxanne Goulde: good afternoon. i'm roxanne laura goulde, representing the american nurses association of california. we're here to show our support for doctor morris and the board. we believe they've inherited the scars and flaws of the previous board and frankly much like you, we were cynical. we didn't know that it was possible to turn that ship around and we are so pleased with how seriously they've taken the reports recommendations. and the passion they've shown in just throwing themselves into trying to addressing this quickly as possible. we're elated and frankly amazed and i'd give them a virtual hug if i could. so thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 144, 'end': 150, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mia Ochoa: good morning, my name is mia roxanne ochoa. i'm a registered nurse and member of california nurses association. i have been licensed by the brn for 20 years. i know that both the legislature and the brn are working to protect california consumers, in other words, patients. and i don't think the brn staff needs to receive, i do think the brn staff needs to receive more kudos for their work. these public sector employees have had to deal with mandatory furloughs, unpaid of course. accusations by some in the legislature with not so subtle agendas that they are not doing their jobs well enough. the relatively new it system the brn, has been forced to use, is to put it mildly a hassle to deal with. i hope you are factoring in this incredibly difficult to deal with computer system in your overall assessment of the board registered nurses. brn staff needs to be supported in their important work. thank you brn staff for all that you do for californians and for the registered nurses.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marilyn Stevens: my name is marilyn, i'm with the association of california nurse leaders. and i just want to thank doctor morris for his dedication, passion, and we so appreciate everything that you're doing. i'm also here to speak in regards to one of the programs that you mentioned in the brn report. it's called nursys n-u-r-s-y-s. and as an employer of over 500 registered nurses, this is a very valuable tool. and i really hope that it's promoted more in the future because many employers do not even know we have it. what it does, just so you understand, is that when an employer puts all of their registered nurses into this program, we are then notified any time that there is a status change on their license. incredibly valuable because we get that information immediately. therefore, if we have any nurses that are working that all of a sudden have their license suspended, we know it right away. so i really want to promote that and thank you again, dr. morris.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 106, 'end': 112, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 951, 'end': 957, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alice Mantanagara: good afternoon. my name is dr. alice mia mantanagara. and i'm the california state director of nursing for western governors university. and our programs are nationally accredited across the us. in 2009, the wgu was invited into the state of california and given a grant to provide high quality, low cost, multi-state approach of higher education option for adult learners needing a pathway to a healthcare career. as a national university, we have experience with regulatory bodies across the nation. we serve the diverse nursing students across all 50 states including our military personnel overseas. in california, pre-licensure nursing education program requires a br in approval for initial in every five years regardless of national accreditation. the process requires duplicate processes and information that we provide to our national accreditation as well. each of these requirements add cost to the budget of the department of consumer affairs, and ultimately to our consumers and our students. yet there is no evidence to correlate these costs to a greater protection of the public. i rise here as a licensed registered nurse in the state of california, and on behalf of the university, to offer support for the california board of registered nursing. we are prepared to offer our support in providing recommendations on best practices to improve efficiency operations and their role to protect the public and the citizens of california, thank you.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Victoria Bermudas: Since my daughter is also a registered nurse, I entered her complete and correct information and the same flaw in the system told me, no results matched your search criteria. With more than 400,000 registered nurses in California this is a problem. The system does not seem to be able to handle more than simple information, the licensee's name without erroneously reporting that no results match that search criteria. My name is Victoria Bermudas, and I have been a registered nurse for 48 years. I'm a member of the California Nurses Association's retiree division, and I'm in support of extension of the BRN. I prepared documents for the Committee to demonstrate a significant glitch that is still in the BreEZe system. When news came out about the need for some nurses to resubmit fingerprints, I went to the website to look at my license in case there was information there indicating that I needed to submit a new set of fingerprints. When I completely and correctly filled out my full name in the city where I live, the website showed no results matched your search.
[{'start': 430, 'end': 447, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lynda Schneider: good afternoon my name is lynda alice schneider, i'm the senior assistant attorney general of the licensing section office of the attorney general. our section represents the board of registered nursing in its disciplinary actions and other associated litigation. the board of registered nursing is our largest client by volume and we are very involved in all of the board's disciplinary actions. like to tell you that the leadership of the board of registered nursing has established in excellent working relationship with our office. they're very committed to enforcement, and we work together like a well oiled machine. so, i wanted you to know about that.  also, the licensing section has provided trainings for the board of registered nursing over the last couple of years. on privacy, protection, pursuant to the state auditor's report, we have also been engaged by the board to provide training for their investigators. both for board registered nursing investigators and division of investigators, and in addition, we'll be working with the dca enforcement academy to provide trainings in disciplinary actions and witness testimony. i just wanted to commend the board of registered nursing for its excellent, moving forward in a very excellent way and establishing such a good working relationship with us which will improve enforcement and that is a point. thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alison Grimes: you would think as an audiologist, i would know how to manage a microphone. seriously, yes, and thank you, chairman, senator hill, as well, for the opportunity to address you this afternoon. i'm i'm dr. grimes, i'm a dispensing audiologist and the board chair. i've been licensed by this board for more than 40 years. with me are dr. dee parker, speech language pathologist and board member. and mr. paul sanchez, our board executive officer. speech language pathology, audiology, and hearing aid dispensing are independent and rapidly expanding professions in both healthcare and educational systems. professional in this three fields work with people of all ages,from newborns to geriatric,to address and rehabilitate communication impairments. communication skills are essential for the well being and societal contribution of all americans,affecting quality of life including psycho social,educational and occupational endeavors. speech language pathologists provide assessment therapy and counseling for individuals and their family members. there is a wide range of disorders addressed by the speech pathologist including speech and language impairments, swallowing disorders or dispasia, strokes or other brain trauma, stuttering and voice and speech production. audiologists provide diagnosis, treatment, and rehabilitation and counseling for individuals with hearing and or balance disorders and their family members. we work with patients of all ages. audiologists provide diagnostic follow-up and treatment for infants who fail their newborn hearing screenings and subsequently fit hearing aids on infants found to have permanent hearing loss. we work closely with early intervention professionals and families to ensure the best speech language and psychosocial outcomes. in older children and adults, audiologists provide treatment and rehabilitative services, including communication counseling, provision of hearing aids, and assessment for cochlear implants, and post-implant management for infants and children and adults who receive cochlear implants. audiologists work with other assistive technologies to address handicap imposed by hearing loss, and provide communication rehabilitation and ongoing patient and family management. we carrying out hearing conservation programs for individuals in industries where there's risk of noise-induced hearing loss. hearing aid dispensers, test hearing in adults to select and fit hearing aids and provide post-fitting verification and validation of hearing aid amplification to ensure that the hearing aid is meeting the consumer specific hearing needs. speech language pathologists, audiologists and hearing aid dispensers in california provide services to linguistically and culturally diverse populations representing all age groups and must continually adapt to new developments. technologies and research findings, in all aspects of their respective professions. services are provided in both public and private agencies, including schools, hospitals and private practice settings. for the history of our board, the demand for regulation of these three professions has existed since the early 1970s. oversight of the professions of speech-language pathology and audiology has been governed by a combined board since it's inception in 1974. the regulation of hearing aid dispensing was enacted in 1970 originally under the jurisdiction of the medical board of california. but for the past 20 years has operated either as an independent board or a bureau under the department. on january 1st 2010, assembly bill 1535 created the speech language pathology, audiology and hearing aid dispensers board. this merged the hearing aid dispensers bureau into the speech-language pathology and audiology board. the newly merged board regulates the professions of speech-language pathology, audiology and hearing aid dispensing. each profession is separate and distinct. each has its own scope of practice. each has its own entry level requirements and professional settings with some overlap in groups and pathologies served. to balance the professional expertise and public input on the board, the government structure of the board consists of two speech language pathologists, two audiologists, one of whom must be a dispensing audiologist, two non-audiologist hearing aid dispensers, and a public member, who must be a licensed physician and surgeon board certified in otolaryngology. all of these members are appointed by the governor. in addition, one public member seat is appointed by the senate rules committee and one by the speaker of the assembly. members are appointed for four-year terms and no member may serve more than two consecutive terms. our board serves to protect the public through licensing and regulation of speech language pathologists, audiologists, and hearing aid dispensers. who provides speech and hearing services to california consumers. the boards sets entry level licensing standards which include examination requirements that measure the licensees' professional knowledge and clinical abilities. that are consistent with the demands of the current delivery systems. to ensure ongoing consumer protection, the board enforces standards of professional conduct by investigating applicant backgrounds. investigating complaints against licensed and unlicensed practitioners, and taking disciplinary action whenever appropriate. the board jurisdiction encompasses the regulation of 11 license types including speech-language pathology, audiology, hearing aid dispensing, paraprofessionals, and education programs offering degrees in speech-language pathology assistance. today the board licenses well over 25,000 individuals and has an operating budget of approximately $2.1 million. in the past four years, the board has face many challenges. since the last sunset review, the boards licencee population has grown by 28%. resulting an increase work load in all areas. despite it's challenges, the board continuous to make great improvements in all of it's operations. this year the board has made significant improvement in meeting all of its enforcement performance measures, excuse me. licensing cycle times have been very significantly reduced in the past two years from an estimated 8 to 12 week time frame previously. to approximately two weeks today. the board will continue to take steps to enhance this process to reduce application cycle times. access to the hearing aid dispensing profession has improved greatly due to the increase in the practical examinations offered by the board. prior to 2015-16, the board examined an average of 120 candidates annually. in 2015-16, the board examined 306 candidates for the hearing aid dispensing practical examination. there remain many initiatives and activities that the board plans to develop and accomplish to further support consumers. there is a growing demand for licensure and enforcement in our professions. additionally, with the population of california aging, demand for services has increased. the board staff works overtime to provide timely management of services. in conducting our hands on hearing aid dispensing exam, we must literally borrow real estate for the exam site. further, this examination program draws considerable resources in terms of staff preparation and time, pulling staff from other essential and time sensitive activities. the board deftly does more with the staff that is frankly, inadequate, given the desperate needs of regulating three separate professions and practices. i believe strongly that our board does an admirable job with limited staff and resources to protect the public as it accesses hearing and speech care.
[{'start': 125, 'end': 129, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 203, 'end': 209, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 334, 'end': 344, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 400, 'end': 412, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Paul Sanchez: Good afternoon, Assemblymember Salas, Senator Hill, Committee Members, and staff. Again, Paul Sanchez, executive officer of the board. I've been with the board since July of 2014, and this is my first Sunset. So I just wanted to thank you for allowing us to present our issues, respond to your issues that have been raised, and hopefully, fill gaps of information. I'll first start with issue number one. The board should advise the Committee of its long term expectations for its fund, especially in light of proposed licensing fee increases. As such, increases are not adopted. Does the board project insolvency before the next Sunset review? And the second part to that is VCA revenue projections show falling revenue and increasing expenditures, yet the board does not project insolvency. So, first off, I want to state that the status of the front condition is relatively healthy based on the current expenditure authority. However as Dr. Garns has explained, we do see a need to increase our staff and resources, just to keep up with the growing licensing population and maintain appropriate levels of service to consumers, applicants, and licensees. Adding additional staff to the board means we will have to increase renewal and licensing fees. I would like to add that the last time we increased our fees to our largest licensing populations goes back to 2001. This will help us prevent a structural fiscal imbalance and ensure solvency in the coming years. And we have received support from all three professions on this fee increase. I did want to explain why it appeared that our revenue was actually falling. And that has to do with the actual projections that the Department of Consumer Affairs Budget's Office provides us. It's typically based on a couple of assumptions, and one is that the board will expend all of its budget. And the second one is that the future projections are based on previous licensing numbers and workload. So, as you can imagine, both of these would result in conservative projections. Our board, for instance, typically reverts $200 to $300,000 a year. And we have seen a pretty dramatic increase in our licensing population, 28% over the last four years and 13% just over the last year. So if you actually were to straight line the revenue, just based on the previous two years, it would show increased revenue and not decreasing revenue. Just to summarize, the board's revenue isn't falling, and we will have to increase our fees to keep up with the growth of the board. And we do believe that based on our current expenditures, our fund is healthy. We also plan to increase fees, so that we can keep it healthy. Thank you. I will now address issue number three, and that has to do with the current training and examination for hearing aid dispensers limiting access to the profession. This is kind of a two part question, so I'll start with the first part. The board should advise committees on whether it feels that access is being limited to the hearing care profession, particularly hearing aid dispensers and dispensing audiologists by the low pass rate of the licensing examination in the absence of a training manual. So we're actually talking about two issues here. We're talking about what have been low pass rates in the past to the written and practical hearing aid dispensers exam. And we're talking about a proposed supervisor training manual for hearing aid dispensers. The background document discusses these pass rates compared to speech language pathologists and audiologists. When I first came to the board, I too thought those rates were low, and I asked the same questions. And we did some research to find out what was involved there. I think the important thing is to determine the effectiveness of any exam. You don't want it to be too easy and allow unqualified people in, but you also don't want it to be too difficult and keep qualified people out. So the board strives to ensure that licensing standards are met that protect consumers, while permitting access into its professions. In support of this strategic goal, the board's done the following. We've addressed and eliminated long standing licensing back logs. We've reduced licensing cycle times to its current average of two weeks. It's actually much Shorter for hearing aid dispensers. We've improved access to the hearing aid dispensing profession by doubling the number of practical exams that have been held in the past three years. To better understand the issue of the disparities in the examination scores, it's important to understand the differences in the qualifications required. For the hearing aid dispenser's exam and licensing qualifications, there are no formal training or educational requirements beyond that of a high school diploma or a GED. In addition, an applicant may work as a trainee, but that is not required as a condition for licensor. In comparison, speech language pathology applicants must possess a masters degree. And audiology applicants must possess a doctoral degree in their respective fields of study. In addition, applicants are required to complete specified hours of clinical practice and a year of professional experience under the supervision of a licensed professional. Many licensed dispensers in California do possess great qualifications. However, because they are not required as a condition to licensure, the result of any examination can vary based on the diversity of the applicant pool. Having said that, the board does acknowledge that continuous improvement has been necessary and continues to be necessary for the examination. And that has been the main focus of this board for the last three to four years. And as a result of that, we have seen positive changes in the rates. In 2008, from the last Sunset report period to the current reporting period, we've seen the written exam rise from 45% to 60% and the practical exam rate rise from 33% to 54%. Although the supervisor training manual hasn't been completed, the board does make available on its website candidate information booklets and examination outlines for both the written and practical examination. The second part of the question is does the board feel that the exam continues to be an accurate assessment of the skills and knowledge necessary to practice in the field? And what evaluations have we pursued on this issue and of the examination itself? So with the help of subject matter experts in licensing and testing specialists from the Office of Professional Exam Services, the board conducts ongoing evaluations of both exams. These evaluations can ensure the exams are an accurate assessment of the knowledge and skills necessary to practice safely and competently. In addition, statistical analyses are conducted by the board after each examination to ensure that the test questions are functioning within the expected parameters. The board also conducts a periodic occupational analysis for each profession it regulates. The next analysis for these exams is scheduled for 2018/19. I wanted to highlight some recent changes. Recently, we have actually redesigned our practical exam, and the new and improved exam just launched in 2017. Enhancements were made to streamline the testing process, including the elimination of information that was already tested in each of the examinations and some clarifying instructions to the exam. We have actually seen some real positive improvements, but since we've only held two exams, we're kind of holding off to celebrate just yet. We need a little more time to study what those improvements have been. The last part of the question is, when is the board anticipating, anticipate completing its handbook? The background paper refers to the proposed training manual for supervisors of hearing aid dispensing trainees, and that is not to be confused with the information that the board already provides in its exam handbooks. In the coming year, the board will explore training guidelines, possibly incorporating national training guidelines to discuss and discuss the potential need for acquiring hearing aid dispenser training ships in California as a condition for examination and licensure. Not just toward the goal of improving rates but for the purpose of ensuring safety for consumers. In addition, the board will continue to develop and update it's current examination handbooks as needed. The emphasis in improving all there is of the exam has resulted in an enhanced exam, the development of resources that are available to all applicants, and the expansion of examiner training. These improvements have addressed the board's concerns and we look forward to working with the Committee on discussing potential training requirements for hearing aid dispensers in the future.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 36, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 46, 'end': 50, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 89, 'end': 101, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 944, 'end': 949, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sean Green: Good afternoon, I'm Sean Green I'm a speech and language pathologist. I'm here on behalf of the California Speech and Hearing Association and this smile is just from the news I heard about the AUD program because I'm also a faculty member here at California State University Sacramento. Some so excited to hear that news and I'm here to lend support to the work that this bore over the last two years and continues to monitor and work with this sport to support professionals and consumers and navigating book concerns as well as advancing improvements in our profession. This board has continued to work closely with CAPTCHA to ensure that professionals receive appropriate evidence based training and that students are receiving appropriate education at both our colleges and universities and of course all this is done in order to ensure that we as professionals are providing the highest level of care to our consumers. This board and its staff have shown advances, and this part I really, really am happy to see, in the proficiency and processing of new licenses and renewals. I remember over 10 years ago when I first started in this profession, it was taking two to three months to get new licenses approved. Now I have new graduates who are getting their licenses, In less than a month's time. So those advances are really impacting our field and those new graduates coming into the field because, as we all know, delays in the licensing process, in some cases, may have the potential to directly impact services provided to the consumers, since oftentimes it's school districts that are waiting for those new graduates. The students may not be receiving the appropriate services that they need. So it's really nice to see that direct impact you're having in our field and of course many professionals, students, and consumers are still concerned with the shortages of speech pathologists and the California Speech and Hearing Association Board looks forward to monitoring and working collaboratively with the licensing board to address this shortage and I'll be having on behalf, I would like to say thank you to the board for the advancements made to support professionals and consumers.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vanessa Cajina: good afternoon mr. chair, vanessa lynda cajina on behalf of the hearing healthcare providers of california. the states licensed hearing aid dispensers. we're here today in support of the board and the big steps that they've taken over the past three years. in order to decrease licensing times and get those time frames really up to speed. is well on enforcement process used. we also believe that the steps taken to increase the number of exams that are given on annual basis. hearing aid dispensers have been increased and increasing the number of licensed professionals in the state. on behalf of hhp, we've worked closely with our national body, the international hearing society on some training manuals, and i think that california has a very strong practice act, and it's been difficult to apply what's worked in other states in california. on licensing standards for hearing aid dispensaries, but we do believe that the board is taking proper steps forward in order to ensure that more people are ready to take the test. we believe in traineeships and apprenticeships. and really appreciate the initial conversations that we've been having with the board and look forward to working with them in the next coming years.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nick Broca: good afternoon mr. chairman and members, my name is nick vanessa broca, here on behalf of the california academy of audiology, which represents the state's licensed audiologists. the academy supports your staff's recommendation that the licensing board be extended for an additional four years and hopefully we're on to the future. the board professional and public members are actively engaged in their duty to ensure the highest and best practices the professions regulate the protection of the consumer. the board's executive officers energetic and focus on fulfilling the mission with the board and providing strong support for the board members. for these reasons california academy of audiology urges you to support the extension. thank you.
[{'start': 52, 'end': 70, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Denise Miller: Good afternoon Senator Hill, Committee and staff. I'm Denise Miller board President appointed by Governor Brown, with me our Executive Director Heather Martin and Vice President Richard Bookwalter. I'd also like to thank and acknowledge our very hard working and dedicated board, who along with me know that this is an honor and privilege to serve the people in the State of California in this manner. I've been practicing for 27 years. I worked at Adventist Health in Glendale Southern California at the Director of Live Well Senior Program. It is a wellness program designed to help seniors and their caregivers navigate the health care system. I'd like to first start out with some background about occupational therapy. The profession was established in 1917 and is one of the oldest allied health professions in the United States. Currently, we are in our centennial year, having been practicing for well over a hundred years. I'd like to, SB 1046 created the California Board of Occupational Therapy effective January 1st, 2001. The board is responsible for the licensure and regulation of occupational therapist and occupational therapy assistance in the State of California. Our mission is to regulate occupational therapy by serving and protecting California's consumers. Today, we have over 16,000 allied healthcare professionals licensed in occupational therapy practicing in our state. We provide important health and rehabilitation services to people of all ages, who because of illness, injury, or developmental or psychological impairment, need specialized interventions to regain, develop, or build the skills necessary for an independent functioning and a full life. A recent independent study by the Health Policy Researchers identifies that occupational therapy is the only spending category that reduces hospital re-admissions. The authors point out that occupational therapy places a unique and immediate focus on patient's functional and social needs, which can be important drivers of readmission if left unaddressed. The use of occupations, which is where I'd really like to draw your focus, are the activities in which clients, patients engage and occur throughout the lifespan, including many elements. Some of those elements are related to instrumental activities of daily living, self-care, or activities to support an independent life, either in the home or in the community, work or activities for people who want to return to employment, or even social participation or the ability to exhibit behaviors and characteristics expected during interactions with others in an orderly social system. Within our domain of practice, occupational therapists and occupational therapy assistants consider the repertoire of occupation in which the client engages, the performance, skills, and patterns the client uses, and the client's body functions and structures. Our board is composed of seven members by law, and includes four licensed members, three occupational therapists, and one occupational therapy assistant. There are three public members, and I'm very pleased to announce that there are no vacancies and have not been for the past few years. The Governor appoints the four licensed members and one of the public members. One public member appointed by the Assembly and the one the others appointed by the Senate Rules Committee. Going into last year, our board met to establish a 2016-2019 strategic plan. As part of that process environmental scanning and analysis took place. We sought stake holder input. We looked at the board's performance in the areas of enforcement, application qualifications, laws and regulations, outreach communication, and organizational effectiveness. We have put plans in order with this strategic plan in order to meet these goals. For example, outreach and education was a goal that we very much wanted to work on. I can identify for you that we hold all of our board meetings at universities, which then are connected to students coming to hear about the Board of Occupational Therapy, to understand what it means to be a license holder in the State of California and all of the things that go with that privilege. After the process concluded the survey included the process 900 stakeholders. So there are all sorts of people on our interested parties list that were included. We also included other state licensing boards, associations, program directors, and all of the California occupational education programs. After the culmination of two plus years in mapping the boards business processes and designing, developing, and testing a new computer system database, the board successfully transitioned to the new computer system, Breeze, in January 2016. The Business and Profession's code BPC section 2570.25 mandates that the protection of the public shall be the highest priority for California. Board of occupational therapy in exercising our right to license, regulate and discipline. The board needs this mandate by effectively and evaluating applicants, efficient investigation of complaints, and imposing discipline where appropriate. Thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 106, 'end': 111, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 144, 'end': 158, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 178, 'end': 196, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Richard Bookwalter: Wonderful, thank you. Good afternoon. Members, sorry. Good afternoon. I'm Richard Bookwalter. I'm Vice President of the Board of Occupational Therapy and a practitioner appointed by Governor Brown. I'd like to thank the Joint Committee for providing us with an opportunity to report on the licensing regulatory enforcement activities of the board over the past four years. Board President Denise Miller's given a brief overview of some of the activities, and they're in the sunset report as well of course, submitted to the Committee. I hope you'll allow me to talk for a moment a little bit more about the question that's on most people's minds when they hear occupational therapy. And that is, what is it really, again. I generally tell people that we help folks with problems with their daily business. School-based occupational therapy practitioners, for example, help students lengthen their attention span in class, grasp and use writing implements, blunt the impact of their physical or learning disabilities on the process of going to school, for example. A neonatal occupational therapist help children develop oral skills for breast feeding or bottle feeding, developing the lips ability to suck. At California Children Services in the regional developmental centers occupational therapy is practitioners work with children on crawling, sitting up right, feeding themselves, using their hands to play and manipulate objects and toys. And reach all the developmental milestones that other children achieve through play and teaching. On the other hand, I'm an occupational therapist practitioner member and I haven't ever done any of those things, and I've been practicing for 20 years, I worked with adults. I've retrained mostly adults with neurological and orthopedic conditions to dress, bathe, clean themselves after toileting, those kinds of very, very basic activities after a disability. I've also trained with the psychiatric occupational therapist at San Francisco General Hospital behind the locked unit. And worked with veterans with mental illness in an outpatient veterans administration program in San Francisco. I've worked at an adult health program, the unlocked program in San Fransisco, which is a all-inclusive care for the elderly program and I've also done ergonomic evaluations for office workers. So that gives you an idea of the breath of some of the settings that people can work in. Let me also take a moment to talk about our clients and I'll talk particularly about mine, because I don't mean to make it about me, but it may be helpful to understand who the consumers are of our services. I currently work with Kaiser members in San Francisco and South San Francisco, those two Kaiser medical centers, sometimes in Morin and Sonoma counties, on complex wheelchair seating and mobility and a couple of examples, I've recently met a toddler and her mother. The toddler needs her first wheel chair. She needs an adaptive stroller, because she's outgrown the regular commercial stroller and her parents can't carry her around anymore, but that's the only way to get around. I'll soon be meeting a young man in the tech industry who went snowboarding last month and had a spinal chord injury and he's getting his first wheelchair as well. I'm working with a young woman with multiple sclerosis on modifying her power wheelchair to accommodate her changing needs, as her disease progresses and in a couple weeks I'm meeting an elderly woman and her daughter, the woman has Alzheimer's disease, and has forgotten how to grasp and hold and use a walker. So she gets up and she falls and her daughter's at her wit's end. And she's coming to see me to figure out how to keep her mother off the floor. So those are the consumers that I have day to day. Through this work I get to know the families, I get to learn about their homes, their support systems, their finances, their financial limitations, and sort of the daily struggles that they have, and this is why consumer protection is important to me as a practitioner. So by licensing occupational therapy practitioners and enforcing education and training requirements, by establishing appropriate regulation and diligently pursuing appropriate enforcement actions, the Board of Occupational Therapy has fulfilled it's mission of consumer protection, cost effectively, within the performance standards. And I hope you will agree and thank you for hearing our testimony today. At this point, we'll be happy to answer any questions the Committee has.
[{'start': 74, 'end': 92, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 191, 'end': 196, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 389, 'end': 402, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Heather Martin: Heather Martin, executive officer for the board, and thank you for the opportunity to appear today. I'll just go into our response. Very good, thank you. We have other questions as well, so thank you. Specifically regarding the board's fund conditions and the proposed fee increases, the board did begin the regulatory fee increase process in early last year. The fee increase amounts were established such to ensure sufficient revenue and the boards long term financial stability. With the biannual renewal being the boards primary revenue source, we did actually approve a two step renewal fee increase. This will ensure that the board maintains a four month reserve at least into fiscal year '25/'26, perhaps longer depending on ongoing revenue and expenditure trends. Also just to touch briefly on one of the staff recommendations regarding the inactive license fee, the inactive license fee has been at a lower amount than the biannual active renewal fee. That's consistent with BNP code section 462. It's also consistent with what almost all the other healthcare boards do except for two. There's only two that have an actual lower amount. The board didn't consider a statutory change to increase that inactive fee, but instead, proposed that, consistent with 462, it'd be consistent for both active and inactive renewals. Any other change to that, if the committee went that direction, we would have to reevaluate the fee increases as proposed. Okay. In the interest of time, I'll just keep responding.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Heather Kitching: good afternoon. my name is heather nick kitching. i'm the president of the occupational therapy association of. california. i do believe that you have a letter before you dated february 28th. if you did not have that, please let us know if we can get copies of that to you. but really, i'm speaking on behalf of the whole association and all of the 18,000 plus license holders in the state in support of our licensing board. i'm very proud to tell you that i've been practicing in the state of california for over 25 years, and that span is longer than the time i've held the license because i've had the great honor of seeing this board come to fruition. i've held many appointed and elected positions in our state association and i've had an active role as an individual to bring this board to its current state of existence and all of the good work that it's doing. so i really would like to, on behalf of our association, say that we appreciate the board's existence, we feel very positive about the future of collaboration with them. we feel that in the past year we have done significant work and collaboration over shared agendas that ensures strong provision of services in the state collaborating, obviously, from two different primary angles. the longevity and sustaining of the profession in terms of our work in the association, as well as protection of the public that the board oversees. and of course there's overlap, there's inherent overlap, and for that i am very grateful that we worked together in a very positive fashion. so having said that, i thank you for your attention and we're in full support of the board's existence.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Woo: Good afternoon, Senator Hill and Committee Members, and staff. My name is Laura Woo, I'm an occupational therapist and have been for over 30 years. I've also been a member of my state professional association, the Occupational Therapy Association of California, and I have been, excuse me, a licensed occupational therapist since the board's inception. I practice primarily in the area of pediatrics, so I work with the little itty bits, all the way up to adolescents, and primarily with children with physical disabilities. I have kind of two hats. I am in clinical practice but primarily in administration, and in also clinical and academic education. I work with over 60 occupational therapy practitioners in my role in insuring education and training for the competence of my staff in providing occupational therapy services to these children. I am appreciative of the Board for the assistance that they have lent me over the years in addressing some of the concerns I hear from my staff in regards to their practice. And with my academic hat as an educator, I teach an ethics course and an occupational therapy program in Southern California and I've been very appreciative also of the Board in lending me a hand in making sure that the future of our profession understands their role in providing safe and competent services to, for some of us, our most vulnerable population. So I'm here to publicly acknowledge and thank our Board for not only ensuring the safety of our consumers, but in providing the resources, assistance and support for me as the clinician and as an educator in doing what I do. Thank you very much
[{'start': 24, 'end': 28, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 74, 'end': 83, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Doug Stead: Yes. Good afternoon. My name is Doug Stead. I am the Executive Director of CCIDC. I've been in that position for quite a long time. I've been involved with this organization since its inception 27 years ago, part of the coalition that helped create it, and get it up and running, and then eventually became an employee and I am serving at the pleasure of my Board. The fact that we only have 15 minutes, I have a lot to cover and I'm not going to cover it in 15 minutes. So, what I took the liberty of doing was writing out all of the testimonies. So, I will give that to Mark, and you will have the written testimony that I would like to share with this Committee. So, what I'll try to do, because of the time constraints, is be brief and try to give you issue number one, the acceptance of the stamp. And I'll try to, sort of, summarize that as best I can. It's a very complex issue. As Rose pointed out, 27 years ago, one of the primary factors of creating certification was with the intent of identifying interior designers with qualifications that would let building officials know that these people had an expertise in order to do this. We operate, as interior designers, under exemptions that are codified into the Architects Practice Act, specifically 5537 and 5538. This is a line, we look at it as a line. Everything above this line architects, that's architecture. And you don't go there unless you are a licensed architect. Everything below that line is an exemption. And, technically, that's really none of their business, because it's exempt. And so, really under the exemptions, and these exemptions have been in effect since 1939 and they've been updated a few times, these exemptions really allow the general public to operate without an architect or without an engineer. Now in 1990, when certification came into effect, the state set a standard for interior designers. Education, work experience, and an examination in order to raise that level to identify those people both to the public and to building officials. That these people were competent and qualified to do this kind of work. So, that's sort of how we operate. Now, with all good intentions what's happened over 27 years is there is no consistency with building departments. There's 450 building departments in the state. Probably 95% of them don't really have a problem with certified interior designers submitting commercial interior design work and residential interior design work. And we're talking significant projects. I mean, the projects involve laying out offices and office buildings, and exiting corridors, and reflected ceiling plans. A whole host of elements that go to the making up the interior of a vacant building. It's non-structural and it's non-seismic. And it falls under the exemptions of the Architects Practice Act. That's where we practice. And some building officials say, nope, we won't accept that, we need architects only. And that's probably about 5% of the building officials. Unfortunately, that 5% are in the major city centers: Los Angeles, San Francisco, and San Jose. There are some surrounding jurisdictions to them that also go along that way, but for the most part those are the three big ones. And we understand all of that. We understand that that's their prerogative under the law and under the California Building Code to do that. The acceptance of the stamp issue, and we tried to address this four or five years ago, at the last Sunset review hearing. And we were turned down at that point, or it wasn't put forward, shall I say, because there was a lot of opposition. It appears we're at the same impasse. We were at a meeting last Thursday with the Architect's Board. I was informed that CALBO, which is the organization of building officials, are somewhat opposed to us making these amendments that are in the background paper and in our Sunset Review report. The California Architects Board has also taken a position of opposition. And, not surprisingly, the American Institute of Architects California Council has also taken an opposition. So, the architects generally, and with the building officials, kind of following along, are all taking an opposition to the amendments that we have proposed to our statute to clarify what certified interior designers and all interior designers can do under the exemptions. So, in following all of this, what we raised the question of where is the evidence? Where is the proof? We've got 27 years of operating under these exemptions. We have been doing horizontal exiting for longer than that. We have been doing one hour corridors for longer than that. We've been doing reflected ceiling plans. We've been building out buildings, in major cities across this state, for over 27 years. There is not one instance of a safety violation. Not one instance of consumer harm, bodily harm, or a death. That's not what we do. We operate under the exemptions. If it's structural, if it's seismic, if it has a real safety issue, then it falls under architecture or engineering. If it doesn't, it falls under the exemptions. So, what we're here today is to, sort of, we want to keep pushing this forward. We've been here before. If we don't get it, we'll be back again. It is just part of what we do in order to continue our practice, and it's what we settled for, or negotiated for, 27 years ago, so that's where we're at, issue number 1.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 572, 'end': 576, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 889, 'end': 893, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Roze Wiebe: again, my name is wiebe, i'm the administrative director.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Patricia Johnson: hello, my name is patricia heather johnson and i am a former fire marshal. i have met with this board in the past. i'm in the process of transitioning from a retired fire marshal into the interior design field. and i wanted to say that as a code reviewer for 17 years, i reviewed plans for the university of california at davis, as well as jurisdictions in sacramento and santa clara county. i would like to say that it is the job of the plan reviewer to determine whoever submits a drawing or a document as to whether or not they are violating safety requirements and/or interior requirements. we look at things in terms of fire, whether or not things are flammable. we look at things in terms of if they change doorways, and exiting, and all a myriad of things. but, my point would be specifically, that i would suggest that this proposal be accepted in terms of them having a stamp. the interior design professionals having it stamped, so that they can submit drawings that are reviewed by a code official, and it is the code official and the inspectors out in the field, to determine whether or not they meet those requirements. i don't think that holding this profession up for any particular reason, would benefit the public in any particular way, because you've already got the balances in place, for people to review their work and determine whether or not, it will be stamped and approved and permitted or whether it will not.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Panettone: I'm Linda Panettone and I am the legislative advocate for the California Legislative Coalition for Interior Design, and with the same Association that Molly Anne spoke about and we do support the clarifying language that is being proposed. We also publish a manual that has the codes and barriers for the interior designers for the State of California. And this is what they have to know in order to take that IDEX test. Thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 151, 'end': 161, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Doug McCauley: good afternoon, doug with the california architects board. at the outset, let me say the board supports the extension of the sunset date for ccidc. we think it's a very effective organization, quality staff, well-run organization. that being said, as doug stead alluded to, the board did meet last week on thursday and voted to oppose the proposed amendments to the definition. the board felt that there would, indeed, be a potential threat to the public health, safety and welfare, and therefore the opposition. on the issue of settlement reports, just as a side note, we have found those to be an invaluable tool in terms of consumer protection activities. simply stated if we don't know about things going on in the marketplace, we cant do anything about them.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 251, 'end': 261, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alma Gardner: my name is alma patricia gardner, and i am a certified interior designer. i have my own professional practice and i'm here as a member of the national kitchen and bath association's local chapter board. i hold the position of vice president of government affairs and i'm here to support the clarifying language. i think as stated, i think all of the membership of the nkba fully supports it as well.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Christian: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mark Christian with the American Institute of Architects California Council. First, we support the Sunset extension on this body of law. We think CCIDC and their staff and their members have done very good work, and they deserve to have that law extended.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Christian: thank you, mr. chairman. mark alma christian with the american institute of architects california council. first, we support the sunset extension on this body of law. we think ccidc and their staff and their members have done very good work, and they deserve to have that law extended. second, we join the california architects board and california building officials in opposing the language. i think it was issue one in your report. as mr. stead has said, the interior designers operate under the exemption in the architects practice act, section 5538 of the business and professions code. and if i may summarize it very simply, it says that this work can not involve the seismic, or structural elements, or the safety of the building. with all due respect, we believe that horizontal exiting and rated corridors go to the very heart of the safety of the building. and by putting that in the interior design, the cid law, it would be in conflict with the exemption that is within the architects practice act section 5538. for that reason we must respectfully oppose the inclusion of that language, thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 442, 'end': 447, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bill Weeman: good afternoon, my name is bill mark weeman. i represent the interior design coalition of california, idcc. we do support the reauthorization of the current interior design codes, under the architects practice act. the current codes have existed for decades and have amended over the years and provide the basic requirements for interior designers to practice interior design in california. ccidc, in the issuance of the cid stamp, provides a certification for interior designers to demonstrate education, experience, and passage of an exam testing for knowledge of the california building codes and ethics of practice. the process is critical for interior designers entering the profession to demonstrate to their clientele their ability to work with a non-structural, non-seismic environment. the idex exam required for issuance of the cid is currently the only interior design exam in california which tests for knowledge of the california building codes. although the idex, a multiple choice test, requires california building code knowledge, it does not test the ability to create complex drawings. however, a national test, the ncidq, exists as an option for designers who work in an environment requiring this kind of skill, this kind of skill, excuse me, mid-rise, high-rise, medical facilities, industrial facilities, and the like. the ncidq, is an optional three day exam containing a drawing practicum and is taken by a majority of interior designers working in the commercial environment. cid is appropriate for designers working in residential space and small commercial space. within the profession, there are interior designers specialize in different areas. as an example, the kitchen and bath designers have developed their own certification and separate stamp. although designers working on large commercial projects have passed the ncidq, no additional certification for these professionals currently exists. we believe another category and certification would be beneficial to these commercial designers and their clientele. such a certification would require passage of ncidq and california codes-based test, education experience, qualifications and an ongoing education competency requirements. the certification could be one of many forms. private certification through the ccidc as part of an existing licensing board or perhaps other options. although we don't have agreement among the different segments of the profession at this time, we will continue to have these discussions. thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susan Stuart: good afternoon, senator hill and members of the committee. i'm stuart representing iida, which is the international interior design association, and this association is comprised of almost exclusively commercial designers. we concur with idcc's statements, so i will not go through some of those again. we definitely support the sunset extension for the cid by the ccidc. we think they're doing a great job. we do, though, believe very strongly that an additional certification for commercial designers is necessary and would be very beneficial to members and their clientele. although there's no consensus on how or along the groups in the interior design community, or even in the design profession with other design professionals, we look forward to having those continued discussions and see if we can come up with a further certification.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 28, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 63, 'end': 69, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Metzker: thank you mr. chair. good afternoon assemblymembers. metzker with the legislative analysts office. our office recently published a report: the uncertain affordable care act landscape, what it means for california. and in that report we summarized the major provisions of the aca. we also evaluate their impact on the california healthcare landscape. we explain how components of the aca might be changed at the federal level and what those changes could mean for the state and we also assess common themes and elements from republican replacement proposals that have been introduced. we have been asked today to discuss one topic from our report: the risks to federal healthcare funding authorized under the aca. you should have a handout that provides each of you with an overview of healthcare funding authorized by the aca and i will use that handout to guide our discussion. as you'll see on page one of the handout, we have organized our discussion today around three major components of federal funding under the aca. the first is we discuss federal funding for an expansion of program eligibility in state medicaid programs commonly referred to as the aca optional state. the expansion. second, we discuss subsidized health insurance coverage offered through the health benefit exchange, covered california. and third, we discuss additional federal funding for other health programs and services, such as the children's health insurance program. on table, the first table on page 1, aca federal funding. the california provides almost recent estimate of the amounts of aca federal funding the state is projected to receive, and annually california is projected to receive more than 20 billion in aca federal funding. on the next page we discuss the first component of federal funding under the aca of the aca optional expansion. in 2014, california opted to participate in the aca optional expansion. this expanded medical eligibility to individuals under age 65 with household incomes at or below 138% of the federal poverty level. childless adults were the primary population covered by this expansion. for the first three years of the expansion, the federal government paid 100% of the costs for this population, and starting this calendar year, the state will be responsible for 5% of the costs for this population. by 2020, and there after as shown in the figure, the state will be responsible for 10% of the costs. in terms of this impact on california in 2017-18, federal funding for this population is projected to total $17 billion or three-quarters of federal funding that the state is projected to receive through the aca. medi-cal's aca optional expansion caseload is projected to be approximately 4 million enrollees in '17-18. on page 3, we discussed the second component of federal funding under the aca. premium subsidies and cost sharing reductions that are available through covered california. a premium subsidies are federal tax credits that are provided to individuals with incomes between 100% and 400% of the federal poverty level, and for whom alternative forms of coverage are not available. those tax credits are used to purchase coverage through the exchange. cost sharing reductions are paid to health insurers to reduce the out-of-pocket costs paid by individuals with the lowest incomes. regarding the impact on california in 2017, premium subsidies and cost-sharing sharing reductions are projected to account for most of the remaining aca federal funding received, at about $5.4 billion. the state is projected to be $4.6 billion for premium subsidies and $800 million provided to help insurers for cost-sharing reductions. in june 2016, it is estimated more than a million californians were enrolled in coverage through covered california. 90% of those enrolled received premium subsidies and over half received cost sharing reductions. on the next page, we briefly summarize the third component of federal funding under the aca and that is federal funding for other healthcare programs and services. the two programs that are the primary recipients of this funding are the children's health insurance program, or chip, and the community first choice option, or cfco. chip as provides health insurance coverage to children in low income families but those families have incomes too high to quality for meidcade. so under the aca states receive an enhanced chip funding rate and this enhanced rate is projected to generate an additional $600 million in federal funding for medical in 2017-18. cfco, provide home and community based attendance services and support to seniors and persons with disabilities and then the hca's receive an enhanced cfco funding rate. and that rate is projected to generate the additional $300 million in federal funding for medical in 2017-18. the state also received some great funding from the hca's prevention of public health fund for activities like cardiovascular disease and stroke prevention, immunizations and screening, and tobacco control. and while the amounts vary year to year, grants to the department of public health and other state agencies are projected to be around $60 million in 2017-18. and so on page five, we put this together to show, as was previously mentioned, the increase in federal funding for medical over time. you'll notice in the graph that the proportion of federal funding relative to overall funding has grown quite significantly. 2007-8, it was about $22 billion of federal funding. whereas in 2017-18, it's projected to be around $67 billion. that represents about two-thirds of all medical spending in 17-18. one-third of this growth in federal funding has taken place since 2014 when key components of the aca such as the optional expansion were implemented. and on our final page, we summarize some of potential risks to aca federal funding. we would note at this time there remains substantial federal uncertainty about the future of the aca. we do not know which aca provisions will be repealed, if any. and at what time those provisions would become inoperative, whether it's immediately, one year, two years out. based on the most recent attempts to repeal components of the aca through the budget federal budget reconciliation process. we can try to identify which components may be at risk. the components that most are at risk include the major sources of aca federal funding for the state. including the aca optional expansion, the premium subsidies and cost sharing reductions available through the health benefit exchanges. and absent any polices if repealed, it would be more than $20 billion in annual aca funding. and potentially, a large number of californians becoming uninsured. however, given the substantial uncertainty as previously mentioned. we would note that any proposed changes to the aca need to be evaluated in their entirety to best determine how they would affect california. and that concludes my remarks. i'm happy for questions.
[{'start': 53, 'end': 60, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Kent: Hi, Jennifer Kent, I'm the Director for the Department of Healthcare Services. And I am here in place of Mary Cantwell, who's the Chief Deputy and the state's Medicaid director.  I will just say that you probably want me here today, because she is at home with a cold and has no voice. So she wouldn't be a very good witness. So a lot of what has been shared, both in your opening comments as well as in the LAO;s analysis, don't necessarily bear too much repeating, but we are a department with a projected or proposed budget of over a $105 billion in 17, 18. We're covering, our estimate to cover almost 14 million Californians. We're incredibly proud of the work that we have done to provide this care, to individuals through two primary delivery systems in California. The vast majority, 11 million of our beneficiaries are in managed care, contracting with 22 plans across the state and then the remainder of the population is in our fee for service delivery system. Very few of those individuals, the remaining 2 and a half to 3 million, are receiving full scope benefits. And what I like to say is a lot of those individuals are on the highway to managed care, meaning they've been found eligible for Medical benefits, and we allow up to 60 days for individuals to make a choice of the health plan, for which they would like to be enrolled in. And if they don't make a choice they're defaulted and so that's a part of our fee-for-service program. The rest of the individuals in fee-for-service are individuals with both Medicare and Medicaid coverage, so those are duels, remaining populations that are very small in nature, foster care, or other specialized populations that are not mandatorily enrolled into Medi-Cal, or individuals who do not have full scope benefits, and so they're limited scope emergency-only the Medi-Cal. I have served in two different administrations, and so I was certainly part of the previous administration when the ACA was enacted, and obviously have the honor of serving under this Governor as well. And I can just say, from the time in which the Affordable Care Act was signed to where we sit today, there's very few provisions that California did not take advantage of. And so, it was not only a financial interest obviously in the federal funds that are available to the state, for which we're doing a lot of things to provide coverage, and services, and benefits to individuals. But I would also like to point out how committed we have been, over the course of not one, but two 1115 Medicaid waivers to redesign our system. So really getting towards working with providers, working with hospitals, working with counties, to figure out a better way to both maximize the use of the services that we have, make sure that the resources are used appropriately. And so I just wanted to both call your attention, or make sure that you we're aware of some of other things, that we continue to look to the ACA to help us deliver on.  One of which is a shared system that we built with Covered California, that does joint eligibility between us and the exchange. That is a very complicated information technology system. It had a lot of challenges when we first made it operational, but I would point to the fact that we have worked really hard with the counties, because, obviously, you have 14 million individuals that are coming in and needing annual re-determinations, or they're applying for the first time. And the backbone of how we make that first door open for these individuals is, how we service them on the front end and so we have built a very complex system, that is shared between us in Covered California and operated by the counties and their county consortium systems.  And so, very much would not have ever happened if it weren't for the Affordable Care Act. I would point to an alignment for the first time with the Behavioral Health Programs in the counties in that area, around substance use disorder, mental health treatment. A lot of those efforts probably would not have come about, either as fast or at all, if it weren't for the Affordable Care Act. The inclusion of the behavioral health benefit and the essential health benefit, certainly made the state both look within itself and look to the counties and others, for how we provide services to those individuals. And it not only improves the quality of the care that we're providing to them, because as, I always give credit where credit's due, Mitch Katz who's the L.A. county Director of, Health, he's a physician and he says, well when the patients come to me, their issues are fully integrated. And so I always laugh because we tend to try to segment people away from, if you have a behavioral health issue, you go here, if you have a physical health issue, you go there, if you need social services, go down the street. We're working really hard through our Medicaid waiver, to integrate those services to help reduce public safety issues, to help reduce recidivism, to improve people's quality of life, to work on homeless issues.  And so I would point out that those are some of the efforts that are being funded, incentivized, delivered through the Affordable Care Act and those provisions. Your interest in populations, obviously we started offering full scope benefits to all children, regardless of documentation status last May. To date, I believe that has added about 150,000 children. And so the Medi-Cal Program, I think we're very proud of the fact that we provide care and that, that is certainly a significant concern to any parent, that if you have a child that has an ear infection or a more complicated condition, what used to be maybe much more frightening is now that something we are able to offer, both coverage and access to care for. And then lastly, one of the other options that we took availability of within the Affordable Care Act, was the coordinating care initiative, or at least that's what we call it in California, otherwise known as the duals demonstration. This was something that, again back to how do you better integrate care, and makes things more efficient, and improve the customer service for an individual, is we have seven counties in California that we're working with contracting health plans, to integrate both the Medicare and the Medicaid benefit for these individuals. These are our highest cost, most fractionalized members in terms of their care, and so, there's potential for them to be in up to three different delivery systems prior to the ACA and prior to the State's use of this demonstration. It is really complicated how you do that. It required a lot of negotiation with the federal government in terms of the three way contracts. So there is a contract between us, the federal government and the health plan. We have approximately 120,000 individuals that are enrolled in those seven plans, and we believe that over time, that will continue to show benefit. And so I'm happy to talk more about the fiscal impact, but I just want to make sure that there's also a lot of context around, not only did California do a lot of things under the ACA because of the fiscal impacts and benefits that came, but there are a lot of both efficiencies and programmatic improvements, that we believe we have benefited from and will continue to do. And it was a really good initiative on the part of the federal act, to kind of incentivize states to take advantage of those things.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 105, 'end': 118, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4456, 'end': 4466, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kelly Green: Thank you. Thank you Mr. Chair and members, my name is Kelly Green, I'm Director of External Affairs for Covered California and thank you the invitation to participate today. If I may, I'll just start with a little bit of background. Over the last several years California has achieved, has made many achievements in terms of implementing health reform and coverage expansions that are working for many. And Covered California has played a role in helping to bring down the rates of the uninsured, which we now know has come down from about 17% in 2013 to 7.1% our lowest rate in history. And we're proud through partnerships with DCHS and through the work of of many of the stakeholders and the Legislature in erecting cover California, and getting it up and running in the way that it operates today. So while we continue to build on our progress. I wanted to mark out a couple of achievements that have been reached so far. Since opening stores in 2014, Covered California has cumulatively enrolled more than 2.5 million people into health insurance. As of June 2016, Covered California had a approximately 1.4 million active enrollees and we just wrapped up our fourth open enrollment period at the end of January, with 412 new consumers that signed up for coverage. I'm sorry? 412,000. 412,000 and I say 412.
[{'start': 55, 'end': 66, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Muller: All right. Good afternoon, my name is Sarah Muller ... I am the Vice President for External Affairs with the California Association of Public Hospitals and Health Systems. CAPH, our organization represents 21 different health care systems around the state that are either owned or connected to their local counties, or are one of the five universities of California medical centers. Together, they really play three critical roles in our community. First, they're major safety net providers. Although they represent just 6% of hospitals across the state, they serve more than 25% of the state's MediCal beneficiaries, and provide 40% of the hospital care to the remaining uninsured. Second, they're also providers of critical community services and serve as the system any patient will go to in the event of a major emergency. Together, they operate more than half of the state's level one trauma centers and half of the State's burn centers. Third, they're educators, training more than 57% of our next generation of physicians. And so, even if you don't get your care in a public healthcare system today, chances are you get your care by a Doctor that was trained at one. Before I talk about what's at risk with a potential repeal, let me just spend a quick moment talking a little about our experience over the last few years. Our journey to prepare for coverage expansion really begin under difficult circumstances. In 2010, our system had experienced significant budget cuts and real increases in the number uninsured as part of the great recession. A provision in Affordable Care Act, allows state to expand medicatiraly and California as been mentioned, took advantage of this opportunity with great results. Beginning in 2011, our systems helped lead the state launch of the low income health program, enrolling over 700,000 individuals into early coverage expansion. This allowed our systems as well as other providers the opportunity to immediately connect patients with medical homes, and primary care providers far in advance of their 2014 eligibility. Although we invested heavily getting ready for ACA official launch, in 2014 full implementation and brought greater enrollment and need than any of us had really anticipated. State wide, as was mentioned, almost 4 million Medicount enrollees have now signed up for coverage and today more than 5 560,000 of those enrollees are assigned to a public health care system for their primary care.  We serve even more in the hospital and specialty care settings. As noted, the ACA also made mental health and substance use disorder services a required essential health benefit which has been critical as we have been able to connect some of our most vulnerable patients. Including homeless and jail-involved populations with MediCal. The implementation of coverage expansion brought significant reductions in the number of uninsured that were accessing care and really brought more stability to our health care systems. It created an opportunity for us to move to a more proactive and preventative health care services, so our systems were no longer just having to focus on the urgent and pressing need of their patients that were in front of them. We were able to connect them to chronic care management programs, design high utilizer programs, so that we were offering intense service to our most vulnerable and high cost patients, getting them out of the emergency room and connecting them with the needed follow up care that they needed. And we were testing low cost new innovations that don't require an in person visit, such as email and And phone consultations between providers as well as telehealth services, particularly in our rural areas. Our efforts weren't just trying to improve the health outcome for the particular patient in front of us, but actually trying to improve the health of our entire community. Consequently, a full repeal of the ACA, and particularly that of the Medicaid expansion, could erode a lot of the progress that we've done to really improve patient care and transform our delivery of care that we provide today, and keep patients healthy. As a result, well, I should say, we've paid particular attention to the Medicaid expansion and the repeal efforts that concentrate on the elimination of the Medicaid coverage. For public healthcare systems, a repeal of the Medicaid expansion alone would result in 560,000 individuals losing their MediCal benefits. And the preliminary revenue estimates associated with these patients and all of the MediCal expansion patients that come through our doors could result in an estimated loss of 2.2 billion in federal funding each year. Unfortunately, this estimate does not include County behavioral health funding, public health funding, county social services and a number of other county agencies in our county family that have also benefitted from the Affordable Care Act. In addition to our concerns around the appeal of Affordable Care Act we're also concerned about a potential restructuring of the Medicare program, which as was mentioned covers almost third of our states population, and as the foundation of the population that we serve. Some of the proposals that have been introduced in Congress would cap federal spending, which would shift costs and risks to the states, to providers, as well as to patients. And that could really compromise a lot of the work that we've done to transform our delivery of care so it's more accessible, higher quality, and more efficient for our patients. The impact of what's at stake is best illustrated with the patients who our systems care for every day. Last month, I learned about Sonya, a 40 year old certified nursing assistant who receives care in one of our systems in Southern California. Her family has a history of breast cancer and hypertension, and at the time that our leaders were talking with her, she was waiting to hear whether a breast biopsy had detected cancer. She shared with our local leaders that having access to MediCal coverage prevented her from having to make the difficult decision between paying to keep a roof over her head in the winter, or paying for a test to see whether or not she had cancer. She got the biopsy done and a few days later learned that she does in fact have cancer. As she embarks on her recovery, we are grateful that her MediCal coverage will allow her to focus on her recovery and will cover all of the major costs of her treatment. Sonia's experience is a reminder of how quickly one's health status can change and how important it is to maintain access to high-quality, affordable health insurance. I share that experience because it's a continual reminder of what we're trying to work towards and continue to improve upon the success over the last few years. Thank you.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 172, 'end': 176, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5666, 'end': 5671, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6470, 'end': 6475, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jody Hicks: Thank you. Jody Hicks, representing the Planned Parenthood Affiliates of California today. Planned Parenthood has 115 health centers in California and we serve approximately 850,000 patients. 87% of those are Medi-Cal patients. So while we have grave concerns about the Medic-Cal expansion and the repeal of the ACA or at least parts of it. I feel a little bit special here today because we are separated on a different point. And I think that's why I'm here in the Committee. It was announced that as part of the reconciliation bill to repeal those parts of ACA this Congress would also move to strip all federal funding from Planned Parenthood. So not just the Medi-Cal portions that we have concerns about but really all funding that Planned Parenthood receives. And Planned Parenthood receives funding through reimbursements for services similar to any other health clinic. So they provide services, 87% are in Medicaid and they are reimbursed the exact same way as any other health clinic. And I'll get into the numbers that Planned Parenthood receives in the Medicaid program. As far as from federal revenues, we receive $9.4 million in Medi-Cal, $72.3 million in Medi-Cal Managed Care, 103.8 million from family PAT. So just in health services in that alone, that comes to somewhere around 175 million. And so, we don't know exactly what the total defunding means, but how they've stated it is complete defunding of planned parenthood. So then that includes other things like grants that we receive for education purposes, Title 10, other cost savings we get for pricing. So the complete total is somewhere around approximately $260 million that Planned Parenthood has to lose with a complete and total defunding and that's about 80% of the total operating budget. And I think it's important to note that currently there is no federal funding that is received for abortion services. So we're not talking about separating out those services, we're talking about losing funding for all of the other services that are provided. So part of what this Committee wanted us to talk about is how much funding is at risk and what are those, what services are threatened. So for Planned Parenthood it's everything, it's all of it and I just want to take a minute to talk about some of the services that we provide. So we took a look at last year, and it's contraception to nearly 631,000 patients, 307,000 emergency contraception kits, 1 million pregnancy tests, 97,000 cervical cancer screenings, more than 75,000 breast exams. More than 1 million tests and treatments for sexually transmitted infections. Sexual health education programs to about 207,000 people, many students, in the State of California. So those are the services that are at risk for Planned Parenthood. California has spent years building a safety net for California, especially for preventive and reproductive healthcare. So for defunding a Planned Parenthood in California, we actually have probably the most to lose than any other state. And I think it's also important to talk about, even though we don't receive any federal funding for abortion services and abortion services are about 2% of the services that we provide, it will have a grave impact on access to those services. So if as a result, for instance, the clinics have to separate out services in order to continue providing any services at all depending on how this is done at the federal level. So for instance, if they say, anyone that provides abortion services can no longer be in the Medicaid program, which is some of the amendments that have attempted in the past. So for our clinics, of the 115 health centers, 109 of those health centers provide an early abortion pill. So it's medical abortions versus surgical abortions. So all of those clinics would no longer be able to provide those services up and the States. And that makes up about half of all the abortions provided in California. So it would only be about 35 health centers left in the State of California, which is a large state, that would be able to provide services. So again, even though it's only 2% of the services provided, it would have a huge impact on the access to those services. And then, also wanted to talk about, the Committee wanted us to talk about impact on counties. I know I don't have that as a fiscal dollar impact, but certainly if you're closing 115 clinics potentially in California, there's an estimate that one in five women rely on Planned Parenthood at some point in their lives. 87%, again, are low income and receive services from Medi-Cal, so those patients will have to go somewhere else. The clinics have already sent out statements both nationally in the State of California that they will not be able to Take on all of those patients if Planned Parenthood were to close. And I think it's also important to talk about cost savings to the state. And we know that providing services like family planning services, sexually transmitted disease tests and treatments, saves the state lots of money in the long run. And it's an estimate of somewhere around I think it's $4 billion from the family fact if their spending family planning services then they saves $4 million and help social services in the long run If the family packed and family planning didn't exist. And the same as to we provide about a quarter of the STI test in California, so longterm savings in that regard too. And I'll just close by saying that, we Planned Parenthood, we say we are the safety net of safety nets in California. We take everyone that comes in the door, whether its for, whether they have Medicaid or cash paying we do it on a sliding scale. So really providing services to. Patients that already face barriers to care. So, you know our demographics are people of color, people of low income, people that are uninsured. Rural communities where a planned parenthood may be the only provider for reproductive care. So defunding and really closing the doors to those clinics will will have dire consequences, in California especially, for women's health. And I'll close there and take questions. Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Nguy: Thank you, Linda Nguy with the Western Center on Law and Poverty. In addition to the billions of dollars cut, federal cuts as well as the potential coverage loss, I'd like to focus my comments on what the impact is on federal action has on immigrants today, specifically the massive disenrollment in health and human services programs such as CalFresh and Medi-Cal. Counties across the state, specifically around border counties have noted massive disenrollment in Medi-Cal, this leaves families to make difficult decisions about their health and livelihood. One case in particular, a client with cancer asked whether she should remain in Medi-Cal, and continue to receive chemotherapy, or risk deportation. Food Banks, which also act as enrollment centers, have reported more families disenrolling in CalFresh than enrolling. So this raises some significant concerns, and as a state, we must not only protect the ACA but also stem these massive enrollments by protecting the current programs.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debbie Toth: Good afternoon Chair and Members of the Committee, my name is Debbie Toth and I'm the CEO with Choice and Aging. We are a provider of long term care supports and services for frail elders, and I just want to say that this is an incredibly depressing time and topic, and I am highly appreciative for the dialogue that took place today. And I don't know that I need to go into all the reasons, I think that everybody here clearly understands the negative impact to children, to women, to men, to our aging population, to our entire public health system. Should we have to eliminate the Affordable Care Act in that there are certain sort of basic insurance access that folks should have, not just because it's the right thing to do but because it saves money down the road. And I know in Contra Costa County, where our programs are provided, we had 58,000 people enroll in Medicaid through expansion. And they're getting care in a less costly place than they would have been without the insurance. And I just want to thank Jennifer Kent, Director Kent for her thoughtful commentary in the entire panelist today, and I'm really thoroughly impressed, and I hope we can stave off this nightmare, thank you.
[{'start': 62, 'end': 73, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1020, 'end': 1033, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1044, 'end': 1048, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kimberly Chen: chen with the california pan-ethnic health network, just building off the previous speaker's points, really want to highlight the importance of the aca for health equity in reducing health disparities. because communities of color, we're among the majority of folks who became newly insured, and so repeal, replace, repair, what have you, will have a tremendous impact. the aca has really been the foundation for driving innovation in reducing disparities and advancing equity. more coverage in medi-cal means folks are getting preventative services. they're getting their asthma treated early, so they're not going to the something that, dr. arambula, you're very, very much familiar with. covered california has done really great innovations on driving help disparities reductions and really using outcome measures in that way. and so we're just really beginning to start. and so really appreciate the conversation here and really urge you all to see the importance of the foundation that the aca has laid in advancing health equity, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 643, 'end': 651, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Fred Main: Good afternoon, Fred Main, representing CalPACE, the programs for the All-inclusive Care for the Elderly. They operate in 11 counties around the state providing care to frail, elderly individuals, 55 years and older, who are generally dual eligible, Medicare, Medi-Cal participants. 6,000 frail seniors in California right now being served. California has been one of the creators of PACE programs. They provide integrated care to these frail seniors that allow them to be provided care more cost-effectively and kept out of nursing homes. We're very concerned that the expansion, which has increased the population that we can serve, would be at risk. And then more fundamentally, because we are half-funded by Medi-Cal overall, that while we're a very effective program, we're small. And that the impact to any cuts could be very dramatic to the PACE providers in the state. So thank you for taking it into consideration during your budget deliberations.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Ader: good afternoon, mary jonah ader with the county behavioral health directors association. we just want to concur with a lot of what's been said and point out that substance-use-disorder treatment and mental-health treatment has been added as essential health benefits, so millions of californians stand to lose coverage. in addition, indigent adults who've benefited from the medi-cal expansion stand to lose access. the seriously mentally ill in the county behavioral health departments. and, of course, catastrophic costs shifted to counties in the absence of the federal funding. thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carolyn Chu: Great, good afternoon, my name is Carolyn Chu from Legislative Analyst's Office. Hospital District Law in 1945. It was later renamed the Local Health Care District Law in the mid 90s. Health care districts are originally created in response to service shortages due to the population growth after World War II particularly in some cases in rural areas. The number of districts grew most substantially in the 1940s and 50s. Today, there are roughly 45 districts statewide, most other special districts, local voters created these local governments. Health care districts are governed by five-member boards, and are subject to state policies and regulations that other local governments are subject to including the Brown Act. Health care districts also are under the purview of LAFCO which will be spoken to next or Local Agency Formation Commissions. Health care districts have brought authority under current law for the activities they can do. They can operate health care facilities like hospitals, clinics, skilled nursing facilities, adult health centers, nurse training schools and child care facilities. They also can operate ambulance services within and outside of their districts. They also can support other types of social and health programs in their communities through grants or direct services. Health care districts carry out these activities through a variety of different structures. They can carry out their activities as corporations, joint ventures or partnerships. They can establish and participate in managed care plans. Or they can contract with other local providers in their communities and make grants to perform various activities. Today there are almost 40 districts still operating hospitals directly, most of these districts are in rural areas of the state. And more of our 20 of these hospitals are designated as critical access hospitals, the remaining district provider array of other services. About half of these other districts provide direct community services like ambulance services or skilled nursing. And the remaining districts provide grants to their local communities to support programs like health programs in schools or physical education. Many of the districts that no longer operate hospitals did have hospitals in the past, or have sold, or leased their hospital operations today. About 14 districts, however, closed their hospitals all together. Health care districts raise revenue through a variety of mechanisms. The vast majority of them receive property taxes through the 1% rate. They also can levy special taxes like parcel taxes which require two-thirds voter approval. They have service charges for the services like those provided in a clinic. They also can have revenue from leases and grants of their facilities. And they also can have debt financing, they can issue general obligation bonds with voter approval or issue revenue bonds based on the services they provide. Some districts in the last few decades, primarily those with hospitals, have faced financial challenges in the last few decades, 14 of those districts have declared bankruptcy, some more than once. One major challenge cited by the health care districts is the hospitals' inability to achieve a viable peer mix. That is, many of their clients either do not have robust health insurance or do not have health insurance at all. As a result of these challenges a few districts have been dissolved or reorganized through the LAFCO process. Moreover, number of grand jury inquiries have looked into some other district practices. In particular, these grand jury cases have looked up the use of public revenues by these districts, in some cases looking at the use of property tax revenues to support various community activities. One challenge that is not unique to health care districts, but perhaps more pronounced in these cases, is that residents and voters may not be aware of their existence. And moreover, voters cannot take steps to change the overall level of service for the health care districts. As you are aware, local government's taxes are locked in at their 1978 levels. As a result, not only do districts continue to receive property taxes, regardless of their change overall in the community but also residents and voters can neither increase nor decrease the level of service that they provide within their communities. This, however, is true for all types of local governments.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 3456, 'end': 3461, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Colantuono: Good afternoon, my name is Michael Colantuono. I'm a local government lawyer, and although I'm here as a resource for the Committee today, I'm going to be as neutral as I know how to be. I am an advocate for some clients, and I think it's fair for you, for me to disclose some points of which my practice touches on this area. I'm general counsel to a couple of LAFCO's, I'm not speaking for either of them today. I represented the City of Concord when it participated in the reorganization that made the Mount Diablo District, a subsidiary district of the City of Concord. I'm presently litigating for the Southern Mono Healthcare District the question of whether or not they can maintain facilities in Bishop over the objections of the Northern Inyo Healthcare District, which includes that territory. We argued that case here in Sacramento Superior Court last Friday, and we're waiting for a decision from Judge Chang. And lastly, I'm general council of the Tahoe Forest Hospital District, which operates the Truckee Hospital, which you may find your way to if you ever break your bone on a ski slope. It's a great place to find a bone doc, but I'm not speaking for any of those clients today, and as I said, I'll do my best to be as neutral as I can be. So the first thing that's kind of odd about health care districts is they have express statutory authority to provide services outside their boundaries. Most districts are not supposed to do that, at least not commonly, health care districts do. So Health and Safety Code Section 32121, which is the primary empowering section of that law, allows them to operate a health care plan. Allows them to provide health care facilities and services to owner lease property, and to provide ambulance services all outside their boundaries. The other powers the district's hold are implicitly limited to the district's territory but my senses they're not the most significant powers the district's have. Whether you can provide services outside your boundary, in the boundaries of another district without a mother may I from Lafco is a contested question. It's also not clear that Lafco can even provide the mother may I because of the Lafco statute require one of two things to be true. Either you're providing services outside your boundary in anticipation of a boundary change, which is rarely true, with respect to hospital districts or there's a public health emergency which is really written with sewer service in mind That applies. And I would think you don't want to wait till there's a public health emergency to allow a hospital district to provide necessary services. So that issue is the lawsuit that I'm participating in, it was nearly a lawsuit in San Diego a few years ago. And there's a question there about whether the statute currently expresses what the Legislature really intends. District territory is a little different for hospital districts, it doesn't need to be contiguous. It must exclude territory that's not benefited, which typically means unimproved territory. Annexing territory that was excluded when the district was first formed due to a lack of benefit at that time can be done, but requires particular findings to be made. A district can be a multiple county district. Districts can't overlap without the permission of the first district unless the principal act says otherwise and for most healthcare districts the principle act does not. How does these districts relate to other governments? They are subject to the zoning power of the city or the county, depending on whether the territory their facilities are located in is incorporated or unincorporated. And their medical operations are subject to all the complex regulations that the state imposes and the federal government payers impose on participants in the medical industry. They have the power to change their name by resolution, as many special districts do, but that can be a little confusing at times. They are required to file a resolution with the county clerk when they do that. Other laws require them also to register with the Roster of Public Agencies maintained by the Secretary of State. Their financial powers are as broad as most local governments although this doesn't typically figure large in their lives. Where most of their money comes from if they're providing services is from their entrepreneurial activity, from their enterprise activity. But they're entitled to property taxes, some of them get a legacy share. They can pass special taxes with two-thirds voter approval, a few of them have. They are entitled to issue bonded debt and they commonly do. They do not seem to have the ability to assess real property with property owner approval as other governments do. Most of their money doesn't come in the transitional forms of government money. Formation and reorganization of a hospital district, creating one and changing one, is governed by the principal act. The statue says that and there's a bankruptcy case that says that. But the court says knocks Herzberg the Lafco law fills voids in the principal act and there are some. So the two laws both apply to creating and changing these districts. If Lafco receives an application to form or reorganize a healthcare district, they're required to give notice to the state health agencies. The solution requires voter approval, as does transfer of more than half of the healthcare district's assets. You can't close the hospital or sell it and go out of town without voter approval. The principle act for health care districts, refers to the district organization law, and the formation process requires a petition of voters or landowners to the Board of Supervisors of the county which has the larger amount of district territory, and the county board serves as the supervising authority not Lafco. There's an election of registered voters, the uniform district election law and the election's code applies. The impartial analysis interestingly enough is provided by Lafco. There is some contested questions about healthcare districts and here's a few. The one I've touched on previously, is a healthcare district's authority to provide services outside its boundary subject to Lafco's review under 56133? This is hotly contested, there are three district that divide up the northern suburbs of San Diego and there a lot of folks living those three districts. And those three district all operate facilities and their pretty vibrant economic forces and they sometime comes to bellows. They manage to negotiate the way out of the last conflict then it didn't come to either Lafco or the cohorts. The conflict between Northern Inyo and Southern Mono arose when Northern Inyo, and again, I represent one of the parties here, I'll try to be balanced, I'll do my best. Northern Inyo invited Southern Mono to provide orthopedic services when they lost their orthopods. 12 years later, when they were finally able to recruit an orthopod, they asked Southern Mono to leave. And so the Mono said, we got facilities, we got clients, we got a business, we're not leaving and they're in court. It is clear that the Legislature intended healthcare districts to compete in the private marketplace for healthcare services. And they couldn't survive if they didn't. And the difficulty of maintaining a standalone hospital for anybody is one of the reasons you're seeing bankruptcies. Most hospitals have to affiliate with a larger network to capture more dollars in order to survive. These ones health care districts have been able to do that by joining power agreements and by contract. But not all of them have been nimble enough to do it quickly enough, particularly in rural areas and that has led to some of the bankruptcies that you have seen. A common strategy for a hospital that's not cutting it as a hospital is to become a skilled nursing facility which is why you see some districts providing that service because that's what the industry does when they get in a corner. How much power does Lafco have over a health care district? Some and some that's significant. They don't have quite as much power as they have over other special districts because the role given to the counties and the role given to voters. So they certainly have the power and the duty to approve a municipal services review every five years. A sphere of influence every five years and reorganizations, which involve the elimination of merger of districts. They don't control formation, except possibly in the reorganization context, where you're creating a new district from parts of an old couple of districts, or three. Dissolution or sale of most assets requires voter approval, not Lafco approval. And they have a difficult role, in refereeing disputes between healthcare districts about extra territorial districts. The districts expect them to do it, but it's not quite clear what their authority to do it is, because 56133 is not a very good match for the problem we're trying to address. Lafco certainly has a bully pulpit, via the municipal services review and the sphere of influence studies. Some healthcare districts are attracting attention due to competition for scarce property tax dollars and are therefore vulnerable to criticism if Lafco, the grand jury or others conclude they are not serving the public interest. And I think you've seen some of those disputes come to your Committee in the past. In my view, like all Californian governments health care districts have a need to engage the public they serve and Lafco can help them do so. Health care districts can be square pegs in round holes and let me point out a couple of ways that that's so Most of their money comes from private sources. So, they can think like businesses. And they may need to think like a business to survive. But if you spend a lot of time thinking like a business, you may forget to think like a government. And we have different expectations of government, both legally and socially. You can think of them, at least the ones that are still providing a meaningful amount of services, as really a public private hybrid. And their talent pool comes largely from outside government circles. They're hiring hospital administrators from the labor pool of hospital administrators. And the hospital administrators aren't trained in the Brown Act, the Public Records Act, conflict of interest, 1090, etc. And, so there can be occasionally a sort of tone deafness about the expectations of government for some of these districts. And that can be very problematic. Like special districts generally, it's hard to generalize about healthcare districts. That label describes a motley crew of very different animals. Some of them are vital local governments well connected to their communities. And you're going to hear from some of them this afternoon. Some of them have very few resources, and barely show up on radar. You Chair can't find them on the Internet. Doesn't know who their officials are, who are they? Some of them no longer operate hospitals, and have yet to find a meaningful role for themselves. But still receiving property tax dollars, and that of course generates controversy particularly in the recession. My sense is that the LAFCO process may be better situated to sort out the wheat from the chaff in this area than any broad-based legislative fix. So, I would encourage your Committee to be careful about legislation. And especially be careful about legislation that makes exceptions to the LAFCO process. And with that, I'll be happy to answer any questions the Committee may have, or to get out of your way, so you can hear from your case studies.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 915, 'end': 920, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5031, 'end': 5039, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 11496, 'end': 11501, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ted Owens: Thank you, Madam Chair, Committee Members. Ted Owens, Executive Director of Governance and Business Development, Tahoe Forest Hospital District, which is located in Truckee, California. By way of background, I'm a former mayor, I'm a former county supervisor and I spent a decade as a LAFCO Commissioner, although sometimes, it seemed much longer. Tahoe Forest Hospital District was the result of tragedy. A man named, Dick Joseph, a prominent businessman in the Truckee area, whose wife was pregnant with twins. This was back in the late 1940s. There was not a hospital in that area. There was no hospital serving the North Lake Tahoe region. The closest was Reno, and this predates Interstate 80, so Highway 40 was a rather treacherous route and took time. Unfortunately, due to complications, his wife passed away giving childbirth. Rather than going to the dark side, Mr. Joseph banded together with community members, and successfully passed a local measure to create the Tahoe Forest Hospital District in 1949. He didn't stop there, he also donated all of the land that the hospital district campus is upon today. It is our legacy. In 1952 the hospital opened with a 10,000 square foot hospital with eight beds. And that served the entire area from Immigrant Gap all the way to the state line, of both eastern Placer County and Nevada County. The original structure was torn down earlier this year for reasons I'll share with you in just a moment. Tahoe Forest is governed, as you know, by an elected board staggered four year terms, always has been. And it had to grow with the region. In 1960, the Olympics were held at Squaw Valley, Tahoe was on the map and growth began. And the district had to move with that growth. Jumping ahead to today, Tahoe Forest Hospital District is a critical access hospital. It employs nearly 800 people. It is the largest employer in the region with the exception of ski resorts when there's a lot of snow. So right now we are not in the category. Our operating revenues are $133 million of which 5 million, or approximately 3.75%, we received from the property owners through property tax. It was interesting in 1966, I recently read the audited financials, I'm strange that way. And at that time the district received approximately two thirds of its funding from property taxes. That is a very different story today. Not only do we serve the 39,000 full-time residents that are in our district, but we have to be large and small at the same time. We have to flex. We have 39,000 full-time residents on Wednesday. But I can assure you that this Saturday, we will have 150,000 when the skiers come up to ski. We have to flex. That's a big challenge, and it makes us very unique compared to other hospitals. As far as services are concerned, I'll blow through some of the highlights. We do cardiac pulmonary, ER, Health clinics, hospice, in-home health, diagnostic imaging, med surge, long-term care, lab, occupational health, orthopedics. And Mr Colintuna was correct, our orthopedists see everything. It isn't just specializing in hands. But I can tell you it's shoulders, it's knees. We even perform anterior hip replacements, which is very rare, and a big investment in the equipment to do so. Your hip replacement one day, you're walking out the next, better pain management. We also have pharmacy, our brand new Joseph family Center for women and newborn care, our legacy service again, pharmacy. We have a research Institute, a wellness neighborhood which I'll speak to in just a moment briefly. And we also have the Gene Upshaw Memorial Tahoe Forest Cancer Center which opened in 2012. In 2006 Tahoe Forest Hospital District faced the challenging realities of compliance with SB 1953, Seismic Compliance. And at that same time, we utilized information gathered from our community health needs assessments, community working groups, leadership councils to determine the desired, needed elements of the hospital's future. Without the voters, passed what's known as Measure C in 2007 with a 73% yes vote. Approving $95.8 million General Obligation Bond consisting of 15 projects for compliance and others for enhanced services that the community desired. The Cancer Center is one of those. Today we serve not just our district patients, and cancer is a really good example of this. Our cancer program reaches far beyond our district boundaries. We have second-home owners who chose to receive cancer care in Truckee because they have a home there. There isnt traffic, parking is easy. They're a name and not a number. And also the care is exceptional. We have cancer patients that come from counties far away to the north and other rural environs. They may come for diagnostic purposes, but through a unique model of rural health care delivery, they can go home. They can receive treatment with their primary care physician, be with their family, not have to move in consultation with our cancer center. We are also the first rural hospital to receive Rural Prime Affiliation with UC Davis, which enables us to perform tumor boards with our Cancer Center. Every afternoon at lunch our cancer docs do Hollywood squares with cancer docs from UC Davis and UCLA discussing each and every case. We're very proud of our wellness neighborhood. And earlier I had mentioned that Tahoe Forest receives about 4% of its operating budget from the taxpayer. And we honor that, and we cherish it, and we try to shepherd those dollars very carefully. And the manner in which we do that is we support what we have coined the wellness neighborhood by pushing out into the community with many programs designed to promote community population health. These programs designed to aid disperate communities to promote access, navigation, and healthy living skills. So why a district? Well, in our case, as I said earlier, in 1952 there was not a hospital there. And if not for the enabling legislation there wouldn't be one there today. Tahoe Forest is there because the Legislature saw a need, particularly in the rural environments, and I would argue that that need exists today. Combined with the incredible philanthropic gift of land and the desire of our community, our district was created, still exist today. We enjoy great support from our community, and criticism from time to time. We are a community hospital and are constantly reminded of that proud fact. Much has changed in the last seven decades. There's no argument, I think, among many of us here today. Health care districts have adapted as we have to their unique communities and associated needs. In a world that's more complicated, regulated and advanced, my view is that healthcare districts are necessary entities that function closer to the people than a stand-alone private-sector hospital. They each evolve, and they each adapt to the communities in which they exist. A few comments as a former LAFCO Commissioner. Naturally when it came time for our municipal services review, it appeared in my inbox, all of the requests from Placer LAFCO. And it was interesting for me to be compiling the data as requested by LAFCO, rather than sitting on the other side of the dais analyzing the data as it's produced. And although it was accurate and the information was interesting, it was generalist in my view. What are your revenues? What are your boundaries? These types of things. But we are, as Mr. Cowentuna pointed out, a square peg in a round hole. We are different than a sewer district. We are different than a fire protection district or a city municipality. We're not reaching out, we have inmigration coming to us from other areas. We're out migration for different services. And therefore, we are unique in that regard. I do think that I would agree that the LAFCO process is probably the best process to satisfy the Legislature and the concern of oversight. Again for another reason, because LAFCOs are closer to the people and they're local. And we are all different. I would encourage exploration of how we can modify that with the LAFCO process so it better serves health care districts in the future and with that all I'll rest and answer any questions that you may have. Thank you.
[{'start': 43, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 419, 'end': 430, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 876, 'end': 882, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2986, 'end': 2995, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7393, 'end': 7402, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Karen Hennings: Thank you very much, Chair Aguiar-Curry and members of the Committee, for inviting us here today. Good afternoon, my name is Karen Hennings and I'm the Administrative Director of the Del Puerto Health Care District. We thank you for the opportunity to share the story of our district's 71-year evolution. Del Puerto Health Care District is in the Northwestern Corridor of Stanislaus County. It borders San Joaquin County to the north, Santa Clara County to the west, the San Joaquin River to the east and the Newman/Gustine area to the south. Let me share a few more facts that'll help you better know our world. Stanislaus County has the fifth highest poverty rate in the State of California. 45% of our residents are MediCal eligible. The center of our district operations is the City of Patterson, where the economy in our region has always been based on agriculture and food processing. And our current unemployment rate hovers at around 9%. First, let's talk about our evolution of hospital to community clinic. The citizens of Patterson were early adopters of the California Hospital District Law. In 1946, our region voted for and established the Patterson Hospital District and by 1949 in partnership with the local rotary club, our hospital was built and serving the districts full time population of 1600. Our district provided more than just hospital services. In the old days, the local ambulance was one man, a station wagon, and a red light. But retirement came for the station wagon. And so, at that time in 1973, our district took over providing emergency medical technician level care and transportation. With the doing of business as Patterson District Ambulance, voters approved a special assessment of $27 per year per house. To support local medical transportation. By 1978, the ambulance care expanded to merit paramedic level advanced life support and emergency transportation. Most patients went to our local hospital. So one well-equipped ambulance met the needs of the then district population of 4,800. The district also worked within the community supporting educational programs in schools and community centers. The district worked to bring more medical providers into the community to meet primary and acute care needs. We encouraged and helped the development of local medical office space and sought partnerships with larger health systems rather than leasing our facilities, we thought more local providers would create more use of the local hospital. But as it turned out larger groups prefer to use their own acute care services. The district, however, was sensitive to the community and responded to the needs of the elderly by converting a section of our hospital into skilled nursing. When state law evolved, we changed our name from Patterson Hospital District to the Del Puerto Healthcare District, better representing the broad region we served. In 1996, we had a district population of 11,600. The ambulance transported about 200 patients per year. Skilled nursing was modestly used and the most frequent requested hospital room service was urgent but not acute care. As state regulations grew more complex, it was difficult to update the facilities and sustained the hospital with such a small population. In 1977, the Stanislaus County closed its county hospital and our in patient census dropped to about a quarter person of a day. Although the nearest hospital would be 26 miles and 40 minutes away, rather than bankrupt and dissolve the district the board closed the hospital in 1998 and looked to the future. This is one of the ways that we demonstrate how local government is best positioned to meet local needs. The district recognized in our rural area, basic health care access was the problem. Local doctors were retiring. Few new doctors entered into the community. Other provider options were impacted with waits up to three weeks. In Stanislaus County, 46% of patients use public transportation to and from their Doctor visit. And the closest county clinic was 16 miles away. District residents would forgo care care rather than spend an entire day on a Doctor visit or follow up. In response to the closing, the Board developed four post hospital goals. Portion off a section of the hospital land and build a modest building for ambulance operations and district administration. Unburden itself of an aged and costable building by selling the remaining property and building. Make good on $600,000 of residual hospital operation debt. And establish our next generation of district healthcare, that is a truly community-based clinic for primary and urgent care. Then, industry discovered Patterson's strategic location on the I-5 Corridor. There was cheap, non arable land to develop into distribution facilities and affordable housing. Patterson quickly grew into a bedroom community of the Bay Area and host to regional distribution centers such as Amazon, CVS, and Kohl's. This is the beauty field of local government. District residents on our board could work with district residents in the municipal government to foresee and respond to upcoming development. By the time the first distribution broke center broke ground, the Del Puerto1 Healthcare District was ready. In 2003, we opened a small downtown clinic. We immediately applied for and received rural health clinic status which under Californian federal law makes our clinic's operations eligible for full cost reimbursement for services provided to Medi-Cal and Medicare patients. We couldn't sustain a hospital in 1988 but, within 10 years, our district population had grown over 25,000 residents. Within a couple of years, the first rented space was outgrown and a short period later, so was the second rented space. Another important point is that healthcare districts can survive the ups and downs of local economy. The recession of 2008 had a huge hit on everyone's economy. Employer-based insurance fill and eventually the roles of public insurance greatly expanded. We were positioned to meet the changing local financial reality. With the USDA backed development loan, we built and moved into a modern facility in 2011. This, our current clinic location, has the capacity to double our current providers and patient visits in future years. The core of our practice is family medicine and pediatrics. We have two physicians and two mid-level providers, and we operate a lean medical assisting staff of 14. We also collaborate with cardiologist specialists who come to our clinic twice per month to see local patients. And we seek to add more services including dermatology, pediatric dentistry and mental health services. We developed a community partnership with the City of Patterson Fire Department who under our sponsorship and oversight now provides first responder medical services within the city limits. We recently purchased the building adjacent to ours and it is leased to a physical therapist, core fitness gym and orthodontist. In response to the exploding community population, the Del Puerto Health Center annually provides 15,000 visits to 6,600 patients. We now staff two full time ambulance who respond every year to 2,400, 911 dispatches and provide approximately 1,600 transports to 105 regional hospitals. We strive to meet the needs of the community, but service charges don't always equal self support. Healthcare districts like ours support vulnerable, under served populations but are also financially vulnerable themselves. In Stanislaus County there are three rural healthcare districts, ourselves, Oak Valley Hospital and Westside Community Health Care district. All three run ambulances and combined we serve 23% of the county population spread over 73% of the county's geography. We spend more time, drive further, and have a lower call volume than our municipal counterparts. Yet we have the same fixed costs for 24/7 365 staffing, vehicle maintenance and a base of operations. The point is, that it is inherently more expensive to provide ambulance cover in rural districts. You remember that economic picture I opened with? 9% unemployment, fifth highest poverty rate in the state and 45% of the population is MediCal eligible. Del Puerto does operate very lean, yet our net cost per ambulance transport is $1,130. Medi-Cal only pays us $115. WIth our high density of Medi-Cal patients, 45% of our transports account for 10% of our costs, of the income towards our cost, only 10% income. Even with tax subsidies, Patterson District Ambulance operates at a loss just to keep staffed for when that 911 call comes in. Healthcare districts providing rural ambulance and emergency medical transportation need the state to step up and reimburse at least the net cost of transporting rural health care district MediCal patients. Please consider a reimbursement model like rural health clinics who were made whole for the services they provide. In conclusion of my remarks today, I want to reiterate that recent district specific legislation and investigations have not told the whole story of healthcare districts. I was invited here to represent the rural healthcare districts that provide and care for their communities both with and without a hospital. Del Puerto healthcare district represents how local government has a definitive role in the historic immediate short term and long term solutions for healthcare access to California's rural populations. Healthcare districts must operate transparent, lean, pro community, pro quality, and pro local services that continually seek to meet the needs of growing communities in the changing world of healthcare economics. I thank you for the opportunity to testify today and happy for any questions.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 39, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 125, 'end': 139, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : Just healthcare, right?
[]
Ted Owens: And, with all due respect. Ted Owens, Tahoe Force. I think that what you've heard today are LAFCO that responded to healthcare districts that were already in trouble. And that is something very different than perhaps doing a municipal service review on a health care district that appears to be fine. For me in the production of documentation for municipal services review, I kind of felt that, of course, most of the requests had to do with finances, and boundaries, and population and growth, and things of that nature. But I thought that perhaps our community health needs assessment reports, which we do each three years, might be something that would be in the repository of a LAFCO. Because it enables LAFCO to gauge how a community's changing well in advance of it, hey, here we are today and it already happened.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barry Jantz: And I think I agree. Barry Jantz Grossmont Healthcare again. Although the districts are different and you've heard that loud and clear here today, it is all uniformly about providing health care services to the community. And I believe whether it's sharing of the types of questioning, as you've mentioned, between LAFCOs and between health care districts gets us to a place where a LAFCOs questionnaire can say, for the services you're providing. How is that patient care? How is that healthcare? And how are you doing it that someone else couldn't do. And that's a tough one, because a lot of people say, well, the county could do it. I mean, I can tell you in San Diego, County, they can't, our county doesn't want to be in the hospital business. So although it may sound like you don't want to ask us that, you don't want to ask us could someone else be doing it better, I think most health care just doing good job can't say that yes we're providing with local knowledge at a community level. So we are doing it better and if we gave this resource, or these financials to another government agency, we're not sure where it would go. So I'm okay with those questions. So I think, we've talked about this with ACHD, Association of California Healthcare Districts, and a working group there, about uniform questions that could get to the core. And that's providing Healthcare services to the community.
[]
Suki Rob-Wilder: My throat's going weird. Hi thank you, I'm Suki Rob-Wilder and thank you Madame Chairman and Committee Members for your attention, and thank you for the subject of this. I am here as a member of a public, I am one of those people who used to be served by Palm Drive Health Care District, but our area has detached and I'm here to underline the need and the urgency of the very topic that you guys are talking about today, which is oversight because we would not be detached today if there had been the appropriate oversight or if through oversight we have been able to gain get attention to our problem any other way than detachment. This is a rural, I'm in a rural area I'm 35 minutes from Palm Drive hospital and 35 minutes from Kaiser and 35 minutes from Palm Springs. Well I'm also a Kaiser member, but that's beside the point. Everybody wants to think that public healthcare districts are run in the public interest. I think even the people on the board wanted to think that Palm Drive Hospital is run in the public interest, and yet there have been several red flags that the district has not taken any heat of. The grand jury in 07/08 came out with findings, recommendations, and the Palm Drive District responded and those recommendations and findings and responses were filed. Nobody followed up. Years worth of audit reports of the district have found serious material weaknesses and a couple of them have questioned the entity's ability to sustain itself. Those reports are filed with the Auditor's Office and nothing ever happens to them. In terms of transparency, when the hospital closed and we heard that they wanted to open the hospital again, several of us came to the district meeting to try to find out. What are the causes of the bankruptcy? Why are you in bankruptcy? And how is this new plan going to address those problems that brought you into bankruptcy? Not only we not get any answers we were shouted down because the focus was on getting a hospital open. That's when we first started thinking. It's really hard to be a member of the public and not be able to have a clear avenue to go to for oversight. Fortunately, we found LAFCO and we found supportive members who were willing to help us work. Let's see, what else was I going to say? I haven't written out my comments, but I've been very interested in everything that you guys are saying. I think that part of LAFCO's purview needs to be to promote efficient public services and efficient use of public monies. And to that end I think the LAFCOs, at least the LAFCO in Sonoma County is seriously understaffed and underfunded. How you can expect two and a half people to do the work that's been done this year is really pretty incredible. I also think that having members of the public having to pay for these services when we pay taxes anyway is difficult. I understand that money is tight, but I also feel like a lot of the burden of this is falling on those of us who just want to be good citizens, not necessarily people with money. The people with money donate lots of money to the hospital and put out signs saying save our hospital. But the final thing that I wanna say, and I'll make it short, is that our hospital district is in its second bankruptcy in eight years, 2007 or 2008, I think, and 2014 it's still in Chapter 9 bankruptcy. There is no bankruptcy plan, and it has never been discussed in open session. Knorr has detachment of our area been discussed in open session, in fact most things are not discussed in open session and it's, let me not get off on that. Let me keep to the bankruptcy because this is something that I haven't heard mentioned today. Chapter nine bankruptcy does provide protection for the district but it doesn't really provide protection for the people who have to pay the money. There is no teeth in chapter nine about operations. So our district has been dutifully filing whatever it needed to file and it's been business as usual. Anyway thank you very much for this hearing. I appreciate it.
[{'start': 43, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ian Berkine: hello, ian jonah berkine with the association of california healthcare districts. wanted to just make a few remarks. i did want to clarify that there are actually 79 healthcare districts in the state. 50 of which are members of our association. as you heard they provide a vast array of services. all the way from small and large urban/rural hospitals down to preventative-type services. also wanted to touch briefly on some of the challenges that have been discussed today. this is something that the association takes very seriously. we created a working group last summer that is still in existence today, and that's of health care districts from trustees and ceos all across the state. we did work on four strategic recommendations, one of which was to work with the local lafcos with our healthcare districts, do some education. and we had talked about with our working group coming up with an assessment that could be used by the lafcos when looking at healthcare districts and that that process is universal across the state and also gives them credibility to that process. so that those municipal service reviews can actually be used in a meaningful manner. we also are working on enhanced certification and credentialing for our board, ceos, trustees, and board clerks. so that we can do some more education and more credentialing of those, so that we don't have some of those issues about transparency and good governance that we hope to address. additionally, we're working on public education and awareness and working with our members. and helping them tell their story to their public and also to their lawmakers, so that they are aware of what is going on in their district, and they're not under the radar. that is not something that we would, we want our districts to be in that position. additionally, we are looking at the health care district law. we're looking at doing some comprehensive revisions of the enabling act, including looking at some of the needs assessments that had been mentioned earlier. this is something that we are embarking on right now, so that hopefully we have a bill for 2018, and we would love to work with the committee and staff on this process going forward. so that we do have some meaningful reforms that would be helpful to our members in meeting their needs of their communities, and meeting their missions, thank you.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 777, 'end': 783, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 936, 'end': 942, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kara Ralston: good afternoon, kara ian ralston, administrator, ceo of camarillo healthcare district, who i truly hope you did find on the internet, if you looked for us. we serve ventura county, population at 140,000 or so, two of our cities, our namesake city, camarillo, senior population over the age of 60 is twice the national average, as is ojai, the city that i live in also, over the national average. our area agency on aging states that of those 85 and older, 70% of those are disabled. that's the view of our county. we are community based, we don't own or operate a hospital and as such we're tapped by our county, by our physician groups, by our third party payers and by other entities, to contract. we are preferred contractor and partner for those agencies, they cannot, do not want to do those services. they find it more efficient to contract with us. we contract to do care transitions, case management, care management, chronic disease management and that vain we have tear one evidence based programming that are contracted by this entities to provide their beneficiaries and their members and we're discussing with our medical provider of the county to sign the contract with them, we having been with our district for 19 years now. we, i personally understand the evolution into relevancy and i would just like to close with saying that these sorts of contracts and this type of work requires sophistication, credibility, relevancy, and most importantly successful patient outcomes and we thank you for your review of these issues. thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tom Bakaly: Good afternoon. My name's Tom Bakaly, and I'm the CEO of the Beach Cities Health District, and Health District represents Redondo Beach, Hermosa Beach, and Manhattan Beach. I'm new to the district. I've been there about four months. I was formerly the city manager of Formosa beach, so I'm learning a lot today, so thank you for having the hearing. It seems to me the goal is to meet the healthcare needs of the community in an open and transparent and accountable way and so I think obviously I don't want to repeat everything that people have said, but for me, one of the things I've learned is everybody's different. It really comes back to what does a community need and what does a community want? And one of the things that attracted me to Beach Cities Health District, I'd worked with them for four years, was their willingness to measure results and outcomes, assess the need, and then enact the programs that meet the needs of the community. That's something that local government has struggled with a long time. I think I was doing performance measures about 20 years ago in Pasadena. That's something that the health district, through the help of Gallup and some programs that we've done that we've been able to measure the need of the community. So I'd just like to emphasize the community needs assessment. How do you know if you're meeting the needs unless you measure it and you look at it and then you enact the programs? Like what you've heard today, we've evolved to meet the needs of our community. We focused largely on preventative health. We still own the old hospital building, but we provide direct preventative health services out of the hospital. We have partner that work with us. On that one of the things that we also do is when we survey the community need we also asked for their satisfaction. And so what we found out is 78% of our residence personally know who we are and of that 78% 97% believe that we're providing services in a favorable way. So that's something that we measure on an annual basis and work with the community to meet their needs. Thanks.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Janet Dilmond: hi thank you, dilmond, i'm from palm drive healthcare district, sonoma county. i'm also one of the people who detached and in 2011, two people, several people from our community went to lafco asking about the taxes and what was happening basically. the hospitals for sebastopol wasn't for us. we're, as she said, the same distance away from three major facilities, and we're told that they couldn't do anything unless there was a petition. so then when the hospital closed, then the community came interested again, my community in getting out of this. and again, we're told that they couldn't do anything without a petition. we asked for an msr and we're told basically, that things were too unsettled to do an msr, that was one reason, and i think there was trouble, how are they going to do a healthcare assessment? but we did ask her that, and again wasn't done. there had never been an msr done in a district which was going on for 16 years. i think they used do one at least every five years, so that was a red flag for us. the other, excuse me your, the other red flag as far as i see it is, there has been a major benefactor. and that person has been involved from the very beginning of the formation of this district. this hospital would not be there without that person's money it is very clear. this person also is a part of the formation of swemc, has embedded his electronic medical records system as a business in the hospital as a beta test. there is no other hospital in the united states that has this system. his partner i believe is also in that business too, runs a telemedicine business inside of the hospital. so it's very clear to me that there's a conflict of interest and i don't have to get around that and i think that's very disturbing. the other thing is that swemc, sonoma west medical center, is a controlling member of the governing board of the hospital rather than the district. it's still very confusing, very muddied, and i do have to say that it seems to me they have three management companies managing the hospital. the last one is their proposing now, has been in business for seven months. we're very concern about that, i have not found any documentation myself and then talking to other people and other parts of the country that this is it illegitimate business, and where did they stand. so we continue to be vigilant observers, we're concerned about what's going to happen to our continuing tax money given the governance and that is why we are here today. thank you very much.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Will Lightbourne: will jonah lightbourne, director of the california department of social services. i'm joined by debby thompson who's our deputy director for our programs which includes the in home support services program. i'm going to lead on the first item on the agenda and then ms. thompson will on the flsa and electronic time sheets sections. we provided a handout to the committee which i'm not going to read through, they just want to highlight a few issues. the core of the ihhs program is the fact that it is 95% of what makes it possible for low income elderly and disabled californians to remain at home. it is 95% of the home and community based services that california offers. and what california offers is by far the largest home community based service system in the country. we are one of very few states that spend more than half of our medicaid long term support services funds on home based care rather than institutional care. the other key factor about our program that is essential i think to always emphasize is that it is also the most consumer centered and directed program of its kind. in almost every case, the consumer, the client of ihss, the person living at home, is the employer of their provider. they select them, they supervise them, they determine how they serve them. and we consider that the most important feature of the entire program. because nobody knows their needs better than the person who's living it. and throughout everything we have done over the years, the foremost issue has been to preserve that consumer centric view of the program. everything else has been secondary. marked as page three, second page, gives you a sense of the caseload that's almost half a million consumers. they receive an average of about 105 hours a month. the caseload trend line is displayed on a graph, to sort of move to the budget side of the program which is the point of the hearing. 98% of that, almost half a million caseload are considered to be part of the medicaid program, so we receive medicaid reimbursement for approximately 50% for one part of the caseload. and currently, approximately 56% federal participation for what's called the community first choice option portion. i would note that the affordable care act legislation, the repeal and replace legislation that was announced yesterday, would eliminate that 6% difference in the medicaid participation in the sifco portion. about 2% of the caseload at any point, is in what we call the residual program. which means essentially that for one or another reason, their medical status is not current. they could be between renewals, they could be awaking eligibility to termination, or for some reason not eligible at that period. one of the major changes in the program of course, is been announced, is that because of the failure of the coordinated care initiative to prove either cost savings or even cost neutral. the coordinated care initiative, the existing legislation has been sort of triggered that returns to the old sharing ratio of the program. and going sort of more detail in that with the department of finance in a moment. so what this will means is that in the budget year 2017-18, the overall budget for ihss in california will be 10.6 billion of which we are assuming $5.7 billion as federal, but i just, again, note the possibility of reduction there. $3.1 billion is the state's share under the old sharing ratio and $1.8 billion will be paid by the counties, with the reversion to the old sharing ratios. the growth and cost of the program is driven by several factors. one of which has been the implementation of the fair labor standards act rule two years ago that requires home care workers with very few exceptions to be paid overtime, travel and wait time for medical accompaniment. and that has created a $900 million cost pressure in the current year. and then growth in the caseload as well as growth in the average hours per case have contributed almost $800 million to the growth of the program. to sort of get to the heart of what does the end of the coordinated care initiative mean for the ihss programme separate from the budgetary implications that many people are going to talk about today, it changes nothing for consumers. the consumers' care and services will continue. in those cases, where there have been enhanced care teams, starting to work between managed care plans and the ihss program, we're going to be encouraging the continuation of those. obviously more detail to come as to how that will be done. but literally, the consumers in the program, if they know anything about the end of the coordinated care initiative, it will because they read it in the newspaper. it won't effect the hours of service, who is serving them or the circumstances. two other features that are involved in the end of the coordinated care initiative. the original legislation had called for development of a universal assessment tool. so that in addition to the ihss assessment tool that we have used, revised over the years, it would have been a common tool to assess on clients in ihss. the big program as well as the much smaller mssp program and the cbas programs that are the, sort of, the day center programs, is what it used to be known as. we had, with very significant support from the scan foundation, we had contracted with ucla to develop a tool that could be used between all programs, to inform a sense of what the consumer needs are. with the ending of cci, the sort of the mandate for universal assessment tool also ends. we have received from ucla sort of their work, in terms of developing a series of possible approaches to interviews and assessments. although it will not be continued in the form of the universal assessment tool, we are certainly looking at it from the ihss program perspective to see if there are tools or aspects that will be helpful for us. the final structural change that results from the end of coordinated care initiative is the unwinding of what was called the statewide authority. as part of the coordinated care initiative, it was determined that when enrollment in the dual status program was complete in each of the seven counties sequentially, the statewide authority would undertake collective bargaining for the workers in those counties. at the time that cci was determined to not be cost effective and therefore the unwind was to begin. the statewide authority had not entered into any contracts with any of the unions. they're still in the exploration, discussion, exchange of information stages. and so the original contracts, that had been previously negotiated by the seven counties, have been returned to those counties for them to resume their responsibility under the collective bargaining provisions of ihss. and so, that has occurred and sort of statewide authority has been unwound and disbanded. so, i would like to stop with that part of the first part of the agenda to see if the department of finance, leandra is going to add?
[{'start': 5, 'end': 22, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 96, 'end': 110, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 270, 'end': 278, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Leandra Ramos: leandra will ramos, department of finance. so as the director had indicated with the discontinuance of cci, the ihss county moe would become inoperative beginning july 1st, 2017. that means that the old county sharing ratios will continue so that for counties, that's 35% of the non-federal cost ratio. for 2017-18, we estimate that the cost returning from the general fund back to the counties would be approximately 623 million.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matt Cate: thanks. thank you mr. chair and members. my name is matt leandra cate, i'm the executive director of the california state association of counties. we represent all 58 counties in california. appreciate the opportunity to address you briefly if i could address the current state of the law first, the 58 counties believe that unanimously that the coordinated care initiative was a good idea. that we believe that it's helped people. that making sure that ihss clients were able to get the best possible care through manage care and through coordinate care as the right thing to do. it has saved money undoubtedly. next year, it appears it will be around $42 million short according to the numbers we've see. our view is we need to reinvest in the coordinated care initiative, re-double our efforts especially in southern california where we haven't seen as much success as else where and give this another try. that's ideal from our perspective. we are very concerned about the current state of the law and the shift of the $623 million to counties. i think it's important to note that not all counties are in the same position economically. while there has been growth in some counties where silicon valley has done well in southern california and some places, there are many others who are doing poorly. this would have a devastating hit on those counties, the current state of the law. as you know, mr. chair, it's a $25 million hit to fresno county, that should triple, orange county 37, 38 million would triple, 220 million in los angeles which will triple but i think the message that people don't understand is that places like san bernardino have seen their property tax revenues decrease 10.8% since 2008. and in fresno, they have 8% less in property tax revenues proportion than they had in 2008. some have modest growth, los angeles almost 5% since 2008. not a ton and then i think the other thing that's important to remember is that counties are unlike other people or other groups that sit before you. counties are a sub division of state government. it's our mission to implement the laws you pass. and in order to do that, we need to have the funding necessary to provide that care, to be in the field everyday with our partners in labor with our partners from the other affiliate organizations to do this work. so that's our primary concern. we we are also concerned about the, not only the size but it's been difficult for a county supervisor's to get their minds around the fact that the program has not only grown but in ways that the county's didn't control over these last five years. and, that's going to be true in the future and so those points make it very difficult as we focus on homelessness and mental health and public safety reforms and all the things that you've asked us to implement. we need proper funding to be able to do it. we think cci is a good idea and we should keep going. i would like to make a few points about the proposal that has been brought forward by this body. i would say that there is no question, counties believe that an moe is appropriate. and so returning an moe for future years at the same level, we've been at the current year, we think is undoubtedly helpful for us. as it allows us to buffer the increase costs that we see coming, that everyone sees coming in this area. we also think it's a good idea if cost are controlled that we think the state should include bargain on behalf of all the entire state, all 58 counties. again, if that moe is in place, those are both things that we undoubtedly agree with. as i mentioned earlier, the 623 million has hit us in the face. and i cannot say that we are at terms with it. all right, it feels too large for us to be able to handle and it will take years to be able to deal with that even in the current year. interested in all ideas around smoothing, around waste mitigate. we have been talking to the administration. we have been talking to staff about all of those ideas and we remain open minded. our primary concern is for the same people that you're concerned with. being able to work together over the coming weeks and months, i think we would appreciate that very much as we try to. a final solution that works long-term for us. thank you very much.
[{'start': 52, 'end': 69, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 3502, 'end': 3505, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Frank Mecca: frank matt mecca, executive director of the county welfare directors' association. just like to drill down a little bit into why the governor's action is sort of acutely problematic fiscally and programmatically. while the statute sets forth the parameters under which the governor can decide whether or not the cci is cost beneficial or not, the statute doesn't specify how the unwinding would occur. so setting aside the question of whether or not the statutory conditions were met. the way the moe is unwound, could've been done in any number of different ways. and the decision that was announced in the january budget was the most acutely fiscally damaging to counties possible. and that's the case for a number of reasons, the first is that, as other people alluded to, i believe the lao did as well, that the governor's decision asks the counties to absorb about five years worth of growth in the program with a single year's worth of realignment revenue. and that's a mismatch that can't be bridged. the second thing, as mr. kate alluded to, the administration's action would require the counties to pick up an increasing, an escalating share of the program that's going to grow for reasons that were beyond the county's control. the restoration of the 7%, the minimum wage increase, and a number of other provisions. we estimate that in the out years the gap between the realignment revenues that we hold have to theoretically pay for ihss costs and what the governor's action would impose is in excess of $1 billion a year. so i know the number 626 has been discussed a lot. but that number grows rapidly in the out years, and we'd never catch up under the proposal. you'll hear from a number of other witnesses about the programmatic impacts. within the social services world, i would like to just point out that ihss is funded in realignment in an account that also funds child welfare services. it funds calworks eligibility work, and it funds calfresh eligibility work. so you'll hear later that the governor's action ends up depriving health and mental health of resources that the counties need. but the action also deprives child welfare and the eligibility services that the counties use to get low income people the supports that they need. and i don't think it's an exaggeration to say that the success of the administration's continuum of care reform hangs in the balance. because a large portion of how the counties fund the child welfare services system is through the 91 realignment. and so we appreciate all the attention that you've provided. and we look forward to working with the legislature and the administration to try to find the solution to what on its face as present, is completely unimaginable.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1033, 'end': 1037, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Karen Keeslar: good afternoon. karen frank keeslar. and i appreciate it you saying keeslar, until i married him, i said it and i spelled it wrong too. i'm with the california association of public authorities, their executive director, and wanted to touch on a couple of things. this is not a proposal, this is an operation of current law, and the administration's presentation that it's not a cut to ihss consumers or providers is true in terms of the operation of law. but there is an underlying threat that is legitimate at this program for public authorities, for example, when you unwind and terminate the moe, then we go back to where we were in 2011. we have 56 counties in the state that have public authorities in the rural areas, we had received a 60% cut in funding in 2009. because ours got cut in 2010 and 2011. we had about a dozen public authorities in the state by 2011 that their total budget, federal state in county was under $100,000. so the reality for us is that we return back to us an unsustainable amount of money and it's been through the moe that the counties have been able to subsidize the public authorities and to keep us going. so we're really in jeopardy if this does not get addressed. i also want to say and reinforce what director kate has said about the cci needing additional time. we were just starting to see some pretty exciting partnerships between public authorities, counties, and the health plans. it took us a long time to figure out our dialogue in a medical system interacting with the social system. but, for example, in riverside, they were able to get the health plans to agree to be paying a differential and higher wage to ihss providers, providing back up services. they were doing things in partnership with the unions and talking about training and other things that were very exciting, those things just starting and so disappointing to see that potentially stop. i want to just mention one thing about the proposal from this house to potentially mitigate the disaster that's facing the counties. which is to say that we really appreciate the thought and the energy that's being put into addressing the disaster that occurs with counties, with public authorities across the board. this is just an absolute disaster. so we defer to csac, they are the leader but want to let you know that we're very, very grateful that great thought is being given in to how to mitigate the situation.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 68, 'end': 75, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1252, 'end': 1256, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tia Orr: good afternoon mr. chair and members, tia karen orr on behalf of the service employees international union. i'm the legislative director for sciu california and just wanted to thank you guys for the opportunity to speak to you today about this very concerning proposal. as you know, sciu is almost double faceted in our concerns with this proposal. we represent our home care workers, which i know we're going to speak to a little bit later. i specifically wanted to focus on the impact to our county workers. many of them are here today and you know we represent thousands of county workers across the state that work in our safety net programs. i think often when we've been discussing this, we hear high budget numbers and we hear formulas and we hear the specifics about all the details in the data. and i really want to try to drive home the direct impact that the action by the governor will have on the safety net programs that i know you guys all care about. i speak today on behalf of 10,000 child welfare service social workers, who literally at this moment in time are going into homes and investigating abuse and neglect on your behalf. literally at this time are saving the lives of children that i know that we all care about. this action by the governor will affect that ability to do that job. i stand here today on behalf of thousands of cow works and cow fresh eligibility workers and employment service workers who you have allocated and dedicated to find ways. and a path out of a life that has to depend on government checks and actually get in to self-sufficiency. our workers, their staff are committed to that everyday. this will affect our ability to do that and i know that something that we should all care about. i speak to you today more importantly about our public health nurses and our medi-cal eligibility workers who were seeing floods of clients come in your offices everyday. and a period of uncertainty were folks don't know where their health is going to be in a couple of weeks or a couple of months. and the demand that's on our county eligibility workers to provide these services is extreme. this will affect their ability to do that. so i say this to say just in some summary, this is the worst time that you can imagine trying to implode our safety net services. it's a time where more people are flooding into our offices, it's a time where more people are dependent on the services that you provide in your districts. i think we made great progress because of a lot of your leadership in some of those programs, closing up gaps in the ground, closing up cracks. i will say to you that the governor's action will cause holes in our safety net that we'll never be able to overcome. that men and women, real live men and women and children will fall through him inevitably. we deal with that everyday with the cracks in our system but i think we've all come together to try to repair those cracks and i think we've done a good job. i fear that this action is going to take us 20 steps back. so again your leadership on this has been impeccable and we thank you for it and i think you guys have really taken the bull by the horn and really tried to address this issue in a very serious way. on behalf of our members and our leaders, we thank you for that. i think we have some way to go, really roll up our sleeves and figure out the best path forward, but i really appreciate your leadership on this. and i really just implore you to think about the safety net benefits that our county workers want to continue to provide on your behalf, and our ihss workers that you're going to hear from, who deserve a fair place to bargain. they are your workers who care for your mothers, your fathers, my grandparents and your grandparents. and they deserve decent wages and ability to bargain for benefits that benefit them to do your work on your behalf. so thank you again and we hope to work with you in the future.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Curt Child: thank you, mr. chair, curt, disability rights california. thanks for the opportunity to comment just briefly. the prior panel members, and you'll certainly hear much more from some of your witnesses, have more then adequately articulated the impact that the ihss cost shift will have not only on the ihss program, but on the real line services in the counties. drc on behalf of ihss consumers are firmly committed to ensuring that the program remain fully funded and opposed to any proposal that would restrict services or hours or any of the worker protections that are so essential for this program. and i think importantly as the point has been made and articulated very well that ihss consumers rely on a lot of services, realigning services within the counties. and so, by not maintaining the moa that puts those individuals at risk. and of course our entire effort is attempting to keep families living, individuals living in their homes and not in facilities. so we'd like to thank the committee for all of the effort that's been putting to this proposal. and we strongly support the staff recommendation of maintaining the ihss moa. thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Allison: Mr. Chair, Members of the Committee. My name is Brian Allison on behalf of the American Federation of State County and Municipal Employees. I would like to strongly support this Committee's actions to move state wide collective bargaining for IHSS employees to ensure that we do not continue along the path of the current disjointed, inflexible system that exists at the county level. One thing that we have seen is that it is going to be more efficient, more effective not only for our members but we believe for the State of California to have statewide collective bargaining as opposed to current disjointed system that works on the county level. We applaud your Committee and this house as leadership for the willingness to take on this task and support statewide collective bargaining on behalf of the more than 95,000 workers, IHSS workers that AFSCME represents. Secondarily, I would like to express my support on behalf of AFSCME for the proposal that is being put forward to deal with the maintenance effort issue that is going to settle counties within an unconscionable $625 million in debt. We cannot, we also represent the county workers who are eligibility workers, adult protective service workers, law enforcement workers, in some cases, right. So for us this is a critical issue. Our services cannot be cut on the local government level, and we applaud your house's leadership for stepping up. We also recognize that this is just the first step in a long process. But we want to sincerely express our appreciation for the work that this Committee has done, the staff has done. And we want to ensure that as we move forward all of the stakeholders are working together to craft a solution that is going to be in the best interest, not only of the providers across the State of California and in these counties but also the critical social services needs. And we need to make sure that the most vulnerable Californians are protected and shielded from any harm. We believe that this proposal does that. We believe that it does limit general fund exposure to the counties. But again, we recognize this is a long process. I'm pleased to be here to support these two ideas but recognized that this is a complicated process. We encourage folks to continue to work with all of the stakeholders and labor and in the county and local government arena. So thank you for your time today.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Young: Mr. Chair, members, Michael Young on behalf of the California Labor Federation. I too would like to align my comments with those of SEiU California, UDW, and AFSCME. We think it's important that we move towards the system of statewide bargaining for all our IHSS members. But also importantly that any plans moving forward as much as possible mitigates the impacts, the financial and fiscal impacts to the counties. We reserve the social net programs that we all care about and the working families that depend on them. Thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Yoder: mr. chairman and members, paul, shaw, yoder, antwih. this is a 2 or $3 million hit to tulare county as mr. cade mentioned, a $25 million hit to fresno. so opposed for those two counties, as well as butte, kern, madera, placer, napa, san joaquin, shasta, san luis obispo, solano, sonoma, and the city and county of san francisco.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 32, 'end': 36, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 38, 'end': 43, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 45, 'end': 51, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 107, 'end': 111, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Laurie Johnson: chair, members, laurie tia johnson on behalf of monterey county. first we'd like to thank you and your staff for all the hard work that you've done on this and we'd like to echo mr. cate and mr. mecca's earlier comments, thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 182, 'end': 186, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 195, 'end': 200, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Gary Passmore: Mr. Chair, members and staff, I'm Gary Passmore with Congress of California Seniors. And for over 40 years, we have been advocating on behalf of seniors and people with disabilities. The only way I can describe the situation we're in, is that we've spent the last six years like in a treadmill. We've worked very hard to make some significant progress in the area of not only IHSS, but also with the CCI. And I feel like just in a matter of a few words it's all being pulled back and the rug's being pulled back from under us. There are, I guess I want to make two or three very brief comments. First, there are some terribly sick, very, very good people, elderly people in this state, who spent a lifetime trying to make this state better. And in their later years, struggling with some real acuity in their healthcare and in their home care needs. Our view was that the coordinated care initiative made real progress, especially for these people who had advanced needs. And we're very sorry to see the Governor decide on a purely financial basis that it's not worth the effort. We believe it was worth the effort, that it was beginning to show real progress until we disagreed with the whole idea of abandoning the coordinated care initiative. And I know that really isn't in front of you because it was written into state law. We are very disappointed that we're not going to continue the work that has occurred and try to create a uniform assessment tool. Not only is it a nice way of knowing how people are doing, you've gotta remember without those data, we have no baseline of where we have been, and we are completely unable to see progress over the whole population over time without those data. So, we're basically stepping back from a progressive way of trying to oversee these people. Finally, I want to point out our strong opposition to the Governor's proposal to abandon the MOU and support for the one being proposed by you and your staff. We appreciate the effort that you've made. We think it's critically important. Counties are instruments of State Government, just like any State Agency and trying to bankrupt them seems to me very short sided and unproductive. So, thank you for the work that you have underway. We support it, and we wish that you had the ability and could pursue some opportunities to go back and look at some of the decisions that the Governor has already made with regard to the Coordinated Care Initiative abolition. Thanks.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jolena Voorhis: mr. chair and members, jolena on behalf of the urban counties of california, here in opposition to the [unknown] cci in repealing the ihhs moe. i do appreciate the proposal by the assembly and we'll continue to work with our county partners and affiliates to look at that. there are parts of it that are good, but we still want to continue those conversations. all of the seven cci counties or urban counties, we worked really hard to make that program work. there's been a lot of successes, yes, there has been some problems or some shortfalls in the program. but we sincerely agree that we, if we give more time, we could make this better for all californians. and we just think this is too much of a significant cost shift as other speakers have said for urban counties to withstand. for urbans, it looks like it's going to be 565 of the 623 in the first year, so we just cannot sustain that type of cost shift. thank you.
[]
Phyllis Marshall: Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and Members of the Committee. My name is Phyllis Marshall, and I represent Los Angeles County. The Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors opposes the elimination of the IHSS MOE. This proposal will result in a $220 million hit this year to LA County's general fund budget. That number only grows over time. In less than four years, that number will grow to half $1 billion on the general fund budget. In 2004, Los Angeles County, the IHSS program, there was about a 143,000 cases. By the end of 2016, this number had grown to over 217,000 cases, a growth of 65% in a period of less than 10 years. It is important to emphasize that counties do not have control over the growth of this federal entitlement program. But instead, in recent years, the State of California has passed laws which have increased the cost of the program. The cost shift created by the elimination of the IHSS MOE, which bundles five years of growth in a single year, will create a devastating impact on the fiscal budgets of counties, putting at risk vital programs, including health, public health, mental health and public safety. We urge this Committee to eliminate the $626 million burden to counties to maintain the CCI and to preserve the IHSS MOE. We commend the Speaker, the Assembly and this Committee for the leadership that you have shown on this most important issue, and we look forward to working with this Committee in the future. Thank you.
[{'start': 67, 'end': 83, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Ader: Good afternoon. Mary Ader with the County Behavioral Health Directors Association. By shifting such a large IHSS funding obligation to counties, important and already insufficient in-patient and crisis mental health services will become even less accessible to individuals, family members, hospital ERs and law enforcement. 1991 realignment is the only source of funding for the following services in our communities. Psychiatric In-Patient Care, 5150 Involuntary Evaluation and Treatment, Public Guardian and Conservatorship, Indigent Mental Health Care, Mental Health Services provided by County Mental Health in juvenile halls and county jails.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Gibbons: Good afternoon. Michelle Gibbons with the County Health Executives Association of California. We represent local health departments throughout our state. We are opposed to the Governor's elimination of the IHHS MOE, as well. The elimination that would have dire impacts on the resources made available for both public health services and healthcare services to the indigents. So public health services including infectious disease control and prevention, STD control and prevention as well. In addition, chronic disease, obesity prevention, and efforts on a variety of other public health issues. In addition on the indigent care side, as you know there's many threats to the Affordable Care Act right now, and an anticipated increase in the number of uninsured individuals returning to the county responsibility. And so these are resources that are desperately needed to help provide a level of services and care should those individuals return. And for those reasons, we remain opposed to what the Governor is doing, and we thank you for your thoughtfulness as the Assembly as well.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tracy Ryan: good afternoon, tracy, rural county representatives of california. we represent 35 member counties, and as previously stated, i know that this committee recognizes the significant consequences, especially to our smaller counties, with this cost shift. and so, we are appreciative of the staff recommendation. we believe it's a reasonable place to start the conversation. thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carol Keck: hello, i'm keck, ihss san joaquin. and please protect county services from deep cuts. move collective bargaining to state level and we save the state money by doing home care. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stacy Sisson: Good afternoon, my name is Stacy Sisson, I'm here on behalf of the California Supported Living Network. We're a provider organization with a membership of over 100 provider organizations throughout the state. And I'm here on their behalf to say that we voice our support of the recommendations that the MOE on the Coordinated Care Initiative stand. Thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nancy Katig: hi, my name is nancy laurie katig and i'm from sonoma county, i have a letter i'd like to read from our county supervisor. can i offer a copy for all the members? can i offer this to somebody? thank you. so, happy international woman's day, everybody here, whatever gender you're identifying this day. we are proud to celebrate woman's day by coming here to celebrate, to speak on behalf of the ihss workers, the majority of whom are women. in a nation where the richest 1% own 42% of all the wealth, and the bottom 80% compete for just about 7% of all the resources, the weight falls disproportionately on the shoulders of impoverished, working women. yes it does. we hope to gain your support and change in situation. and now i'd like to read a letter prepared by the sonoma county supervisor fifth district, lynn hopkins concerning this topic. it was addressed yesterday. to whom it may concern. please note that i, lynn hopkins, strongly support the position of the california homeowners association, which opposes shifting the cost of burden of the ihss workers to local counties. in january, our board of supervisors unanimously approved the legislation platform for the county of sonoma which includes the following language. the county's interest is to sustain the 2012 funding methodology of ihss as established in the 2012, 2013 budget. the county contribution for ihss increased each year until a maintenance of effort, moe, was established for ihss. the moe replaced the share of cost methodology that was used to determine the county cost for ihss. the new moe continues to fund the ihss program and support the community at a lower cost. the moe took effect july, 1 2012 and includes a substantial shift in how counties budget ihss cost. all 48 counties began paying moe in 2012 regardless of this data's transfer for collective bargaining for ihss providers. the base year for county expenditures for the moe is 2011, 2012 fiscal years. since 2014-2015, the county moe increases by an inflation factor of 3.5% per year. the county moe will be increased for the county share of all cost for locally negotiated wage and benefit increase prior to the state taking over collective bargaining if the state approves. action, sponsor of support legislation efforts to provide sustaining wages to ihss workers while limiting the county's obligation to increase local funding. ihss workers are crucial to the safety and security of our seniors and community members with disabilities. please sustain the state's contribution to ihss. best regards, lynn hopkins, supervisor, fifth district. thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 811, 'end': 823, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 919, 'end': 931, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1431, 'end': 1434, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1466, 'end': 1469, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1570, 'end': 1573, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1656, 'end': 1659, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1781, 'end': 1784, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1920, 'end': 1923, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2554, 'end': 2566, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Marleni Vasquez: my name is vasquez, and i'm reading this letter on behalf of john fallon, who is a resident of santa rosa, california, who can't be here today but wanted to communicate his concerns about the proposed cut to ihss. he states, my sister was diagnosed with early onset alzheimer's disease three years ago. she was a k-11 school teacher with a science background, but due to her disease was unable to gain tenure and is no longer able to work. she is totally reliant on medical for her insurance. she requires 24/7 care, cannot feed or take care of herself, and relies on her siblings and spouse for her basic needs. we as a family have very limited resources and struggle daily to cope with this insidious disease. there being no medical remedy at this time, we are reliant on ihss for support. i honestly do not know what we would do without ihss. they are our only source of caretakers qualified to handle an alzheimer's patient. not only have they provided in-home health, they have made it possible for my sister to go to and participate in the shaw center for alzheimer's patients. my sister was a world-class ballerina. she graduated with honors from sonoma state university with a 3.9 grade average. she raised her son to be a productive member of society, an eagle scout, and air removal medic currently serving in the us army. she's perfectly representative of the most vulnerable in our society. ihss is the glue that keeps us all going. our journey is not yet over. please, i implore you to not take from the already limited resource budget of ihss. ihss workers provide critical service to the most vulnerable people in our society, doing some of the most difficult work you can imagine for little pay and i can't tell you how priceless they have been to our family. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 61, 'end': 72, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jesus Solis: Good afternoon, everyone. My name if Jesus Solis. I am a caregiver. Caregiving both saves money for the government and helps the person that I take care of mentally and physically. Plus, as a caregiver you keep track of the client's progress, whether they get sicker or they need someone to talk to because in some cases they're just scared and alone. We need to keep this program going strongly, and the more people we help the more money we will save the government. You save the government money by monitoring the people, how their health is, if they are taking their meds, if they're getting enough exercise and their spirit of being cared for, knowing someone is helping them because they really care. This will keep people from having to go to the doctors more often, or go to the emergency room, and possibly allow them to take less meds. Elderly people will sometimes not be able to take care of their own living conditions, so they may fall, or they may eat the wrong foods, or maybe even start a small fire because they have Alzheimer's or are depressed. I feel that this cut is very wrong And will only cause more pain, and suffering, and money that the government is going to have to spend because there wasn't someone there to look after the people that caregivers take care of. I enjoy my work, and I feel a feeling of doing something important, helping people to make their lives better. Caregivers are saving the state and government a lot of money as institutionalizing them is a much larger expense for the taxpayers. Plus the care givers have a job, it's a meaningful job, and it's a nice occupation. I demand that the state fully funds IHSS and get the funding by cutting brakes and subsidies to the wealthiest corporations, I thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susan von Zabern: Good afternoon, Mr. Chair, Members of the Committee. My name is Susan von Zabern, and I'm the Director of the Department of Public Social Services in Riverside County. And as you've heard, the unwinding of the coordinated care initiative not only has immediate impacts in the very first year of the counties, but growing and compounding impacts in the years ahead. And our assessment, as a fast growing county with demographics that have a high demand for this services, the shortfall in our county in the first year will be $40 million and will grow to a $135 million in just six years. And I want to just acknowledge and express our appreciation for the recognition that this program was not intended to burden counties. It was intended to be supported by 1991 realignment. And as you have heard today, that source of funding is not going to be able to adequately support the cost of the program and the cost shift to counties. And we are appreciative of the proposals that are being brought forward and eager to continue to work with you to find an appropriate solution. Thank you.
[{'start': 64, 'end': 80, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gerard Lopez: good afternoon, my name is gerard, and i'm here speaking as a representative of the  sacramento county workers benefits counsel. my mother has been a caregiver for ihss for over 10 years. and i strongly believe that the ihss program is a vital necessity for our community. the governor's decision to reinstate the 35/65 state, county state sharing ratio, would be devastating to the county's already strained budgets. the increase in annual cost would be prohibitive, and the governor has acknowledged this himself. this massive cut just puts the counties against caregivers who just want a limited overtime pay and a little travel time last year. even the highest paid ihss workers in our state are less than what the state says it takes for a family to survive. the international committee, specifically 193 members states of the united nations adopted unanimously 17 global goals for all countries to prioritize and achieve cooperatively by 2030. global #8 is to promote, sustain inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment, and a decent work for all. not only did the us government signed these goals, governor brown attended several events and commended these girls. we call upon you, our state representatives, to make decisions consistent with this goal. there is no shortage of money in california. according to the california budget and policy center, the state gives away $48 billion in tax breaks every year, and most of which goes to the wealthiest corporations and individuals in the state. if the state has enough money to support lockheed martin with over $429 million in subsidies, then surely the state can come up with $600 million for ihss. we call upon the state to find the funds and to take a ways and means approach to the responsibility you have to the people of california. do not cut any funds from the state to the counties. you can eliminate state tax breaks for large corporate interests. you can organize with other states to demand the federal government pay more to make up for the state short fall. it is your job as legislatures to find a way to get some means to not balance the budget on the backs of ihss workers and the lives of elderly, blind, and disabled recipients of their care, thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1144, 'end': 1149, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sivone Vancey: hi, my name is sivone nancy vancey, and i am from san joaquin county. i've been doing home care for 10 years now. as you know, san joaquin county was in bankruptcy, and also we haven't had a contract for a couple of years now. and so, moving from county to state level would help us in all ways, not just with san joaquin county but with all the counties. thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicole Torres: good afternoon, i'm nicole sivone torres. i'm from el dorado county, and i take care of two clients. i am in support of the proposed committee action to protect the county services and allow statewide bargaining for ihss providers. thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lisa Scott: hello, my name's scott, and i'm a udw provider from el dorado county. i have three recipients, which i've had for over 10 years. i strongly support the proposed committee action to protect county services and allow statewide bargaining for ihss providers. thank you.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sharon Ducesi: Hello, my name is Sharon Ducesi, I'm from Placer County. I am a proud home care provider, also a proud union member with UDW. I support statewide bargaining, and I also do not want the CCI cuts to affect any programs on a county level that could potentially affect our clients. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Steenhausen: Good afternoon, Sarah Steenhausen with the SCAN Foundation. SCAN Foundation appreciates the continued commitment to the Cal MediConnect program and to the Managed LTSS program through 2019. However, we're very concerned at the state's termination of the universal assessment tool process. And in the absence of a universal assessment tool, it's really the cornerstone of an integrated service delivery system. And we urge the Committee to consider development of trailer bill language that outlines requirements for enhanced health risk assessments to identify the functional, cognitive and social support needs and how those services will be met and identified in individual plans of care. Second, we recommend beyond 2019, the state commit to developing an LTSS infrastructure plan, so that the local levels can adequately prepare and plan for the aging population. Thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barry Jardini: Good afternoon, Barry Jardini with the California Disability Services Association. I'd just like to register our support for the staff recommendation and maintain the MOE and ensure adequate services, and supports are available to individuals with disabilities. Thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Keeslar: Karen Keeslar, not taking another bite at the apple, representing other clients. The Los Angeles County Professional Peace Officers Association for [UNKNOWN]. Clients also in Los Angeles like the Association of Los Angeles Deputy Sheriffs and so forth. Here in Sacramento and Merced, there are two public employee unions and then the public employee union for San Luis Obispo, very, very concerned. And in Los Angeles, they're talking about across the board cuts in every department including the DA where we represent the DA investigators. Sheriffs potentially are being laid off right now and this just makes it worst. In Los Angeles, this is a $220 million hit that cannot be sustained without impacting public safety. So, we really appreciate on behalf of the unions that I represent your work on this and mitigating the county impact. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rosanna Carvacho: Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and members. Rosanna Carvacho here on behalf of the Alameda County Board of Supervisors in opposition to the governor's repeal of CCI. And the county is estimating that in the first year, they will incur costs of $40 million. And this, as the previous speaker just stated, will lead to financial hardships for Alameda County that will lead to having to make some decisions including cuts to critical services in order to cover those rising costs. So in order to protect the 22,000, almost 500 individuals that are currently being served in Alameda County, almost 800 of those are children, we respectfully request that you reject the Governor's CCI proposal. Thank you.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Terri Thomas: Hi, Mr. Chairman and members, Terri Thomas, on behalf of the California Association of Public Hospitals and Health Systems. And as you know, our responsibility is to care for everyone in our counties who comes to our facilities, regardless of their ability to pay for health care. We join with our county colleagues in opposing the governor's proposal in the budget.  Over the last several, there's a great deal of uncertainty, as you know, about what will happen with the actions in Washington relating to the ACA. And we dread the day that our counties will have to return to the day when we had such large numbers of uninsured and indigent patients, but that is a very good possibility. And so, the pressures on the county budgets, both on the general fund and on the realignment funds, would be very severe and would impede our ability to care for growing numbers of uninsured. Over the last several years, we've developed a real focus on whole-person care. Where we look at treating, working with the other county agencies to treat the whole individual, their behavioral health care needs, their homelessness, etc. And so, this will not only impact health care budgets, it will impact the budgets of all of our county colleagues who are trying to treat the entire individual. Thank you.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sandra Johnson: Hi, good afternoon. Sandra Johnson from the Department of Public Social Services in LA County, eligibility worker. We're here requesting that you please protect county services from deep cuts and move collective bargaining to the statewide levels. Thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Javier Sanchez: Hi my name is Javier Sanchez, I am an eligibility worker for Monterey County. I determine eligibility for Medi-Cal, food stamps, and CalWORKS. And I know that every time there is a cut on the budget, the most needy people are the ones that suffer. So let's keep California great by protecting our aged, blind and disabled. Please protect county services from deep cuts and move collective bargaining to statewide level. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bradley Wiedmaier: good afternoon, dr. arambula and subcommittee assemblymembers. my name is bradley nicole wiedmaier, i'm an ihss provider from san francisco. and i'm very concerned about the impact of the governor's budget proposal on our counties, based on the ending of the cci. i'm afraid that this is going to hung an albatross, that we are somehow responsible for all of our other programs in our counties that need the funding that they have, that they may be having to make percentage-point cuts and reduce services. and we don't need to be made a villain. ihss saves money for the state and the counties. we keep people at home, happier and healthier, and we save at least 50% from what it costs to institutionalize people and to care for them in institutions. so, we are savers. we don't need to take the responsibility for this transfer of responsibility to counties and that potential funding cut across the board and contending and competing with other very important programs. also, i feel that a statewide bargaining, if done right, would be better for all concerned. and i think we can do it right. i hope that the counties who will be running the programs will be represented on the state authority as well as consumer activists and advocates who are those who benefit from the program primarily, thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 28, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 74, 'end': 98, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stephanie O'Connell: Hello, I'm Stephanie O'Connell. I'm wearing a union shirt, but I'm not an in-home support services worker or a union member. I'm the aunt of a disabled man, a young man who needs 24-hour care. I'm here on behalf of my family, my nephew, his in-home support worker, and her union to ask you to please protect county services from cuts and to move the collective bargaining to the statewide level, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carlos Rodriguez: Good afternoon, my name is Carlos Rodriguez, and my mom is my caregiver. If it were not for IHHS, my mom wouldn't be able to find another job and would not have been able to take care of me all the time. Therefore, I'm asking you to please oppose these budget cuts.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debbie Thompson: Thank you and good afternoon I'm Debbie Thompson Deputy Director adult programs and I'm going to talk a little bit about IHHS and the Fair Labor Standards Act implementation. Last year California implemented, beginning in February 2016, the changes to their Fair Labor Standards Act including overtime for providers, wait time, and travel time. And over the next few pages of your handout, I'll highlight a few of the things that we've seen during this time. The first chart that you see on slide 11 is that about 24% of providers each month are receiving overtime pay, they are receiving an average of about 61 hours of overtime each month. The second chart talks about travel time. That's for those recipients that serve more, sorry those providers that serve more than one recipient in a day and travel between them. There's about 7,000 average a month that are currently being paid for travel and being paid an average of about 15 hours each month in travel time. The next slide talks about wait time. Wait time is authorized within our medical accompaniment and accompaniment to alternative resources service for recipients. So what this slide is showing you is the increase in the time in those two areas from the same period, in July 15 to December 15, to July 16, December 16, that there was an increase of the time for medical accompaniment and accompaniment to alternative resources. We anticipate that there's probably going to continue to be some increase as this was primarily implemented through the reassessment process so as counties are seeing individuals this time is being adjusted. The next slide is looking at our exemptions. At the time we implemented overtime there were caps to the number of overtime hours providers could work each week. However we created some exemptions for situations where recipients really needed a particular provider to be able to work for them due to individual circumstances. And there were three different types of exemptions that allowed providers to work up to 360 hours a month, or 90 hours a week rather than the 66 hour cap. And you'll see that there was a total of about 2000, a little over 2000 providers that were receiving one of those exemptions as of the end of December. The next slide addresses violations that providers may have received for going over caps and allowable overtime hours. We're seeing about 1% a month of providers that are in that situation. In conjunction with counties and labor organizations, we've been doing extensive outreach and education to providers to ensure that they understand what the requirements are, and to try and continue to reduce the number of violations that occur. The next slide goes into a little more detail of the number of providers that have incurred a second violation each of the months through December and then a third violation. So that's the highlights of the data around what's been going on with the FLSA implementation. Happy to answer any questions you may have.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Charlie Bean: My name is Charlie Bean. I am a current IHS consumer. I serve on the IHS Advisory Committee of Humboldt County. I drove down here too this morning, to be here. I also am the current Executive Director for the California In Home Supportive Services Consumer Alliance, CICA. ... As changes have come to IHSS program one would believe these changes would be positive, both for the recipient and provider. But federal labor standard act over time rules, the positive for some hurt some consumers and their providers because of caps. And this is where the State created the exemptions, exemption one and exemption two. And I'm going to skip the details on those because I'm sure you guys understand those better than I do. But, from my experience with receiving telephone calls and Facebook posts, providers have applied and they go much without hearing what the status of their exemption to application is. It's almost as if they're not getting any response. And then when they do get a response that they're denied, there's nowhere for them to turn. There's no appeal process. It's my word and you have nothing to say about it. And that just doesn't seem fair. Where everything else in IHSS, if I get a notice of action, I can appeal it if I disagree with it. This is the one decision that's made regarding a care provider and his recipient that they cannot appeal. As a member of the state wide Stakeholders Committee for FLSA, over time and exemptions guidelines. How the exemptions would work felt very good at the time, but that was here, in a state that group meetings. But when it came out to the counties, it was almost like they didn't have time. Not because they didn't want to do it, it's because they didn't always have the money to do it. And I think that was, problems with earlier you guys brought up about money and stuff like that. That was mentioned earlier and to me it is sad to read the projected high number of exemption toos planned for yet not even close to meeting those initial needs. As a consumer it is believed there should be a time limit set for when a response is to be given to the provider after the date turn into an application. I mean my way I would say that the social worker should contact that provider within 10 days, I mean. An appeal system should be established for all decisions regarding the exemptions, mistakes can be made you know, you can say that this is the way you were turned down but you might not have seen something or overlooked something. In the very near future, I believe DSS should be directed to develop a strong outreach program, reaching out to recipients with extraordinary circumstances, rural or remote locations, language, or complex medical needs. And at last, it is hoped the recommendations forwarded by the IHS coalition are used and placed into effect immediately. Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tiffany Whiten: Mr. Chair, members, Tiffany Whiten with SEIU California. I'd like to associate my comments with my colleague's, previously before me. But did want to highlight a couple of things with regards to the exemptions. The current exemption policy is extremely flawed. Both the consumers and the providers were not appropriately notified of their criteria, and the process for the exemptions. There is currently no appeals process, as was previously mentioned for those that were denied by the county, and we feel as though that they're most definitely should be. The exemption criteria was so narrowly crafted, that it potentially puts the health and the safety of the consumers at risk. The exemptions should be for those providers who are parents, step parents, legal guardians of two or more children. It should cover spouses, domestic partners and adult children caring for their aging parents. It should be allowed for those that at risk of out of home placement. The exemption process should be enhanced and clarified. So that our vulnerable IHSS consumers, receive the level of care that they most desperately need and deserve. So on behalf of SEIU as well as AFSCME-UDW, we would ask that you support the IHSS Coalition proposal that is before you. Thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1144, 'end': 1148, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Marty Omoto: thank you, marty. sorry. omoto, california disability community action network and the california person centered advocacy partnership, and most of all a family member. first of all, i want to thank the subcommittee and the subcommittee staff in echoing what kirk child said about the agenda. it really gave a good view of the situation in ihss. so, that's always important when you have good information to start with. secondly, i want to acknowledge the department for it's good work in working with stakeholders. california should be really proud. we're one of the few states that actually enacted overtime for home care workers. so that's a good thing. but strongly, we want to urge the committee, subcommittee to approve the subcommittee staff recommendations regarding exemptions. we have to realize that people with disabilities who use ihss include people with developmental disabilities, as my sister, when she was alive. and so it's very important that the exemption process, be clarified and be expanded to include those people who are in crisis. thank you. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 16, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 259, 'end': 269, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sharon Stephenson: so my fellow care provider is very adamant. my name is sharon. i just want to say that i would like to support the proposal that the ihss coalition has put together for you. i know we haven't gotten there yet. thank you.
[{'start': 55, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Phyllis Hoffman: hi, mr. committee and everybody up there. i go with ... i'm from lake county. my name is phyllis, and i support the ihs coalition. please, let us do our job, we deserve it. our consumers need us. the more you cut us, the more they get hurt. thank you.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 17, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 89, 'end': 96, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marilyn Swan: hello, my name is marilyn, and i take care of my 29-year-old, 24/7 daughter, 24 hours around the clock. and i support the proposal by the ihss coalition. thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Iliana Ramos: iliana bradley ramos, department of finance. for the record, we just like to indicate that we're opposed to any action that would increase general fund costs that are not included in the governor's budget. currently, we budgeted for a bigger amount in the 2016 budget act that we revised that based on the existing data so it cannot be absorbed within the existing resources. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tiffany Whiten: Tiffany Whiten with the SEIU, California, I associate my comments with Christina. And I'd just thank the department, once again, for all of your support on this, and all of your help with this. And we'll look forward to working with you in the future.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 71, 'end': 80, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Henry Contreras: thank you chairman arambula and members of the committee, henry iliana contreras with the california foundation for independent living centers. on behalf of our board directors and the three independent living centers, we affected by this budget request, we're in strong support.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 58, 'end': 80, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Schultz: Good afternoon, Chris Schultz, Deputy Commissioner with the Department of Insurance. Thank you to the chair, the Committee and the staff for inviting the department to participate. And compliments to the Committee staff on the excellent background paper. Appreciate excellent staff work. In 2012, the insurance Commissioner Dave Jones gave department staff a pretty clear directive, which is make sure there is insurance ready as soon as autonomous vehicles are ready to launch. We've taken our mission of consumer protection for all Californians pretty seriously. We've coordinated closely with our friends at DMV. We've reached out to stakeholders. And the Commissioner himself took a ride in one of these autonomous cars to see what it was like. In October 2014, the Commissioner held a public hearing in San Jose on these issues, where we invited insurers and academics and actuaries to kind of present on these issues. I think there are two big pieces of information. First, it's the Legislature sets the minimum financial responsibility limits. The bare bones insurance requirements for every car on the road. And these limits have not been increased in quite a while. And for some types of vehicles, like big trucks or vehicles that transport passengers for hire, the Legislature set higher limits. The second is that Proposition 103 approved by the voters is the controlling law in setting auto insurance rates. For commercial auto insurance rates, they fall under Prop 103, but there's considerable flexibility in how those rates are established. About 12% of the auto insurance market is commercial auto at this point. For private passenger auto insurance, that's 88% of the auto insurance market, the rates are governed by the mandatory and optional rating factors in Prop 103 and the optional rating factors adopted by regulation. And the three mandatory rating factors are the driver's safety record, the insured's miles driven annually, and the insured's years of driving experience. Those are the mandatory rating factors. We've been asking all the stakeholders whether there's an immediate need to change either the law or the regulations in order to insure autonomous vehicles. And the initial answer is, we do not think there's a need. If a manufacturer offers a vehicle for sale tomorrow, insurance will be available. For manufacturers who are testing AVs right now, commercial auto insurance is available. Once we get to a certain level of autonomy, as discussed in the staff background paper, insurers may well file for new rates. They might weight some of the optional factors like safety and protective devices or vehicle type more heavily. They might propose a separate class plan. We have these, for example, antique autos or motorcycles, they have a separate class plan. In order to do that, insurers would use estimates or projections based on the data that's available. We have some recent experience on this, as it relates to the personal auto endorsements approved for Uber and Lyft drivers. Some insurers treated a TNC mile like it was a personal mile. And some insurers filed rates that treated it more like a taxi mile, because they're making a projection on what these miles are going to look like. They don't really know yet. These projections are allowed to remain in effect for a few years, possibly three years for a smaller data set or two years for a larger data set. Until credibility is established. That's several quarters of data moving in the same direction. Is kind of credible data for insurance rating purposes, so it takes a while for the experience out there on the street to translate into data to translate into changing insurance rates. We'd expect the insurers would track autonomous vehicles separately and that would allow them to establish this credible data. There are a few quick issues I wanted to mention. The first is the Uber and Lyft example, in our view here is informed by Uber, a company who's changed the insurance situation for drivers, and pedestrians, and third parties when they put the cars on our streets. We think that with AVs, we might end up seeing a situation like Uber and Lyft where the insurance available in each collision could be the drivers, or the manufacturers, or a combination of both. That's a little bit complicated. The first time we really have seen that was with Uber and Lyft. And the statute calls for report on TNC insurance that's due this summer. And we hope that study will illuminate whether that kind of hybrid model is working for consumers. The second is that Proposition 103 is working. A recent study from the Federal Insurance Office, that's in US Treasury, found that while half of California zip codes meet their definition for low income zip codes, these are high poverty, high minority zip codes. Only six of those zip codes had insurance rates that were above their affordability index, that was 2% of the family's income. So compared to the rest of the nation, auto insurance in California is relatively affordable. The insurance Commissioner would caution that any rush to kind of amend Prop 103 risks harming Californians who benefit from Prop 103's protections right now. In many states, insurers use credit scores, or zip codes, or location tracking, or big data to, frankly, to try and cherry pick the best risks. And we think that's a risk in this conversation. I just mentioned data, and we're watching autonomous vehicles closely, because California has prohibitions on using data for certain types of purposes. Specifically, we allow tracking miles, but not the location of those miles. So when we think about autonomous vehicles or track Caltrans road charge pilot project, these are things that we're going to spinning off a lot of data about miles, but also the location of these miles. And we want to make sure there's a firewall between whatever purpose that might be used for, for autonomous vehicles or for the road charge. But a firewall for the insurance purposes, where we dont allow the use of that data. And the final issue is the determination of fault. The department has, principally, at-fault regulations that require insurers to look at each collision and determine whether the driver's at fault, that impacts the driver's driving safety record and the driver's eligibility for the good driver discount. These are provisions of Prop 103. We're planning to take a look at these principally at fault regulations to see if any updates are necessary based on further development with autonomous vehicles. Thank you for inviting us to be here, and I'll be here for the remainder of the hearing if the Committee has any questions.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 324, 'end': 334, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brian Soublet: good afternoon, i'm brian jonah soublet, i'm the deputy director and chief counsel for the department of motor vehicles, and been working on autonomous vehicle regulations for the past four plus years. and i'd like to thank the committee for inviting the department to participate in the hearing this afternoon. i think one of the important things to talk about first is, what is an autonomous vehicle? and basically, under sb-1298, which was enacted in the 2012 legislative session. it created vehicle code section 38750, and that's the section that required the department of motor vehicles to come up with regulations for both the testing and eventual deployment of autonomous vehicles on public streets. and it defines an autonomous vehicle as a vehicle that has technology that makes it capable of operating without the actual physical control or monitoring of a human driver. so there are many vehicles on the street now that have driver assistance systems such as lane key, emergency pre-break, parking assist. those things under the definition in the statute aren't autonomous vehicles, and so there is a distinction. the nation highway traffic safety administration has adopted what are the levels of autonomy that were set forth by the society of automotive engineers. and so those levels go from zero to five. the vehicles that we see on the road now are level two or below. so when we talk about autonomous vehicles, we're talking about vehicles that start at level three. which is a vehicle that can operate for some time in an autonomous mode, but then require the driver as a, so to speak, a back up in case there is a need. then you have a level four vehicle which doesn't require on the driver, but only can operate in specific domains. and a level five vehicle which can operate basically all the time without a driver monitoring it. so with that task in vehicle code section 38750, back in 2013, we started working on regulations. one of the first things that we did was form a statewide steering committee, that included our sister agencies, the department of insurance, the office of traffic safety, the highway patrol, the national highway traffic safety administration. and we started mapping out a course for, at first, testing regulations. with that process we availed ourselves of a technique under the administrative procedures act which allowed us to hold workshops on drafts of the regulations. that's been a valuable tool for us. to date, we've held six workshops on both the testing, and what we would call our deployment regulations. our testing regulations went into effect in september of 2014, and as of this morning, there are 26 companies that hold permits with the department to test vehicles on our streets. there are approximately 180 authorized vehicles that have autonomous technology that are testing right now. the law requires that the drivers of the vehicle be employees of the manufacturer. and so we added in our regulations a requirement that those drivers meet the definition of what is a good driver. so there's no violations in their record for the last three years, no duis. we also require that the drivers get enrolled in the dmv's pull notice program. and that's a program where employers have to enroll their drivers so that they receive notifications when drivers have some form of a traffic violation. those regulations have been in effect for two years. they seem to be working. we also require reports of accidents that the vehicles have been involved in. in the past two years, there have only been 25 reported accidents. they are all available on the dmv's website. the majority of those accidents that we've seen so far, are the result of someone actually crashing into the autonomous vehicle. they have a tendency to drive very conservatively. and so people don't know how to react to them. accident reports are required to be submitted to the department within 10 days of their occurrence. and that's when we go ahead and post them on our website. so now we're at the phase where these have been in effect for two years. we're very shortly, pretty soon, going to roll out what we're calling our deployment regulations. and those will include testing for vehicles that do not necessarily require a driver in the seat of the vehicle. the current testing regime requires that there be an employee of the manufacturer in the seat of the vehicle. we're about to launch on regulations that would have requirements that would allow vehicles that don't necessarily have a person sitting inside the vehicle. we anticipate that with that rule making proceeding, we would probably have those regulations ready and in effect by the end of this year. so it is moving rapidly, and those regulations would allow the operation of basically all levels of autonomous vehicles. the issue becomes whether the vehicles are actually available. we don't have an estimate on that. i think the manufacturers would be better suited to speak on that issue. but in the very near future, we'll have our regulations ready to go. so, with that, i invite any questions.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Curt Augustine: thank you mr. chair and members, i am curt i'm the director of policy for the alliance of automobile manufacturers, and the committee asked me today to put on my crystal ball a little bit to tell you essentially what the status of autonomous vehicles are, and what is literally coming down the road in the foreseeable future. and what a lot of people initially ask is, why do we even have them? what's the need? and our response has been several reasons. safety, we believe that they will dramatically increase the safety on america's roads. mobility, questions there would open up automobile usage to all sorts of communities who could not access them now or that are visually impaired, physically disabled, the elderly. customer demand is asking for it, and the changing needs of our society with things like ride sharing, are driving this requirement. so, what avs are on the road and are being tested? and it's really a transition and mr. soublet touched on that a little bit. there are vehicles on the road today with the level 1 technologies and they've been around for many years. things like cruise control has been offered since the 60's. electronic stability control, since the 1990s, and the various lane keeping and lane departure warning systems, began appearing in vehicles in the 2000s. and electronic stability control is now standard on all model year cars made after 2012. so with level two, again, some of those partial driving features are available. perhaps the best example is the combination of adaptive cruise control, which automatically adjusts the vehicle's speed as it approaches an oncoming car, or excuse me, a car that it's coming up onto, and to maintain a safe distance. and the lane keeping or lane departure warning systems. and another example is the collision avoidance. many cars may not have the adaptive cruise control, but if they are coming too close to a car, especially in a rush hour situation, the car will brake on its own to avoid that rear-end collision. now the level threes and five vehicles are being tested extensively not only here in california, but throughout the country. some of the specific examples of what's going on, general motors has 50 vehicles deployed in three states. ford is testing in multiple states and also has a new partnership with the company argo, with looking at an eye to the ride sharing capabilities using this technology. bmw and audi again is doing extensive tests in multiple states. fiat chrysler has just entered into a new program with waymo, which was formally google. they are testing a pacifica minivan in three different states. daimler, which is mercedes, they have their e class vehicles, which are being tested in addition, they own daimler trucks, and they are doing extensive work in larger trucks as well. and they've also set up some partnering programs with uber. volvo has began extensive testing in gothenburg, sweden, their hometown, in september of last year, and in 2017 will be testing those vehicles in london, those are fully autonomous vehicles. in gothenburg up to 50 vehicles will be on the street by the time the program is over. the waymo fleet has driven, according to media reports, almost 2 million miles and are now testing avs with no steering wheels or pedals. in september of last year, uber started a program in pittsburgh where uber is offering fully autonomous vehicles to passengers. but there has to be a technician behind the wheel of that program. so, that's the state of the condition now. what's coming and when? well, there's broad consensus that these level 3 and 5 avs will be commercially available to some buyers within five years. the announced plans of some of our companies include that tesla has announced fully autonomous vehicles in the next couple years, volkswagen by 2019, toyota by 2020. ford has announced plans to quote, have a high volume, fully autonomous level four capable vehicle in commercial operation in 2011. and as i mentioned, they recently invested $1 billion in a new ride-sharing service. volvo and bmw have announced that they will have vehicles in 2021. as an example of some of the thinking that's going on, some of you may have seen the mercedes f015 vehicle that is essentially a living room on wheels. their whole idea is it's a commute vehicle to wherever you want to go and you're sitting in swivel chairs. its obviously a car that's not in production, but its an example of what could be happening in this industry. gm has announced that it plans to make its first autonomous vehicle, an electric vehicle, like the chevy volt. and to quote, nearly everyone will be able to experience it through lyft, end quote. as of the end of last year, 33 companies around the world are working on some aspect of av's. and we have 28 licensed, or excuse me, 26 that we heard from the dmv, so a great deal of that is occurring here, as well as in other states around the country. so what are the current a, b sales and travel projections? well experts agree that it will likely be years before the level 4 and 5 avs make up a substantial portion of our fleet. the consensus of all the research that we've seen that level fours and fives will not be ubiquitous on our roadways until the 2030s. and some examples, estimates obviously, but in the 20s, perhaps 2 to 5% of sales could be avs. in 2030s, maybe 20% to 40%, which would then translate to 10% to 20% of the fleet. and then through the 50s, 80% to 100% of vehicles, and that would still only be 40% to 60% of the fleet. it's important to recognize that the longevity of vehicles and the condition that they are made, vehicles stay on the road. so drivers are going to have to learn how to interact with ab vehicles, and ab vehicles are going to have to learn how to interact with drivers. they're going to be on the road together for a very long time. in fact, the iihs estimates that even if avs were mandated today, it would take at least 25 years before 95% of the vehicles are avs. so this is a very long process that we're looking for. actually to mention, it wasn't in my remarks, but it was senator newman asked about trucks. i do not represent them, but i'm familiar that the ab technology, there is a project both in urban areas and on our highways. but there's serious consideration on us highway 83, in the middle part of our country running from canada to mexico, they're looking at devoted truck lanes solely for av and commercial use. so what do we think will influence av sales? well, the public views avs with both great interest and some skepticism. when we talk to consumers, three themes really jump out. first, cost is critical, these vehicles will cost more. they're extensive in their technology breakthroughs, and that's going to cost more. there's also uncertainty among the driving public about av performance, and that really is much of the skepticism. so we believe that we will really only be overcome until avs are able to demonstrate that they perform reliably and safety, and those potential purchasers will be able see that. and then finally, many drivers tell us that they would prefer to operate a vehicle both in the autonomous mode, but have the ability to be taken over by a human driver. manufacturers understand that desire, and are building their plans accordingly. so, we do see several challenges to a successful implementation. one is the transition that i mentioned. avs and traditional cars are going to be on the road together. right now, the average fleet age of our cars is 11 and a half years. i mean, that's going to take many, many years to cycle that through. there are the laws, both nationally and in each state, that are going to provide challenges to that, and all the testing that goes along with that. i've mentioned cost is one, but there are also some other issues. we've had some questions about some of the accidents and potential failures. those have to be addressed, and those will be challenges. there are also ethics issues regarding senator portantino's question about school zones, or a dog runs in front a car, what does the car do? does it hit the car or hit the dog? those type of questions need to be answered. liability, security for the vehicles, and the data privacy, much along the questions that senator gains answered. auto makers are prepared to work with legislators, regulators, insurers, and other stakeholders to address these challenges. we don't have all the answers at this time. we believe there is time to do this, and forums like this are critical to begin that process. and so, this last set of remarks i'll make are both not only for insurance issues, but also for the actual implementation of the vehicles themselves. and the auto alliance that i represent, which i was remiss, i should have said, i represent 12 of the automakers, which is approximately 70% of the vehicles sold in the united states. so our policy is that we urge policymakers to proceed carefully in creating new and broad legal frameworks. the alliance cautions states against passing premature laws which would serve to inhibit vehicle innovation, and delay potential safety benefits. we encourage states to heed the nhtsa's advice about appropriate state action as expressed in the recently published document that mr. soublet mentioned. and this will thus avoid regulating vehicle safety performance design and certification. if states get involved in that we will have a patchwork of legislation that will be inoperable throughout our country. the alliance agrees with the united states department of transportation's assessment of the roles of federal and state authorities, with respect to regulating motor vehicles. as detailed in their document, the oversight of safety design, performance, and certification is best left to one unified federal standard. while traditional registration, licensing, law enforcement, and insurance issues are best left to the states. so in closing, the state chooses to take a legislative or regulatory action with respect to avs. we recommend that such action be premised on removing impediments to safe testing or deployment of such vehicles. and we recommend that states concentrate on revisiting existing laws and regulations to accommodate the safe use of autonomous vehicles. and again, thank you for the opportunity.
[{'start': 943, 'end': 950, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6116, 'end': 6122, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8018, 'end': 8028, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 9293, 'end': 9300, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cliff Costa: mr. chair and senators, cliff brian costa on behalf of the california new car dealers association. i want to thank the committee for including us in today's hearing. california's new car dealers are retailers. and we play a unique role when it comes to autonomous vehicles, and when they eventually become available to be sold at our dealerships dealers provide a variety of different roles for consumers, but one most important role is we help answer consumers' questions. whether that's from actually test driving the vehicles, to how much is monthly payments are going to be, to what the repair costs are going to be, or potentially what type of auto insurance they're supposed to have. currently when a consumer comes to a car dealership, they want to visually inspect the vehicle, you know kind of kick the tires, smell the new car smell, and then get a test drive. when customers are test driving those vehicles, the dealer asks for a copy of their driver's license. now, during the test drive, insurance coverage covers a potential accident depending on who is operating the vehicle. so if it is a dealership employee who was operating the vehicle during that portion of the test drive, it is the dealer's comprehensive insurance coverage that would cover that potential accident. if it is the individual consumer who is test driving the vehicle, then that individual consumer's auto insurance then covers that accident. now, this does happen, it's rare, but it does happen. now, when autonomous vehicles arrive at dealerships, we anticipate consumers will want to come in and do the same thing. they'll want to kick the tires, smell the new car smell, and then want to probably get into a test drive. what we believe is that there will not be any sort of change in insurance, as it relates to these test drives. dealers will continue to have comprehensive coverage that will cover the property, and vehicles in their inventory, as well as their employees. but we believe, at least in the short term, that consumers will have to also have their own auto insurance. now, when consumers purchase or lease these vehicles and financing is needed, which the vast majority of people who are leaving a new car dealer lot today need some level of financing, the finance company, whoever is providing credit to that individual vehicle, or that individual vehicle owner, wants to ensure that they have some sort of certainty, that when that vehicle is down driven on the road and is involved in an accident, they can then collect on the amount that they financed to the individual. auto insurance plays a significant role in that currently. when autonomous vehicles do come, i do not believe there will be that level of certainty to the finance companies, unless there is some sort of form of insurance. now, whether that insurance is some sort of homeowner's insurance or a separate level of insurance than what we see today is unknown, and that's part of the reason why we're having these hearings. but from our position, we believe the finance companies, the people we work with to help consumers be able to afford these vehicles, will need some level of certainty, which will then mean auto insurance. of course the potential reduction in deaths and serious injuries from vehicle accidents is important, is definitely something we need to be pushing for. but as mr. augustine just said, the full potential will not be here for decades. we will continue to have these situations where we have human drivers on the road. it is our belief that regardless of vehicles being fully autonomous or not, there will still be some sort of need for insurance, like you presently have in your home for theft, fire, flood, and other potential damage. this may eventually, like i said, look like a home insurance policy. but that's something for us to continue to discuss today. overall in the short term, the california new car dealers association believe that the need for auto insurance will continue to be needed when autonomous vehicles reach california's roads. we appreciate being part of today's committee hearing; being included in the stakeholders as we play a pivotal role in helping get these vehicles on the road. thank you.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 3367, 'end': 3376, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ryan Gammelgard: My name is Ryan Gammelgard, counsel for State Farm, and I'll be talking about some background issues in terms of State Farm's involvement in autonomous vehicle technology. Give some current key issues from an insurance industry perspective and then also provide this Committee a broad overview of the current legislative regulatory landscape across the country, at the federal level, the state level. And also a little bit about international issues that are going on. And then Rex will be able to talk more about California specific issues. We thought it was important to provide that background to give this Committee a better context of some big picture issues that are going on. The mission of State Farm is to help people manage the risks of every day life and recover from the unexpected. State Farm and its affiliates are the largest providers of auto, home, and life insurance in the United States. It's 18 thousand agents and more than 65 thousand employees serve more than 83 million policies and accounts, with over 45 million auto polices, over 4 million here in California. Automated and connected vehicle technologies have the potential to significantly impact the manner in which insurance serves to protect individuals, families, and businesses from financial loss. In discussing the deployment and adoption of these technologies, we believe that property and casualty insurance industry Is a critical stakeholder in a conversation to consider a number of potential issues. Such as coverage and liability matters and the impact of automated technology to the general public. So as the nation's largest automobile and home insurer and an innovator in the field of automation and transportation. State Farm very much appreciates the opportunity to provide testimony to this insurance Committee on autonomous vehicles and auto insurance in California. In order to advance our understanding of the role of automation and transportation, State Farm has participated in a number of research opportunities around the country. State firm is a founding partner of the University of Michigan's mobility transformation center. Is a key partner in Stanford universities,center for automotive research. And most recently was appointed to the US Department of transportations,advisory Committee on automation and transportation that only ensured to be appointed to that advisory group. State Farm is also an active participant, at the federal and state level, in reviewing and commenting on proposed automated vehicle legislation, regulation, and guidance. State Farm also recently worked with Bloomburg Government to conduct research on the publics perception of automated vehicles. The timing for movement to the SAE level 4 and 5 environments is of obvious interest to the insurance industry. With many of the major manufacturers publicly promising the availability of level four technology by 2018, and a few manufacturers working toward level five by 2020. Historical experiences with other technological advancements such as airbags, automatic transmissions and navigation systems suggest that the time from availability to market saturation can be anywhere from 25 to 50 years. What sets this issue apart from others is the unusual collaboration that has occurred between competitors as well as the cross functional partnerships. Manufacturers are working together, seeking input from educators and others, and preparing for alternative adoptions the technology. For example a ride sharing fleet vs private ownership. One of the key issues for the insurance industry as it relates to automotive vehicles is data access. Data access is essential to developing proper pricing and underwriting of vehicles, critical for liability determinations. And, from the general public's perspective, important in determining the safety and reliability of the technology. In looking at data access, an existing corollary is what exists in current vehicles with their event data recorders. The ability to access data from EDRs is essential in helping insurers make liability determinations. Also of importance when discussing data, and looking to EDR scenarios for context, is that access to data does not default infringe on the proprietary nature of the data. In the contexts of underwriting in liability situations, the key is access to data, to certain data, that is relevant to those issues as opposed to wholesale collection of all data associated with the vehicle. For SAE level zero through three, there will likely be a continued reliance on the existing auto insurance products in existing liability systems. The question of the value of existing insurance products occurs in the SC level four to five range, when it is probable that the operating system is at fault. There will likely be considerable issues during the transition phase as instance occur between vehicles across the spectrum of all those levels. Due to costs associated with automated vehicles, there will possibly be increased repair and replacement costs, which may lead to reevaluating how insurers determine pricing associated with physical damage coverage. In addition, as new vehicles increasingly go into the SC levels four through five range. There will potentially be a reevaluation of coverage exclusions related to audio, visual, and electronic equipment as no policy on the market was drafted to cover those risks. Cybersecurity issues are also at play when surveying the liability landscape. There is growing concern about the ability for someone to hack in to automated vehicle operating systems, which could in term lead to auto accidents. To further complicate matters there are increasing risk associated with hacking by foreign countries. In such situations, we'll increase the complexity of under riding and adjusting cyber insurance products. Within this space however, there may be opportunities for new product developments. The move toward autonomous vehicles will have other impacts on the insurance industry, ranging from the need for a different skill set for its employees, new risk management considerations, and the development of new products and coverages. The changing liability landscape, where methods such as victim recovery funds, and no fault insurance models. Will also increasingly gain interest in public policy debates, and also could have a significant interest on the insurance industry. In the Fall of 2016 the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration or NHTSA. Issued its federal automated vehicle policy. It is important to note that the policy is guidance and not law. It was purposely crafted as such in order to provide the agency the flexibility to address rapidly changing technology without being burdened by the normal procedural issues associated with rule making. Also of note is that when NHTSA crafted the policy, it worked directly with a number of manufacturers and suppliers, but did not include the insurance industry in its initial discussion of the guidance. In its vehicle performance guidance section, NHTSA outlines 15 areas that any developer of an autonomous vehicle needs to address. These factors include data recording, sharing, privacy, system safety, cyber security, ethical considerations Minimal risk conditions and validation methods among others. For purposes of data recording, NIST states, manufacturers and other entities, should have a document process for testing, validation and collection of event, incident and crashed data for the purposes of recording the currencies and malfunction, degradations or failures in a way that can be used to establish the cause of any such issues. This data should be maintained and be available for retrieval by the entity developing the highly automated vehicle and also NHTSA. Of note is that NHTSA does not extend the ability to retrieve the data to any other agency at the federal or state level. In addition, the Department of Transportation recommends that manufacturers and other entities collect data associated with events involving fatalities, and damages to the extent that the vehicle can no longer be driven under its own power in a customary manner. It does not recommend the collection or retention of data associated with incidents outside of those two scenarios. For model state policy NITSA urges the states to focus on sufficient consistency of laws and policies with the goal of avoiding a patch work of inconsistent state laws. NITSA expects the states however to continue to retain control over the regulation of auto insurance liability issue. However, NITSA recommends creating a Commission on liability and insurance issues in order to make recommendations to the states. In commenting on NITSA's policy, the insurance industry has focused on the importance of data access, safety assurances, cybersecurity issues, and the continued need to explore insurance and liability issues. The data access issue in particular has been a focal point of insurance industry concern, as such information is vital to determining whether the technology is safe. How to underwrite and rate insurance products, and how to determine liability. These same concerns also apply at the state level as more states such as California start to incorporate NITSA's policy into their state laws. In addition to the Federal Automated Vehicle Policy, NITSA has also issued cyber security best practices in a proposed rule mandating vehicle to vehicle technology, or connected cars. All these actions implicate insurance whether it relates to the need for new products or determining liability issues. From A states perspective, since 2012 almost every state has considered or is considering an acting automated vehicle legislation. Initially as in California, such legislation focused on testing. Then last year starting in Michigan, there have been a number of comprehensive bills attempting to open the roads to all forms of automated vehicle use. A particular concern with these bills has been an increasing tendency to carve out liability exemptions for manufacturers in certain situations where a modification is made to the vehicle's operating system resulting in a safety-related defect. These type of exemptions, like seen in the Michigan bill, do not define what a modification is nor pay proper attention to the current work being done on cyber security issues at the NITSA or Society of Automotive Engineers' levels. It's also important to note how international law is addressing automatic vehicles. Germany is considering laws limiting recovery and accidents but also making data readily accessible to interested parties. The United Kingdom is considering a single-insurer model where an insurer covers both the driver's use of the vehicle and automated vehicle technology. An examination of all these developments show that the automated vehicle public policy issues are rapidly developing and increasingly complex. In conclusion, State Farm appreciates the opportunity to provide testimony on autonomous vehicles and insurance in California. The insurance industry's input on these issues is critical. And we look forward to continuing to be a part of the discussion and solution for protecting insurance consumers in the autonomous space. Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 478, 'end': 481, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rex Frazier: mr. chair and members, thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today. i'm obviously fighting a cold, so i'm sorry about that. my name's rex cliff frazier. i'm the president of the personal insurance federation of california. we represent seven of the nation's largest property casualty insurance companies that collectively write over half of the insurance premium on the personalized basis in california. and the membership has a long history of advocating for legal changes that improve safety on our roads and save lives. we strongly believe that autonomous vehicles have the potential to further both of these objectives but there are also many issues to consider. while mr. gammelgard from state farm outlined the national perspective. i'd like to focus on california and offer three questions for the committee to consider as we move forward with this conversation. first, how can the insurance industry recognize and encourage the safety benefits which autonomous vehicles have the potential to deliver for californians? second, what type of autonomous vehicle generated data is appropriate for insurers to access? and then lastly, what is an appropriate process for policy makers, the public and the industry to consider following today's meeting. so the first question, how can the insurance industry recognize and encourage the safety benefits which autonomous vehicles may provide. one of the biggest issues facing the insurance industry when it comes to autonomous vehicles is how do we properly insure them under our current legal framework california's laws are much more complicated than other states with much less flexibility and room for innovation. the current rules were conceived in a very different world 25 years ago and as noted by the department of insurance testimony they require auto insurance to use three driver centric factors. and to give them more rate impact than the other 16 optional factors which the insurance commissioners over time have permitted. the driver centric factors that are mandatory ,a driver safety record at the dmv, the number of miles driven annually, and the years of driving experience. and as one can immediately see, the most heavily weighted characteristics make no mention of the type of vehicle driven or, its safety features. for that, there are a few other rating factors, which the commissioner has permitted carriers to use over time. the type of vehicle, for instance, is a rating factor, vehicle performance capabilities is another rating factor, and vehicle characteristics, which the rules indicate include safety and protective devices. while these latter rating factors could pick up the enhanced capabilities of autonomous vehicles. the current rules prohibit these vehicle factors from having a higher impact than the three mandatory driver-centric factors, which i mentioned earlier. so certainly a conversation has started within the insurance industry about how to recognize and encourage the safety benefits of autonomous vehicles when the current rules focus on the driver and not vehicle capabilities. so, imagine at level four or five of autonomy, the vehicles may not even have a steering wheel or pedals, but auto insurance rates will be based on factors such as the drivers dmv record, or their years of driving experience. emphasizing these rating factors makes little sense when an autonomous vehicle is transporting a passenger who is reading or doing some other activity and not even looking at the road. at this point we certainly don't have the answers about how to proceed. but we know that at some point the current insurance rules will prevent insurers from providing the full amount of discounts which are justifiable for advanced vehicle technology. it's a public policy question for this body as to whether that state of affairs will be acceptable. but it's important to at least question whether insurers should be permitted at some point in the future to fully recognize and encourage in their auto insurance rates, the safety benefits which autonomous vehicles almost certainly will provide. the second question we're considering is what type of autonomous vehicle generated data is appropriate for insurers to access. the data created through the operation of self driving cars continues to be one of the most widely debated topics in this discussion. and the rapidly changing and innovative advancements that occur in this field only further complicate the issue. we believe access to the data is a critical component for all stakeholders, including car owners, manufacturers, law enforcement, and insurers. new rules should provide clear guidelines on the need for third parties to have reasonable access to autonomous vehicle data for legitimate purposes. while simultaneously respecting the privacy expectations of car owners and the economic secrets of manufacturers and component makers. for instance, at level three of autonomous operation, where a driver will control the vehicle part but not all of the time, we will certainly see crashes where the driver is not even looking at the road. and may not even understand how the crash occurred. in such claim situations, obtaining access to the vehicle data will be critical so that insurers can assess their driver liability, and fulfill their promises to your constituents. as the technology of self-driving cars progress. we ask that laws and regulations remain flexible enough to ensure that insurers can properly and responsibly undertake their operations. the final question we ask policy makers to consider is what is an appropriate process for policy makers, the public and industry to consider these questions following today's hearing? the pip membership is certainly committed to new and innovative technologies. even though for them they present significant business challenges and uncertainties for the future. but despite these challenges, the potential public safety benefits of autonomous vehicles simply cannot be ignored. as these issues develop and take shape we would welcome further opportunities to comment and participate in the dialogue. and we encourage this committee to continue its investigations. without a continuing discussion which examines the issues on a systematic basis, we certainly will end up addressing issues on an ad hoc basis. much as we're currently struggling to address the many complicated issues with drone use on a bill by bill basis. in closing, autonomous vehicles can and should be a promising and life saving technology. however they also pose considerable and unique challenges. i want to commend the chairman in this committee for taking a leadership role on this issue. by bringing impacted parties together to work through these complex issues surrounding autonomous vehicles, thank you.
[{'start': 148, 'end': 165, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 691, 'end': 701, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Harvey Rosenfield: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Members of the Committee. My name is Harvey Rosenfield, I'm the Author of Proposition 103, the Founder of Consumer Watchdog. When you read the breathless headlines, excuse me, the breathless headlines surrounding driverless vehicles, you kind of get the sense that some of the companies that are proponents of driverless vehicles have got the pedal to the metal. They want to blow past all the rules and get to where they're going, and get these things out there as if it had to happen tomorrow. And then when you kind of look at the insurance companies and they're sort of like hanging on a little bit by their fingernails, they're hitchhiking on this fast track. They have their own journey to follow, but they're happy to be along for the ride. I think what's really needed here and I've kind of brought something that would illustrate it is this, a caution cone. And I hope by the way, that I apologize if you didn't all get copies of my testimony. But as you'll see on the front of it, testimony will put the caution cone there too. So there are two reasons, I think myths that we need to address that would support the idea of slowing down. The first myth is that contrary to, is that autonomous vehicles are right around the corner. There is no such self-driving car at this time. There is no intelligent highway which most observers say is what we'll need in order to build out the infrastructure of vehicle to vehicle, vehicle to satellite communications that would be like air traffic control. And in fact, as some of the witnesses explained a few minutes ago, we are probably 25 years away from a moment when there are many driverless vehicles on the road. For the foreseeable future, for the next decades, there will be a hybrid highway composed of traditional vehicles with some portion of which will have some automation and then some of these brand new, probably very expensive high end vehicles that are capable of driving themselves. So and then finally, I think the other thing is one thing that is unstated here, but nobody and nobody really talks about it is, are we sure that every American is going to want to give up, surrender the ability to drive their own car? I spent a lot of time looking at the Society of Automotive Engineer's discussion of the different levels of automation. If you look closely at this thing, even level five which is considered to be the ultimate autonomous, fully driverless vehicle. This level five says that there could be a situation where the driver may request control of the vehicle. That presumes at least these people are presuming that these vehicles will be built with some kind of functionality the help that allows the driver to control the vehicle. Next thing, the other myth that I wanted to talk about is the suggestion that machines are infallible and that the safety that we can just kind of assume without any argument that these things will be perfectly safe, so that we won't even need insurance anymore, for example. Now take a look at a couple of the recent devastating airplane accidents that have occurred, exactly because of too much reliance on automation and these have been major crashes that caused many fatalities. It's obvious that machines are not infallible. Now let's look at the risks in the short term that are going to that consumers and insurance companies and manufacturers will confront in some of them have been mentioned, hacking. Both at the criminal level and potentially even at the level as the FBI has suggested a terrorist attempts to take over large numbers of vehicles. Software, this is something that none of us have really contended with and the companies, the software companies such as Google that are at the lead in programming these vehicles are going to be their engineers are going to be programming into these computers a substitute for the moral values and practical judgement of motorists and we don't know what rules they're going to use. But they're going to have to make a premeditated decision that when a car is faced with an unavoidable collision, it mean they're going to hit pedestrians or people in other cars or perhaps even the mom pushing the baby in the stroller on the sidewalk. That is a huge risk that nobody has really thought through and we don't know what the companies are doing when they're programming their computers this way. So what do these two myths or the explosion of these two myths mean for what I would call the personal responsibility system, which is what the Committee is discussing today? And that system is composed of a set of tort and insurance laws that have been around in the case of the civil justice system for hundreds of years that protect consumers against dangerous products, that protect consumers for the last 28 years against unfair and excessive insurance premiums and unfair underwriting practices. What the personal responsibility system that we have in California tells us is that people are going to be still at fault. Motorists are going to be still responsible for the actions that they take with respect to their vehicles. Let's start briefly with the Civil Justice System, I won't take that too much time, but the Civil Justice System is the technique is the set of tools that our nation uses to expose wrong doing. Determine responsibility. Make the wrongdoer pay for an accident. Pay to compensate for the harm done to victims and to force people to behave better, including manufacturers that may or may not produce a safe vehicle. And in the case of autonomous vehicles, because of manufacturers will bare some responsibility, they will be held accountable under the rules of strict liability. The question is will the manufacturers not contest liability? Nothing we've heard, nothing anybody has said, except with the CAVEAT of a Remarks by Volvo. Nobody has signed on the dotted line that if you buy one of our self-driving vehicles, we will cover you completely. For all of the harm that happens regardless of whether you, the motorist had something to do with it as opposed to us, the vehicle manufacturer. And until that happens and I would submit to you that it would never happen, that manufacturers will never agree to fully accept all responsibility without being able to contest it or blame the motorist or the owner that we have a personal responsibility system based on liability protections. As for Proposition 103, so long as consumers face liability, face the possibility that they're going to be blamed in some way for what their vehicle did whether it's a robot car or not. Consumers in California are still going to need Proposition 103 protections. Now I know the insurance industry hates Proposition 103 and they spent a fortune in 1988 trying to defeat it and they're constantly fighting it in the courts, and they've been up here a few times asking members of the Legislature to bail them out of something that voters passed. But the fact is that even in a driverless environment as long as motorists are responsible for anything Including, by the way, just having their vehicle in their driveway and making sure that they didn't ding one of those sensors. because if they ding a sensor, the results could be catastrophic. It's clear that motorists will have at least that responsibility to maintain their self-driving vehicle. As long as they have that responsibility and they face blame if they don't exercise that responsibility, they're going to need that system that protects them, that bases their premiums primarily upon factors within their own control such as what they do with their car? How they operate their car? How many miles they drive every year? How much experience they've had driving? Senator Newman, you raised a question about ZIP code, I believe. There's no problem with getting access to data about under Prop 103, about ZIP codes. That data is available, in fact, the Department of Insurance publishes quite a bit of data. But what Proposition 103 does not allow, what the voters got rid of when they passed Proposition 103 is the notoriously, the infamous practice of basing people's premiums primarily upon the ZIP code in which they lived rather than their driving record, because that was a form of pernicious redlining that discriminated against people that the insurance companies didn't want to sell to. So the system that the voters substituted is much fairer than a system that would be based on the location of your vehicle, the voters got rid of that system. You could still factor in the frequency and severity and there are ways that Proposition 103 through the optional factors permit some consideration of territory. But as the principal factor, it's been banned. So the second issue will be, well, how much will these cars cost? Nobody knows. Will they be more expensive to repair? Most people think yes. In those situations, will the insurance companies attempt to come in and say, we need to drastically raise our premiums? Because we're now insuring all of those greater risks. The answer is yes, they will come in and do that. But luckily here in California, a system that has already saved motorists $100 billion since it was passed in 1988. Makes sure that when they come in and request those rates, they are not approved, unless the insurance companies open their books and justify them. That's the critical savings of Proposition 103. That is what is responsible for the Consumer Federation of America's determination that California was the only state in the nation where the average auto insurance premium went down between the passage of Prop 103 in 1988 and 2010. Rates, average premiums were lower in California in 2010 than they were in 1988. And it's the Proposition 103 system that protects voters and consumers and motors and will even under the product liability rules, protect manufacturers and small businesses and purchasers to make sure that rates are fair. I want to conclude by saying, we've heard a little bit from the representative of the insurance lobby here in Sacramento about how we need to change Proposition 103 and there was a reference earlier to no fault insurance. The both of us here and the organizations that we represent over the last 30 years have really contended with the arguments brought by wrong doers, and the insurance industry that we have to restrict people's rights whether there is the right to go to court or the rights under Proposition 103. The voters rejected no fault at the ballot box twice. Once in 1988, once in 1996. The discussion here by the insurance industry with all due respect to them, really should be about loss prevention. The insurance companies are a cost plus system of insurance. They like to pass through the claims costs plus a little markup for their profit and overhead. So they don't have a huge incentive to crack down on accidents, to limit claims, because that reduces their revenue. Yet, now really is a perfect moment. I started to hear the gentleman from State Farm step up to this moment. Now this the moment for the insurance industry to focus its amazing resources and database on accidents to impress manufacturers to build safer autonomous technologies, and to advocate for stronger federal regulation of auto safety. Because you may not all realize this, but the NHTSA or the National Highway Transportation Safety Administration has recently done an about-face and now they are saying that they're going to let the auto industry regulate themselves. And in an era where the industry is evolving so rapidly and there are so many risks that are brand new to driverless vehicles, that is going in the wrong direction and the insurance industry should step up and insist that NHTSA do its job. Thank you.
[{'start': 62, 'end': 79, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 7737, 'end': 7743, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Elise Sanguinetti: good afternoon, mr. chair and committee members. my name is elise rex sanguinetti, i want to thank you for allowing me an opportunity to speak to you today and to talk to you about any, i definitely want to answer any questions you have regarding liability, the tort system and it's impact on the growth of autonomous vehicles. my role as the immediate past president of the consumers attorneys of california has put me in a position where i have been able to give recommendations and monitor the bills that have gone through regarding autonomous vehicles, and that have been considered in california. in addition to being the immediate past president of the consumer's attorneys of california, i'm also the vice president of the american association for justice which is our trial bar nationally. we are very involved nationally at monitoring this nationwide. so i'm going to talk to you a little bit about what's happening in other states, so that you have some understanding of what bills have been passed and most specifically about insurance and what discussions have occurred regarding insurance. right now, there are 56 bills that have been filed in 20 states. testing is going on as you probably know in many states, and in at least two states its been monitored and sent by the governor's office. but in every state where there has been a law regulating autonomous vehicles, there has been at least $5 million in coverage that has been required, except for in the state of florida. in michigan, there was a requirement of 10 million, except for auto manufacturers, which already automatically have a requirement of 25 million. so those are non auto manufacturer companies that are getting involved in autonomous vehicles. i think this is important because you've heard a lot of discussion today about, where is liability going to lie when we see the shift from the different levels of autonomous vehicles? and it's pretty clear that up until we get to the part of the level three, that it falls within the driver. i do think that this gives this committee, and the state of california, an opportunity for us. if the driver is going to be responsible as we go through the different levels of autonomous vehicles, that we do need to look at our minimal insurance requirements here in california that have been in place since 1967. because we were seeing change in autonomous vehicles, and as has been discussed by mr. rosenfeild and others, the cost related to replacing and the damage that can occur to autonomous vehicles is a lot higher than what we're seeing in our current technology. so that is something that i think this committee should look at in the future. as far as insurance for autonomous vehicle manufacturers, 25 million in insurance coverage is a much more realistic number than the 5 million that's currently in place. there are varying levels as you can see from our materials that we sent. and i hope that the entire committee received the report that was created by the american association for justice, that put together many studies and talks in depth about no-fault insurance and other things that have been raised today. with a lot of references for this committee to look at if you want more details. but 25 million is the number that we are advocating on a national level right now. this is evolving, we're going to see things changing over time. we've heard this is not going to be a reality for 25 to 50 years, where 100% or even 90% of our vehicles on the road are fully autonomous vehicles. however, we need to be making sure that we're monitoring consumer safety throughout. so, i just want to raise a couple of other issues with-
[{'start': 60, 'end': 81, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2425, 'end': 2435, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Maritza Urquiza: Good morning, Maritza Urquiza with the Department of Finance. I will begin with a broad overview of the Governor's Budget for a higher education and highlight the new spending proposals for the community colleges, and my colleague will provide an overview of the Governor's Budget for the universities. Each year when we build the budgets, we begin by building in funding for community colleges based upon revised Proposition 98 guarantee. For the universities we build in the existing level of resources as well as growth pursuant to the administration's multi-year plan. Funding for the CalGrant program is then based on estimated participation pursuant to existing policies. Despite budget constraints due to lower than anticipated revenues, the Governor's Budget continues to increase funding for higher education. The budget proposal's total funding of 31.9 billion for higher education made up of 17.5 billion general fund and local property tax, and 14.4 billion of other funds. This total reflects both direct funding to colleges and the universities and the costs of financial aid that students may use at eligible institutions. The Governor's Budget continues the steady investments that the state has made since the passage of Proposition 30 in 2012. With the increases the administration proposes in 17, 18, funding for the University of California will have grown by 817.8 million since 2012. Funding for the California State University will have grown by about 1.1 billion. And Proposition 98 funding for the community colleges will have grown a total of 1.8 billion. The administration supports continued investment in higher education with the expectation that colleges and universities will work together and implement new and creative policies that consider the cost of instruction, better support student success and completion and expand access to higher education to more California students. The proposed investments in the Governor's Budget are also grounded in three efforts. First, to maintain affordability, second, to support success for all students including reducing the time it takes students to complete degrees, and third, to encourage greater alignment across entities to support students' transition from K-12 to higher education and into the workforce. These guiding principles are reflected in the Governor's Budget for the universities and for the community colleges. The Governor's Budget includes $8.8 billion in funding for community colleges and adult education when accounting for available Proposition 98 general fund, local revenues and fees. This funding supports apportionments and numerous student success programs including the student success and support program, the extended opportunity programs and services, and the disabled student programs and services. To further support student success, the Governor's Budget proposes several new investments for the community colleges. First, the budget includes a 150 million one-time Proposition 98 General Fund to support community colleges' effort to develop and implement guided pathways programs. A guided pathway program is an integrated institution-wide approach focused on improving student success. This one time investment will provide grants to community colleges to redesign academic pathways and organize student choices in a way that promotes better course taking decisions, and better integrate support services to make it easier for students to access the support that they need. The expectation is to improve completion rates, reduce time to degree, increase students' employment opportunities, and reduce student debt. The budget also includes ongoing increases of 94.1 million Proposition 98 general fund, reflecting a 1.48 cost of living adjustment, 23.6 million to support community colleges operating expenses, and 79.3 million to support a 1.34% enrollment growth, which would provide access to approximately an additional 11,500 full time equivalent students. To incent the development and implementation of innovative practices, the budget includes 20 million one-time Proposition 98 general fund to provide innovation grants to community colleges. This program will be administered by the community colleges' chancellor's office. Finally, the budget includes an increase of 10 million Proposition 98 general fund to provide system-wide access to the online education initiatives learning management system. And an increase of 6 million one-time Proposition 98 general fund to facilitate the development of an integrated library system for the community colleges. With that, I'll pass it on to my colleague.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christian Osmena: Thank you very much. Christian Osmena with Finance. I'll begin with the universities, and as Ms. Urquiza described, the Governor's Budget continues a multi-year funding plan for the UC and the CSU. The stability that comes with that plan has been a core component of the administration's approach to budgeting and higher education since the passage of Proposition 30. Our intent has been that predictable growth can allow the universities to engage in longer-range planning to manage costs within levels of resources that are sustainable for the state and for students. Specifically, general fund appropriations to the California State University are $3.3 billion in 16-17, the current year. The CSU reports enrolling about 400,000 students at its 23 campuses, with another 22,000 students seeking degrees and other credentials through continuing education. The budget proposes an additional $162 million general fund for the University. The 2016 budget called on the CSU to increase four year graduation rates and two year transfer graduation rates with specific emphasis on closing achievement gaps for low income students, first generation students, and students from underrepresented minority groups. The CSU graduation initiative 2025 adopted by the Board of Trustees in September commits the University to ambitious graduation goals, increasing the four year rate to at least 40%, increasing the transfer rate to at least 45%, and closing gaps and outcomes between the targeted students and their peers. Notably, in the current year, the state provided $35 million in one-time funding to jump-start those efforts, assisting campuses and making immediate changes, and helping to relieve some cost pressures over a longer term period. The budget highlights an existing structure, that is the methods used to place students in college-level courses, that warrants additional review. The budget argues that the graduation initiative can only be successful if education leaders across the system are clear about what a CSU education entails both upon entry and at graduation. More than 40% of CSU freshmen today are still identified as unprepared for college over courses based on their performances on a sequence of tests. Evidence from other contexts including California's community colleges suggests that many of these students actually are prepared for those college courses and that other measures like high school grades are better indicators of that preparation. There are notable opportunities for reform. As one example, a task force of the CSU Academic Senate released a set of recommendations that would define student proficiency before their entry at the CSU and at graduation. We'd be happy to discuss these issues further as the budget progresses. For the University of California, general fund appropriations are 3.5 billion in 2016-17. The 10 UC campuses enroll about 265,000 students with thousands more connected to its extension programs. The budget proposes an additional $131 million general fund for the University, which amounts to a 4% increase. The budget also includes $169 million general fund on a one-time basis as part of the agreement that funds some of the unfunded liabilities of the UC retirement plan, if the plan is structured consistent with one of the state's pension reforms. The administration continues to monitor progress on an agreement between the Governor and the UC President, aimed at making the UC's cost structure more sustainable. Their framework, which was also adopted by the Board of Regents, recognizes that lowering the cost structure, while maintaining quality, requires the University to reevaluate how students' prior academic experiences are recognized as part of UC degree programs, how academic programs are structured, and how instruction is delivered. The University has demonstrated progress in all of the areas of the agreement, but the work is still underway. I'll note two specific reforms that we are monitoring closely. First, the UC has begun pilots at three campus, Davis, Merced, and Riverside, on activity-based costing, something we've talked about in this Committee before. But it's a method of calculating the amount spent on individual courses based on the way those courses are delivered. These calculations would allow University leaders to better plan enrollment and determine which and how courses should be offered by understanding cost coupled with student outcomes. Second, the UC has made significant progress in improving access for students transferring from the community colleges and those students' experiences when they arrive at the UC. The agreement expects the UC to increase the number of transfer students its campuses enrolls so that by the upcoming academic year at least one new transfer student is enrolled for every two new freshmen. These reforms are important to the administration because their implementation would demonstrate the University's commitment to using resources in a cost-effective way and to aligning its own efforts with the state's broader higher education goals. Both segments have now considered tuition increases for next year. The budget reiterates that any tuition increases must be made only in the context of reducing the overall cost structure at UC and improving the graduation rates with the CSU. Tuition increases without these improvements would only burden families with the costs of an inefficient system. Any increases would also have impacts on the state budget, specifically the increases the governing boards have considered would grow Cal Grant costs for UC students by $18 million and for CSU students by $25 million in 17, 18, beyond those costs already reflected in the Governor's Budget. Finally, there are several additional issues related to financial aid that I know are of interest to members. We understand that these issues will be the subject of a future hearing, so we'll plan to present details then, but I'd quickly note that spending on financial aid is an important component of the administration's broader approach to higher education finance. The Cal Grant program, the state's primary financial aid program, is an entitlement for students who meet eligibility criteria, and students who do not qualify for the entitlement are able to compete for additional grants. Since 12/13 funding for the Cal Grant funding will have grown by $442 million, a 29% increase. In total, the budget includes $2 billion to award financial aid to about 382,000 students. With that I'll close, and we'd be happy to answer any questions.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 97, 'end': 104, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Hans Johnson: all right, thank you chair and members of the committee. my name is hans and i'm the director of the higher education policy center at the public policy institute of california. ppic is a non-partisan policy research organization, we do not take positions on pieces of legislation nor funding proposals. my comments are based on the research that we've done at ppic, much of which you've heard referenced to earlier today. including the work we did that identified california's need for more college graduates, which chancellor white called the degree drought. certainly one of the central challenges we face in california today is ensuring that higher education serves as a meaningful ladder for economic and social mobility rather than simply perpetuating economic and class divides. this challenge is especially acute in california, where 60% of our high school students according to california department of education, are socioeconomically disadvantaged. california needs to find ways to improve not only access to higher education, but perhaps even more importantly, completion among students from underrepresented groups, including latino, african american, low-income, and first generation students. there is some good news and you heard some of that this morning in terms of some of the progress that is being made. california's public colleges and universities do indeed enroll a diverse population. recent research by the equality of opportunity project shows that california's public universities enroll more low-income students than comparable colleges in the rest of the country. for example, among elite research universities, ucla ranks first in the nation in the share of its students from low and middle income backgrounds. and among all large public universities, cal state los angeles ranks among the very top in economic mobility, propelling students from lower income families into middle and upper income groups. having said that, there's more work that needs to be done. the challenge is ensuring that even more students succeed in our higher education systems, among those who get into the university of california. the system has an excellent track record of graduating low income and underrepresented students. and, as you heard, california state university has made significant progress in approving graduation rates. and their new graduation rate initiative is very ambitious, completely eliminating gaps between groups by 2025 with the dramatic overall increase in completion rates for all students in that system. however, as you also heard, neither institution has been able to fully enroll all the qualified applicants that it has received. and in recent years, thousands of qualified californians have been turned away from both the university of california and the california state university system due to a lack of resources, and we could talk about that if you want. uc redirects students to campuses. now only uc merced, which many students are not able to attend. csu will flat out impacted campuses, turn down qualified students. of the state's three systems of public education, our community colleges provide most opportunity for the most diverse students in our state, with almost 2 million students enrolled, a majority of whom are from low-income families, or other underrepresented groups. however, far too many community college students do not succeed, most never transfer to a four-year college, do not earn a degree or certificate. hundreds of millions of dollars have been invested in efforts like thebasic skills initiative, the student success and support program, and new proposals such as guided pathways. and they hold a great deal of promise for improving student outcomes. expanding access to our public universities and improving outcomes throughout our higher education system will almost certainly take more resources. using current funding to improve student outcomes is certainly one of the most efficacious manners or ways possible to improve outcomes for low-income and underrepresented students. these include important components like financial aid and student support services. but also again, simply access and providing space for low-income and underrepresented groups. the role of higher education officials and your role as state legislators is to ensure that resources are spent wisely on programs that really work for students. doing so means we need to have good data, most importantly a comprehensive student level, longitudinal database that spans our k-12 system and our higher education systems. california's far behind many other states in not having such a system. we need that kind of information to be able to answer your questions about what works and what works most cost effectively. ppic is already working on a number of projects that focus on improving student success. we look forward to continuing to contribute to such efforts. we know that equity has to be a primary determination of what we do and what works in california and if we don't consider equity outcomes, then we're not going to reach the goals that we need to reach as a state. thank you.
[{'start': 68, 'end': 72, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 528, 'end': 533, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Paul Steenhausen: thank you mister chair, steenhausen with the legislative analyst's office. we can provide some information or questions to maybe consider possible options. they're really, the purpose of the local control funding formula was to simplify what was by virtually all accounts of the time an overly complicated and even irrational k-12 funding system as well as the purpose was to provide more funding to school districts with greater concentrations of students that needed additional assistance. so presumably the legislator would need to access and come to consensus on the extend to which the three higher education segments share the same or similar problems as k-12. whether higher funding is over complex for example or has too little transparency or is designating too little funding for historically under represented students. so to the extent the legislature reaches such a conclusion, the state could consider redesigning the budgetary formula and providing additional money for certain student groups. it would be a fairly extensive undertaking of course to redesign such a system for three separate segments. and if the legislature were to decide to go that route, you might consider starting with one segment and then learning from that experience and that process and then moving on to other segments. now, the segments, most similar to k-12 is the community colleges. the community colleges have local funding, boards. they are funded within proposition 98. they have general fund and categorical programs. and many of this categorical programs are designed to serve these types of students that fit, we're talking about right now and the state currently is spending more than $800 million per year in this categorical programs. you have student success and support program, the student success for basic skills program, the fund for student success. you have financial-related advising programs. you have extended opportunity programs and services which is designed for basic skills students who are on financial aid and there are others as well. and as our office has noted repeatedly, over the years, the current categorical system with the community colleges does have notable drawbacks. they tend to result in silos on campus even though the programs are serving overlapping groups of students. the categorical approach also tends to be highly prescriptive in terms of how funds are spent which limits local flexibility design a program or set of programs that is most efficient and effective in meeting student's needs. and also categorical finding can take a lot of energy and money overseen and monitoring. so, the state could consider an lcff type reform for our community colleges such as the one you heard. using the formula approach could limit how much colleges spend specifically on represented groups. however, at least as the law is now, if funding were treated as general purpose dollars, what the community colleges call, apportionates, than the formula presumably would be subject to the 50% law which is a statute that says that half of districts general operating dollars have to spent on instructor salary and benefits. a more direct way to maybe get at the same kind of goal is to consider a block grant approach which we've talked about in the past. with the block grant approach, you could consolidate various categorical programs and put it all together, add additional money to it as you would decide and colleges would have to spend the money for those categorical programs purposes, but they'd have flexibility and how they did so. and so it might give them opportunity to colleges to provide [unknown] services such as counselling, orientation, financial aid advising child care, book vouchers, that sort of thing. we'd really leave it up to the innovation of the colleges to come up with what program makes most sense, given that the college and what the students need are. no, the black grant, of course, is we take some time to think through and develop, but we're fairly straightforward, something you could probably do in a year or so developing an lcff-type approach for community colleges would probably take more time, given the experience of k-12 where they had to come up with not just the formula, but then accountability plans and accountability rubrics as well. so there's some of that time to take into consideration. the state has taken a notably different approach over the years with the universities and unlike the community colleges, universities have few categorical programs. just a couple of categorical programs and it's really up to the system offices now to decide how the money is allocated to the campuses. this means that developing a starting point for the university's might be more difficult versus community colleges. but maybe starting with the community colleges, it gives the legislature time to think through what that process and that product might look like for the universities.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Curley: good afternoon, rebecca jonah curley on behalf of the community college facility coalition. i'm here to speak to you about the capital outlay item. i share the concerns that were expressed today by the governors approach which will fund five projects based on health and safety reasons. as assembly member medina mentioned, we looked back at the language in the bond itself and that language which was approve by voters with proposition 51. supports $2 billion for community college for construction, renovation, reconstruction and equipping of facilities. so, much broader than a narrow band of health and safety. we also know that the board of governors and the chancellor's office uses a very robust process to prioritize those projects. they prioritize health and safety projects first every year, so we do agree that those are very important projects, but we already have a process for prioritizing those. so with that, we know the need is great. there's over $28 billion in facilities needs for community colleges. we urge you to include all 29 projects approved by the board of governors in the budget. thank you.>>thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 306, 'end': 312, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Austin Webster: good afternoon, webster on behalf of the faculty association of california community colleges. we've submitted a full letter outlining some of our reactions to the proposed budget but i'd like to highlight a few of them here. as has been mentioned, we're very concerned about the current proposed split in prop 98 funding, it shorts the community colleges about $44 million. we'd like to see some additional funding for a full time hiring, part time faculty support such as office hours and health benefits as well as funding for mental health services on campus. lastly, we are very supportive of the post increase to the base and we'd like to see some additional funding for such categorical the eops, dsps, and calworks. we look forward to working with all of you, thanks. thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Rosenberger: kimberly rebecca rosenberger with service employees international union state council. i want to echo the comments of cfa and csuu, my affiliates. we're focused on insuring that there's access diversity but also we want to remind you that it's a people's powered institution. so when we're looking at increasing access, we need to look at insuring that there's appropriate staffing, that there is staffing that doesn't have. that has colistic and maintain living in the areas where they work. thank you. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jared Dirusso: Good afternoon, Jared Dirusso, I'm with the California State Student Association. We're in firm support of a fully funded CSU support budget request. That budget request helps fund programs that interest student success and close the achievement gap. It also compensates or funds fair wages for staff and faculty, and mitigates a tuition increase, all which are very important for student success and critical for students to be able to graduate. The student experience now is different than what it was 20 or 30 years ago. We have many students who are homeless, who are food insecure. And even with a great University, state, and federal aid package, we still have many students who's debt continues to rise. We're hopeful that any consideration on funding considers those things as they will contribute, potentially to tuition increase. So again, we're in firm support of CSU fully funded budget. Thank you.>>Thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lizette Navarette: good afternoon lizette with the community college league of california. i just want to align our comments to something that chancellor oakley said and it was really the concern about the pop 98 split. in reality, based augmentation, it really means the opportunity to provide quality to our student and ensure that that quality is available to all regardless of their background. and then lastly i want to align my comments to the [unknown] college coalition, a facilities coalition, who has expressed concern about the plan to spend bond resources. these are resources that our voters have expressed that they want to invest in our schools. we should honor that. and in your districts it also means an economic investment and jobs, so we encourage you to look at that. and i know that they'll be a hearing around that. thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 135, 'end': 141, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Karen Smith: good afternoon. i'm dr. karen jonah smith. i'm the director of the california department of public health and the state public health officer. welcome.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brandon Nunes: good afternoon. brandon karen nunes chief deputy director for operations at the department.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Newton: And Mark Newton, LAO.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 17, 'end': 20, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brandon Nunes: yeah. hi, nunes with department. so i think dr. smith kind of hit the main thing is that in recent years we have put more resources towards both on the legal side to help drafting of the regulations, but also having those subject matter experts. dr. smith also mentioned we identified where our largest amount of regulations were housed, and those were in our licensing and certification programs so we added more subject matter experts there. i think the tracking of regulations and the development of that has improved in recent years. we're also looking at because we do have a large amount of regulations for our department. we're looking at trying to find some more refined tracking software. so that we can both track where it is in the process as it moves up through being finalized but also kind of knowing where barriers are occurring. where is this particular regs package being held up? and i think some of that tracking software will assist. an then i think one of the other things that we're doing is a new website that we're going to be rolling out. hopefully, a lot of the comments that have come through will be able to come through that portal, which will help us in our ability rather than just having things. it will help us search through the comments and find similar comments so that we can respond more proactively to some of the the concerns that are being raised by stakeholders.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 48, 'end': 53, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 250, 'end': 255, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark Newton: newton, lao.
[]
Greg Oliva: good afternoon mr. chair, members, and staff. greg brandon oliva, assistant deputy directory, center for chronic disease prevention and health promotion. the writeup is excellent. i'll just take a little time in doing a high level discussion of the prop 56, and the implications for the department of public health. so on november 8, 2016, californians passed the california health care research and prevention tobacco tax act of 2016. and what it will do is raise the cigarette excise tax by $2, effective april 1st, 2017. and a commensurate tax on other tobacco products, such as smokeless, pipe tobacco, cigars, and also e-cigarettes. and those determinations will be determined by the board of equalization. so in the bcp, the governor's budget requests an increase of 57 positions and $223.5 million to help support the implementation of the three separate components that the department would be administering. so the first would be the tobacco prevention and control programs that count, and that request is for 26 positions on $178.5 million. and that's to support prevention and reduction efforts using media, local programs, evaluation, and also some level of state administration. the second component is the tobacco law enforcement account and that request is for 20 positions and $7.5 million to increase stop tobacco access to kids enforcement, compliance checks, and to establish a local grant program that we would administer with local law enforcement to address tobacco enforcement activities. the final piece is the state dental program account, which the request is for 11 positions and $37.5 million. and that is to create a comprehensive public health infrastructure to support oral health education, prevention, surveillance and treatment activities. so just a little bit more about these three components. two would be very mature efforts that already exist within the department. the first being our state's tobacco control program. so this program began as a result of the tobacco tax and health protection act of 1988, which we call prop 99. and we've been implementing this program for roughly 25 years. what prop 56 would do is provide a lot more additional resources to do the same sorts of things that were required within prop 99. so we would continue to do a media campaign, to conduct evaluation, to fund the local health departments, to fund a competitive grants program. and we think some reasonable resources to administer those separate programs. there's one difference between prop 99 and prop 56. and that is, which was identified in your write-up, is that prop 56 does require that not less than 15% of health promotion, health communication activities, and evaluation. and tobacco use surveillance funds being awarded to accelerate and monitor the rate of decline in tobacco-related disparities with the goal of eliminating tobacco-related disparities. i'm confident to say that with our current appropriations from prop 99, we're meeting that 15%. most of our local, actually all of our local competitive grant awards are going to address health equity and tobacco control. and i'm confident with the prop 56 resources we would meet that 15% very easily, it's a very important issue for us. so that's a very mature effort within the department. the other really mature effort in the department is our tobacco enforcement efforts. so, what prop 56 will do is allow for more investigators to do more compliance checks. and also what is new for that is to issue some local grants to law enforcement to conduct their own activities at the local level, that's new for us. what's not a mature program is the oral health side. and that is, to date, it's our oral health efforts are primarily made up of relatively small categorical, federally funded programs, currently focusing on perinatal oral health, the virtual dental home, and water fluoridation. so, these funds will allow us to actually establish a comprehensive statewide program that we hope can be delivered to all counties within the state, so that's my overview.
[{'start': 46, 'end': 64, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ben Menses: ben greg menses, department of finance, no comments.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Megan Allred: thank you mr. chair and members, allred on behalf of the california dental association. cda is very pleased to have significant funding allocated to oral health programs through the prop 56 revenue. and we are members currently of the state oral health plan advisory group. and, just recently, there had been some discussion and concern about limitations on the department of public health's ability to spend some of the local assistance money. so we just wanted to make note that we want to ensure that the department has the ability to contract directly with local agencies and to enter into multi-year contracts, going forward. so that we can facilitate the contracts with the local agencies and the plans that will come from the state oral health plan. we believe that this will allow for really meaningful programs at the local level. but more importantly, even drastically improve the oral health programs in the state and overall. so we really look forward to working with the committee staff, department of finance, department of public health, to just make sure that this has worked out as we move forward. thank you.
[]
Katie Andrew: thank you, katie ben andrew, children now. i'm here to speak in regards to the california children's dental disease program, or ccddpp. in august of 2016, governor brown approved restoration of funding. two ccdddpps, it's a mouthful, which exists in statute, and that was to the tune of $3.2 million. but as we were discussing previously, the department submitted a budget-change proposal that would return that funding back to the general fund. under the expectation that these general fund moneys would be supplanted with the anticipated funds from the new tobacco tax. we believe that if the state reverses this funding by returning it to the general fund to be used for a purpose not related to its original intention, so oral health prevention and education services at the local level. this might set a dangerous precedent for funding that the state office of oral health is planning to make available to local oral health, or local health jurisdictions with prop 56 funds. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 164, 'end': 169, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michelle Gibbons: Hi, Michelle Gibbons with the County Health Executives Association of California. We represent local health departments throughout our state. As CDPH has mentioned, we do greatly appreciate the partnership that we have in ensuring that the use of tobacco is decreasing in our state. I know there was a question earlier about some of the programs that are happening at the local levels and so I just wanted to address that briefly. At the local level, we do campaigns aimed at various age groups. Right now, I think campaigns aimed at teen use and prevention are really taking up. We also are a provider of tobacco cessation classes, and so forth. And then, there's some work being done even with stores to try to limit the availability of tobacco products in the stores. So, this is just a small snapshot of how we're utilizing those funds and we look forward to continuing the conversation and continuing the partnership that we have with the state. Thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Myriam Valdez: Myriam Valdez with Health Access. Health Access strongly supported Prop 56 and is in strong support of the department's proposal to use Prop 56 funding for tobacco prevention and control. We are also in strong support of this funding to continue to be used for grants targeted towards achieving tobacco related health among California's diverse populations including African American, Hispanic, and API communities. Including low income communities, people with low income and education, LGBT communities and the formerly justice involved. We also look forward to the health equity report card, which will track the state's progress in reducing tobacco among these vulnerable populations that are most impacted by tobacco use. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Chen: Hi, Kimberly Chen with the California Pan- Ethnic Health Network support. Supporter of Prop 56 and support the funding towards the oral health program. And to reiterate the comments of the previous speakers, offer greater flexibility for the program. The dental director to get that money out the door, the most efficient way to get that money out supporting longterm outcomes. Thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Mark: hi, i'm dr. karen katie mark. i'm chief of aids at the california department of public health.
[{'start': 12, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sonja Petek: Sonja Petek, LAO.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Newton: and mark, lao.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 10, 'end': 13, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
David Kilburn: Thank you, my name's David Kilburn. I'm Executive Director of Access Support Network of San Luis Obispo and Monterey Counties. I appreciate you all letting me have a few words today. I'd like to paint a picture just a little bit of what it's really like in the field of the ADAP and OA-HIPP enrollment worker. In our offices, we have sort of the full-scope, wrap-around services. Where we're Covered California, ADAP enrollment, and OA-HIPP. There's a lot of moving pieces in this puzzle and there's a lot of requirements for our clients to adhere to to be eligible for these programs. The enrollment worker, in what used to be about a 15-minute procedure of getting ADAP eligibility, is now taking with the problems with the portal upwards of an hour, and then there's twice a year, once a year on your birthday, once a year, or six months from then you have to get re-certified. So it's a huge cumbersome program, and I'm real excited that the new access to the portal is coming up and I anticipate its streamlining. However, it's very encouraging that we have other programs for our clients with the pool and associates, the PAI cards that'll pay the copays for our clients with insurance. However, that's a difficult program for the client to understand how to use and for medical providers to use. So what happens Is the client comes back with a bill and doesn't know how to process that. So our ADAP enrollment workers assist in that, filing of those forms, too. So they also assist clients in finding providers within network in their insurance. So they become a full, wrap-around benefits navigator, whereas we anticipated in the early days it was just enrolling in ADAP. So there's a lot going on that's wonderful right now, but the burden on the enrollment worker and agencies is unsustainable at the current point. So I really would encourage you to look at the $4 million that the HIV Alliance is advocating for to help support those workers in the field. I would like to give a shout out to all the enrollment workers that have...
[{'start': 21, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Kilburn: my name is david karen kilburn, executive director of access support network, san luis obispo and monterrey counties.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amanda Wallner: thank you, and he can have some of my time. i'm going to be quick. amanda david wallner, the california lgbt health and human services network. here in support of the proposals from the hiv alliance to really support the extra burden that many of those enrollment workers had to take on. as well as expanding the prep drug assistance program to those folks without insurance and also equality california, which is one of the members of the network, wanted to express their support, as well.
[{'start': 67, 'end': 87, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chelle Gossett: hi, hi, my name is chelle amanda gossett. i'm with cares community health here in sacramento, california and in the effort to save time, i would just have the exact same story that mr. killburn said. we do have that at our clinic. we have five enrollment workers who are also certified in covered california. so they do attempt to enroll all of our patients in some type of insurance, as well, as they're enrolling in adap. so we have the exact same situation going on here in sacramento.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 185, 'end': 193, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Emalie Huriaux: Thank you, my name's Emalie Huriaux. I'm the Director of federal and state affairs at Project Inform, which is a 32-year-old nonprofit based in San Francisco working to end Hepatitis C and HIV in California and beyond and I'm here in support of the two proposals from the California HIV Alliance. One with regard to the ADAP program and the other regarding the modification of the trailer bill language. With regard to the increased support for the ADAP enrollment workers, it's essential that these workers have more support. We're asking them to do more work, adding the OA-HIPP work, as well as the PrEP assistance program to their plates and we need to assure that an increased workload is accompanied by increased resources and the ability to have that capacity. So thank you so much for your time.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathy Musberg: Hi, chair and members. Kathy Musberg with the San Francisco AIDS Foundation. I want to do the same and echo the comments of my colleagues for these both proposals, excuse me. At the AIDS Foundation, we've been having the same problem with our ADAP workers, enrollment workers just doing a tremendous amount of work. So we really want to throw support to that piece of it, as well, and then on the trailer bill language modifications, we're certainly been working with the Office of AIDS and the Department, and will continue to do so. To be clear though, our language last year did leave up to the discretion because we weren't certain how many folks are going to uptake in this and so we also indicated a cap of a million and so we want to sort of continue that dialogue and that conversation, but we certainly understood the idea that we don't know how big this is going to get. So if it gets too big, there's some discretion to shut it down and sort of figure that out, but we do believe that's probably doable, and I think that just to sort of highlight the reason for it is it really is a key component for us to get to zero. I mean, to get at this disease before, rather than when folks have racked up hundreds of thousands of bills. It's important, so thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Scott Avona: good afternoon, i'm scott, i'm the acting deputy director for the center for healthcare quality.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
CJ Herrod: I'm CJ Herrod, I'm the Chief of Policy and Planning for the Center for Healthcare Quality.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Newton: ed mark chelle newton lao.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8, 'end': 25, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ed Manzese: ed mark manzese, department of finance.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Fawn Law: fawn ed law, department of finance.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gary Nodine: Gary Nodine. So with an ITSD, we're assisting the program areas to look at their areas and how we can improve it, to improve the performance. And that will be, our internal staff will help, but also in some cases we'll hire a contractor to help with that. And so that's what part of that is there.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Angelo Bellomo: Good morning, Mr. Chair and Committee Members. Good afternoon. My name is Angelo Bellomo. I'm Deputy Director for Health Protection for the Los Angeles County Department of Public Health.
[{'start': 74, 'end': 88, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carol Sewell: Thank you, I'm Carol Sewell from the California Commission on Aging. We are in full support of the $1 million ongoing from the citation penalty account for the long term care ombudsman. We hope that you are aware that staffing and increasing staff for the long term care ombudsman actually does have a positive impact on community care licensing. Because it can help resolve problems before they turn into formal complaints. Thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Angelo Bellomo: again, angelo fawn bellomo, deputy director for health protection los angeles county public health. i just wanted to clarify that in the governor's budget, there's 1.1 that we were discussing a minute ago. but we actually need an augmentation of an additional 1.5 for a total of 2.6, and i just wanted to clarify that. our original request was 5 million for this current fiscal year. we recognized the severe budgetary constraints the state is under, and we did everything we could to defer many of these expenditures, these additional costs, and to come up with efficiencies. but that still leaves us with an additional 1.5 beyond what is in the governor's current budget. okay, thank you very much for considering our request.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melanie Boston: good afternoon, my name is melanie angelo boston. i'm a health facilities evaluator nurse for the county of los angeles. i want to thank the committee for taking the time to hear the los angeles county's proposal. prior to becoming an evaluator, i was a trauma surgical nurse and provided care to patients in the county hospital. as an evaluator, i provide care to the residents in the skilled nursing facilities by ensuring that the facilities meet the standards set by the state and federal government. if the facilities provide substandard care, put the residents' lives at risk, or cause them harm, i hold them accountable by writing deficiencies and, or citations, so they change how they deliver care. two years ago, los angeles county was severely underfunded for the work we performed. and that led to delays due to understaffing. with the additional funding we received, la county was able to hire more staff, which allowed us to conduct surveys and investigate complaints quicker. this has led us to issuing our deficiencies and citations in a more timely manner. for residents in the skilled nursing homes, their families, and especially for the residents that have no one to speak for them. it meant they could feel more secure in knowing they are experienced nurses ensuring they are cared for and protected and safe by us thoroughly inspecting the facilities that are their homes. for skilled nursing facilities in the industry, it means the facilities receive feedback from us on how they can improve the care they provide in a more reasonable time, which holds them accountable for the care and safety of the residents. for the general public, it means when families make the decisions to place their loved ones in a skilled nursing facility, they can feel assured their family members will be cared for and protected. because we are out there and looking out for those residents who utilize the skilled nursing services. i'm particularly proud of the service commitment of my long standing colleagues. my colleagues are courted by private industry, the very industry that we monitor. okay, i respectfully ask the legislature and the administration to approve the los angeles county's proposal. so we can continue to improve our program and provide the needed services to the vulnerable members in our communities. thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 41, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michelle Cabrera: mr chair and members, michelle melanie cabrera with the service employees international union. we represent both the state health facilities evaluation nurses, as well as la county nurses. and you will recall that this journey began some time ago with cms reviews with public concern, rightfully so, for the under-investment that had been made in this program statewide. this did not start as an la county program, but of course, the problem was exacerbated in la county by the disproportionate gap in spending in la. and so i think what happened was two years ago, la county negotiated a contract that they felt was responsible to the work load that they had. the administration has now honed in on the union-negotiated contract. well, yes, the county of la did negotiate a contract that increased wages for all of their nurses across a variety of programs including this one, and i think the proof is in the pudding. la county is able to both recruit at a much higher level, as well as hold onto the public investment that's been made in those nurses over time. and having seasoned licensing and certification personnel out in the field yields much better returns for the public. i don't have to tell you, this is a program, where when it is well resourced, we actually save lives. we are preventing people from dying when it is preventable, right? so i think there is a conversation to be had here. the increased salaries may contribute to a portion of the increased cost. i understand there are additional costs included in their request for an additional 1.5 million, including office space for all of those new personnel to do their work in. we believe this is reasonable and therefore we request your support for this item. thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Darryl Kelt: Chairman Pan, Darryl Kelt with the California Association of Area Agencies on Aging. We wholeheartedly support the proposal for the ombudsman program. This is a critical program. What they do really makes a difference in the lives of many, many people. It's a shame that we have to come up here every year and beg for one time only money. It would be nice if the Legislature would fund this program on an ongoing basis and at a level that will support it. Thank you.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 12, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 14, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gary Passmore: Chairman Pan, Gary Passmore with the Congress of California Seniors. I was hearing your comments about all the years you've been listening to this issue of L&C. And I can tell you honestly, I've been doing this for 15 years and one of the very first meetings I attended 15 years ago was on the problems with L&C. So, I don't want to get you too excited that you're going to be able to say you solved this problem. I'm here really, because first of all, I want to support, strongly support, the request of the long-term care ombudsman, with their one-time request once again. I believe that ought to be made permanent and annualized, and come from the citation account. And at the same time, to comment on the CalQualityCare website request, we have been strong supporters of that website. And in the past couple of years, we've been in here with them with requests to find some funding for it. But we are absolutely opposed to the idea that they should take precedence over the ombudsman. Essentially, that's what would happen if they got a ongoing permanent half $1 million funding request from the same citations account that the state agency, the Department of Public Health says they can't provide money for the ombudsman on an ongoing basis, out of that same account. And this is a proposal to fund a website. My own experience, and I think the experience of our constituents, is that the ombudsman provides an invaluable service at improving the quality of life of people who are in long-term care facilities and assisted living as well. As opposed to trying to help through the Internet, families or potential patients and helping make decisions about what they ought to do for long-term care. So, we support the long-term care ombudsman request. We have a lower level of support for the website. And we wish you all the best in being able to tell people that you solved the L&C problem at the end of your tenure. Thank you.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 12, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 14, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sonja Petek: Sonja Petek, LAO.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Newton: Mark Newton, LAO.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Fawn Law: Fawn Law, Department of Finance.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gary Nodine: And Gary Nodine, CIO Public Health.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Chen: Kimberly Chen with the California Pan-Ethnic Health Network, we were one of the sponsors for AB 1726. I want to thank Dr. Pan's leadership, we're so happy that we're here now. Happy to get it moving forward, there's so many other parts of our state where this is needed. And the state's done a lot in disaggregating data, but with this we're one step closer to making sure these very important parts of our community are recognized and highlighted. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 122, 'end': 125, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Galia Ling: Thank you, Galia Ling with the Southeast Asia Resource Action Center. We are in full support of this budget request and we were also one of the cosponsors of this bill. And so we're really excited that, again, like what Ken said, we're one step closer to really addressing the health disparities that exist with the Asian American, Pacific Islander, and Native Hawaiian communities. Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 220, 'end': 223, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mary Valdez: Mary Valdez with Health Access. We supported the bill moving through the process last year and, as you know, disaggregation of data is just necessary to fully understand the needs of the API community and also help address health coverage disparities. And we look forward to working with the Department in implementation. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Starr: good afternoon. i'm dr starr. i'm the deputy director for the center for environmental health.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sonja Petek: sonja, lao.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 7, 'end': 10, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark Newton: mark michelle newton, lao.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Fawn Law: Fawn Law, Department of Finance.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sonja Petek: sonja mark petek, lao. we don't have any particular concerns with this proposal. and we had asked the department how confident they were that that federal contract would get renewed. and it sounds like it's funded with industry user fees, so it's a pretty stable source of funding and should be available to fund the positions.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Yang Lee: lee, department of finance. well, wonderful. okay, you may begin. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Yang Lee: yang, department of finance, we'll get back to you. i don't think it's 10. i think it's probably seven, but we'll get back to you and clarify that for you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Beth Capell: Beth Capell on behalf of Health Access California. We sponsored the original legislation in 1999 that created the Office of Patient Advocate. For most of its existence it did nothing of any particular use except. The report card. It was only when it was re-invented as a result of the intervention of then Assembly Member Monning and later Senator Monning, that we actually moved forward to the kind of complaint oversight that you've heard reported on today. And it was precisely because of the need to look at complaints across various healthcare agencies, that we sought to have this agency do that. We were struck time and again by the failure to communicate amongst the agency, and the lack of common standards. What you've heard from Ms. Abbott, who we surrendered to the office of patient advocate. She having formerly been the other Beth at Health Access. Well, is the iterative process of looking at those complaints. What strikes us the most in the report, that your staff has assembled is how very few people have complained. It's less than 1% of Californians. You know from your own constituents that it's much more normal to have Two, three, 4% of people complained about something, especially something that is important to most consumers as their healthcare. So, we're struck by how few complaints there are. With respect to a number of the questions and comments from the Committee Members, let me note that with respect to the grievances filed at the Department of Managed Health Care there is specific statute on this. Health and safety code, section 13 68, which I happened to be looking at Yesterday. Which requires that the complaint first be made to the health plan and if it is not resolved within 30 days, that it then be handed off to the Department of Managed Health Care. Indeed the law is so prescriptive that a complaint that can be resolved within 24 hours does not count, as a formal grievance but anything that can not be resolved within 24 hours, does count as a grievance. The advantage of that has been that many consumer complaints never count as grievances instead they're fixed, which is really what we all want, thank you
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 322, 'end': 329, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 348, 'end': 355, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 744, 'end': 750, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 841, 'end': 845, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kimberly Chen: kimberly on behalf of the california pan-ethnic health network want to express our support for the office of patient advocate, and highlight some points in the conversation here. particularly that the points that miss abbot made and mr. monty made regarding language and individuals speaking language other than english. this, i think, really highlights the need for expanded and streamlined collection of race ethnicity in languages spoken. and of course this is not the charge of the opa, but i think without the collection and reporting from the office, we wouldn't necessarily see this highlighted a as much. as was discussed in the conversation, 3% of folks complaining in language other than english, not reflected our population nearly 40% of people in california speak a language other than english at home. six to 7 million are limited english proficient. while they may be able to get family members or others to help guide them in that process or help support them, i think there is something amiss. and i think there needs to be greater streamlining in collection of that information. but with the work that the opa does, we are able to highlight that very more, so thank you.
[{'start': 218, 'end': 223, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 237, 'end': 242, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Gary Passmore: gary with the congress of california seniors. i am here to i guess, in this environment, support the budget request of the opa technically. and just report that our constituents, and we, often use the information that the opa has produced. we see enormous improvements in the work of that organization since senator monning got involved in the issues some years ago, and then since director abbott has taken charge and improved the organization without a doubt. we do support the budget request and i can say personally, i would rather be here supporting a budget that had 10 positions in it, thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 316, 'end': 323, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 391, 'end': 397, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Yang Lee: yang sonja lee, department of finance. i recognize today the advancement of conversations about, potentially doing some providing more responsibility for opa to do, in addition to workload. i, we don't have any proposals for opa at the moment to augment their budget. they have a baseline budget at the moment. but to the extent that it's the legislature's priority to, maybe give a little more scope or look at complaints from matched care or from the insurance provider. we're happy to have this discussion, but just want to go on the record that we don't have any proposals for the time being. okay, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Peter Kelly: Good morning Committee Chair Pan, Committee Member Stone. My name is Peter Kelly, I'm the Chief Deputy Director with the Office of Systems Integration to my right.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 32, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 51, 'end': 56, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 69, 'end': 80, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cynthia Taiker: Cynthia Taiker, Deputy Director at the Office of Assistance Integration.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rene Mollow: Hello, Rene Mollow, Deputy Director at Department of Healthcare Services.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barney Gomez: good morning, barney yang gomez, deputy director, chief information officer for the department of healthcare services.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lourdes Morales: Lourdes Morales, Legislative Analyst Office.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tyler Woods: tyler, department of finance.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Ayala: laura barney ayala, department of finance okay, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jen Flory: Hi, good afternoon, I'm Jen Flory with the Western Center on Law&Poverty. We were sponsors of AB 1296, which, among other things it does, it laid out the stakeholder process for CalHEERS, and I know in previous years, we'd had some pretty strong critiques, both about the product and about the process, but I think in the last year, we've really Learned a lot about how to improve the CalHEERS system. Stakeholders have been involved in user acceptance testing, where, when a release is going to go out in CalHEERS, we come up with scenarios that we think, based on some of our hardest client situations that we've seen, we give them to the staff ahead of time. Then we test the system and then even more importantly, even prior to releases getting to that point, for some of the more consumer-focused releases that are coming out, we have had opportunity to be involved in the design of some of those. Most notably, there were, in February, very large changes made to how income is input by consumers. And we believe that it has really improved the accuracy of the calculations there. When we first heard about some of the redesign of this and the talk about it's going to look like TurboTax, we were rather skeptical, but in seeing the most recent, where we saw actual consumers, people in off the street brought in to test some of the changes that we were making, and they got through the process in a much faster process than we realized. We're really happy to finally see a product that is much more user-friendly and consumers can understand what it is asking them. So we just want to lay that out for the record and also use those lessons Learned as we're doing these modernizations to the SAS System. We understand that there have been some bumps along the road in LA replacing their system and so we would like that that same, not necessarily consumers testing at that point, but county eligibility workers having that same type of interface with the system, and then as we go on to modernize meds, that we have that same type of interaction with the stakeholders, thank you.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Lopez: thank you madam chair, senator anderson. jason jonah lopez, deputy director of fiscal services for cdcr. with the first item, we're going to hit the highlights on our adult population estimates. but before we get into the weeds. overall, the jan 10 budget for the department represents $11.3 billion, 11 billion of which is general fund. we've heard a lot over the last few weeks about the approximately $300 million growth that we're seeing from current year to budget year. and i know that there have been extensive discussions about what exactly makes up the difference. but just to revisit a couple of the highlights for the committee, this year's-
[{'start': 31, 'end': 39, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 41, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julie Basco: Madam Chair, Senator Anderson, good morning. As Jason said, my name is Julie Basco and I serve as the Deputy Director of CDCR's office of research. It's the office of research that prepares CDCR's adult population projections. And the projections are prepared twice a year, generally in the spring and in the fall. The production include the entire adult population. And that includes our 35 institutions, fire camps, both the in and out of state contract facilities. Our alternative custody programs, the community reentry programs, and medical parole. And the projections are developed utilizing historical trend data and time series forecasting techniques. The report, our most current version is the 2016 fall projections report. And that was released in January of this year. And that report predicted a modest increase in the adult population from 128,643 inmates on June 30th, 2016, to 129,613 inmates on June 30th, 2017. That's an increase of 0.8% or 970 individuals. Annual adult population is expected to increase at a similar rate for each of the next four fiscal years, through 2021. Why? Given that in the last few years California has implemented some of the most significant criminal justice and correctional reform measures really seen in decades. There are myriad factors. The makeup of our current adult population. So our newly arriving determinately sentenced inmates have longer lengths of stay. In 2010, the length of stay was estimated at about two and a half years on average. Then after 2011's public safety realignment, there's been a market increase to the 2015 estimate of about 3.4 years on average. More inmates with life sentences are being admitted each year than are being released. In 2015, 1,031 life sentence inmates were admitted, while 796 life sentence inmates were released to parole. In 2016 the admissions were 1002 and the releases were 728 respectively. Also, determinately sentenced violent inmates fall into the same category of more arriving than leaving. Going back to the criminal justice and correctional reform initiatives passed by California voters and the Legislature. Proposition 47, which passed at the November 2014 election, brought re-sentencing possibilities for mostly non-serious, non-violent, non-sex registering inmates. Through February 28th, 2017, 4,674 inmates have been released from prison via Proposition 47. And the prison population that could be re-sentenced under Proposition 47 is anticipated to be nearly exhausted this year. But this Proposition 47 release volume is still outpaced by the inmates admitted for serious violent and sex registered offenses. Now, implementation of Proposition 57 will impact the adult prison population. And anticipated impact was not included in the fall 2016 population projection report, as Proposition 57 had not been voted on at that time. And final determinations are yet to be made regarding implementation. Now, the department's population projections are highly accurate to the actual population numbers at fiscal year's end. As an example, in 2015, the adult population projection was 126,982, and the actual population as of June 30th was 127,816. That's a difference of 0.7%. Similarly, in 2016, the projection was 128,995, and the actual was 129,416, an even smaller difference of just 0.3%. Lastly, and briefly, parole projections, our fall report forecasted a 0.3 decrease from June 30th, 43,814, to June 17, at 43,683. Then, we anticipated that the parole population was expected to remain generally stable. Madam Chair, that concludes my comments and I'd be happy to take any questions from the Committee.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 29, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 48, 'end': 53, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 71, 'end': 82, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Josh Doggett: if i may, doggett department of finance. i can take that question. the budget did include assumptions on the projected impact of prop 57, and those assumptions have been laid out in the budget. however, it was projected at the time that the implementation would not occur until october of next year. but, the governor is still working with stakeholders and the administration is interested in feedback of stakeholders before we finalize the actual implementation plan. but for the sake of including budget adjustments, assumptions were made in the governor's budget.
[]
Jeff Macomber: Good morning, Madam Chair and Committee Members. Again, I'm Jeff Macomber, Deputy Director in the Division of Adult Institutions. This BCP has three components, as Mr. Lopez said. The first is to provide additional yard access for inmates at the Deuel Vocational Institution. It is a facility that houses both general population and Reception Center inmates. And within the Reception Center they have two types of inmates. Inmates that have potential safety concerns and inmates that don't, which make it difficult to provide yard access to the general population. And the Reception Center and the inmates with safety concerns. The piece of this proposal proposes bringing up a yard that is not currently activated that would allow all inmates at that facility to get at least 10 and a half hours of yard offered each week. Currently they get five hours a week only. The second piece is a request to enhance staffing at the California Institution for Women. As far as our female facility goes, we transitioned one facility to male several years ago. And we have two facilities plus a smaller facility, the Folsom Women's Facility. And what has happened at CIW is you've seen an increase over the last three years. A steadily increasing number of incidents, disciplinary offenses, drug offenses are all trending upward. In particular, concerning for the department, we've seen a number of suicides at that facility. We've had six suicides since 2012. And we're seeing violence go up. So, this additional staffing will provide monitoring, provide staff to respond to medical emergencies. And also allow inmates to create a program access in and out of the housing units within CIW. And then the third piece is there is a visiting center slated to open at the end of this fiscal year, at the California Healthcare facility in Stockton. This component provides the staffing to staff that facility two days a week to provide visiting to the diverse population at CHCF. With that, I'd be happy to take any questions from the Committee.
[{'start': 60, 'end': 73, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 168, 'end': 173, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Caitlin O'Neil: Caitlin O'Neil, Legislative Analyst Office. Good morning, Madam Chair and Senator Beall. I've been asked to provide a brief overview of recent concerns about inmate and staff wellness and what steps the Legislator has taken to address these concerns, and I'll focus on High Desert State Prison and Central California Womans facility as these institutions highlight several wellness concerns. In 2015, the office of the Inspector General raised several concerns about High Desert State Prison. These included the high levels of stress among staff who work in a geographically isolated location with some of the state's most dangerous inmates as well as a culture among staff of indifference towards inmates that has resulted in callous treatment of those with disabilities and use of racist language. And finally, the review also found tightly knit social circles among staff that sometimes result in staff retaliating against colleagues who cooperate with investigations into staff misconduct, and this type of retaliation allegedly led to the suicide of a High Desert State Prison correctional officer in 2011. In total, the Inspector General made 45 recommendations to CDCR. One of which was the installation of video cameras in all inmates areas of the prison. CCWF has experienced an increase in violence, attempted suicide, and contraband trafficking since the transfer of women offenders from Valley State Prison to CCWF in 2012. The Legislature has taken several steps to address these concerns. In June 2015, the Senate Committee on Rules requested that the office of the Inspector General conduct the review of High Desert that I just spoke about. In March of 2016, this Subcommittee held a Joint Hearing with the Senate Committee on Safety to explore ways in which CDCR could better train and support staff working in the state's prisons. And finally, the 2016 budget act included $4 million for CDCR to do three things. First, to consider a partnership with the National Institute of Corrections to improve recruitment, retention, and mentorship of correctional officers, to consider options for improving the well-being of its workforce and managerial leadership, and also to increase compliance with mandated trainings. This concludes my overview comments, and I'd be happy to take any questions at the appropriate time.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 82, 'end': 87, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kia Cha: madam chair, kia jason cha, department of finance, if i could just clarify. even though the initial limited installation of cameras at high desert is being called a pilot. it was cdcr's attempt, within existing resources, to put up cameras on one yard to address a critical problem. now the administration is proposing to build on that, to create a bcp-approved pilot program at one female and at one male institution with policies, procedures, timelines, and data collection. and then just to circle back on the lao's comments, that concerns that inmates could move illicit activity outside of camera view. we also have the same concerns that just having limited cameras in one yard is going to enable inmates to move activities to other areas. so this proposal, by expanding video surveillance to the rest of high desert and to the women's facility, will provide more comprehensive video coverage of locations where inmate movement occurs and that's going to allow cds to sort of more accurately and more effectively assess video surveillance of full institutions.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 513, 'end': 516, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jen Flory: good afternoon, madam vice chair and members. i'm jen with the western center on law and poverty. western center partnered with the legislature early in the implementation of the affordable care act and we sponsored some of those early bills. as a result of our implementation of the affordable care act, in 2014, medi-cal was expanded to allow adults from age 19 to 65 earning less than 130% of the federal poverty level who are not otherwise linked to the medi-cal program, either through disability or qualifying child, to access coverage. as a result of that expansion, we have seen the rate of un-insurance among adults under 138% of the federal poverty level drop from 36.5% in 2012 to 19.2% in 2015. no other income level saw such dramatic drops in uninsurance rates because at no other income level do people so desperately need access to health coverage. the recent house proposal, the american healthcare act, would reverse these gains made in access to healthcare for low-income californians. the proposal reduces the federal reimbursement rate for the medi-cal expansion population, making it near impossible for california to uphold its commitment to cover this population. the proposal ends a guarantee of federal matching funds for the medi-cal program per a per-capita cap. the proposal puts additional barriers to medi-cal coverage such as adding additional renewal periods, withholding services prior to the verification of immigration and citizenship documents, denying payments for older medical bills, and eliminating easier access points to the program through simplified applications submitted at hospitals. these proposals would take billions of dollars out of the medi-cal program, while simultaneously increasing the cost of administering the program. and the cbo report that was just released half an hour ago also found that most of the increase in un-insurance is from changes to the medicaid program, which means again, it is low-income people that would bear the brunt. low-income californians cannot afford the ahca, and need the protections of the aca. for these reasons, we strongly support sr 26. thank you.
[{'start': 50, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gary Passmore: Madam Vice Chair and Members, I'm Gary Passmore, speaking on behalf of the Congress of California Seniors, an organization celebrating its 40th anniversary this year, and providing advocacy and service to older Californians. I vividly recalled, seven years ago, very close to this time on the calendar, in fact, that many of us in this room got together to celebrate one of the great achievements of these past several decades, the passage of the Affordable Care Act, by the Congress. We in California had spent years looking at this under our former Governor. In a slightly different model it would have depended on California law. And then through the years of developing the Affordable Care Act and then here in California, implementing it, and I might note, doing an outstanding job of implementing it. As shown by the fact that California's recognized more than any other state as having more to our implement the provisions. Take advantage of every opportunity that was made available to a state to use the ACA to provide better access and access to many millions of people who lacked insurance coverage. I think it's fair to say that the Affordable Care Act demonstrated our very strong sense of community in California. Demonstrated our values, California values, and we should take a great deal of pride in the work that we've accomplished thus far. We've taken greater advantage of the opportunities allowed under the Affordable Care Act than virtually any other state and we showed that California's values are very strong. By promoting this resolution today, I think we show that California is still committed and our values are still strong. Even as we struggle to stop a drive to strip our gains, that basically in order to give the richest Americans $600 billion in tax cuts at the expense of people who need healthcare, and either cannot afford it or can't find it. So, California seniors thank you for the work that we've done for our years of work together to make this a healthier state but also a fairer state. This is far more important to us than the number of bands and age ratings that, as they're now proposed in this new healthcare proposal, will actually hurt seniors and we recognize it and we're troubled by it. It's more important to us than the debate between providing subsidies to people who need them, low income people, or tax credits. It's not just about saving Planned Parenthood. SR 26, we believe, is about who we are in California. It is about the kind of society that we choose to create for ourselves. And it is about our principles and the values they reflect. We urge you to support this resolution and get it through the Senate, and get it to Washington as soon as possible. Thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Cabrera: Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and Members. Michelle Cabrera on behalf of the Service Employees International Union. We are proud to support SR 26. As you've heard, we would like to align ourselves with the comments of Health Access Western Center, as well as the California Congress of Seniors. Also want to note that children will be disproportionately impacted under this proposal, people with disabilities, and women, and we cannot afford this. The state budget will be squeezed to the tune of tens of billions of dollars. There is no priority in the State of California that won't be impacted should this proposal move forward. And, in addition, for those of us who care deeply about health care coverage and access it will make the journey to achieving health care for all that much more difficult to achieve. And for those reasons we strongly support this resolution. Thank you.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Chen: kimberly jonah chen with the california pan-ethnic health network in support. the aca expanded coverage and access to millions of californians many of which are communities of color and limited english proficient individuals who got coverage for the very first time. we support this resolution.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Josefina Ramirez Natsuna: josefina kimberly ramirez natsuna with children now this resolution strongly supporting it. the american health care act would seriously harm kids, and we're here to advocate for kids.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sara Flocks: Madame Vice Chair, members, Sara Flocks, California Labor Federation, in strong support. Thank you.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amanda Wallner: amanda josefina wallner with the california lgbt health and human services network, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Velasquez: kimberly amanda velasquez with equality california in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Camere: tim kimberly camere with seiu local 1000. with over 96,000 public employees across the state, we support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Gregory Kramer: Madam Chair and Members, Gregory Kramer on behalf of Planned Parenthood Affiliates of California. We'd like to thank the author for this resolution. We align ourselves with the comments made by Health Access, but as you know, Planned Parenthood is on the chopping block as part of the ACA overhaul, and so we are a safety net provider. We provide services to all folks, but especially women, and by sending folks off of the ACA, they go to safety net providers like us. But if they wanted to defund us, they'll end up in emergency rooms or with no coverage, so we urge your support. Thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Fred Main: Madame Chair, Members of the Committee, Fred Main on behalf of CalPACE, the 11 programs for the all-inclusive care for the elderly, in support of the resolution.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jodi Hicks: And revolution. Jodi Hicks on behalf of the California Academy of Family Physicians, in support for all the reasons stated, and access to healthcare being a priority to the family physicians. Thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Noe Paramo: noe tim paramo on behalf of california rural legal assistance foundation on behalf of our state coalition stand in support of the resolution. and to add in the san joaquin valley, where many of our residents in these counties 46 to 51% are in medical through the expanded program, we need to continue that support and get people their healthcare and health access they need, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 14, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dennis Cuevas-Romero: madam chair and members, dennis noe cuevas-romero with the american heart association and american stroke association in strong support of the resolution to require affordable and accessible healthcare for all. thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roxanne Gould: Good afternoon, Roxanne Gould with the American Nurses Association of California. We're in strong support of the resolution and revolution.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tabitha Stout: Tabitha Stout, Department of Finance. So, we would note that the constitution provides that the MVA funds can be used for the state administration and enforcement of laws, regulating the use and operation or registration of vehicles, used upon public streets and highways in this state. POST is a state agency that is mandated to provide training to local law enforcement, in the protection of state and public roads and so we believe that this funding is appropriate for POST to use.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dave Cornejo: Madam Chair, Dave Cornejo. So, we currently have the simulators. This would allow us to continue to have simulators available. So, if we do not receive the funding, then these simulators have all ready exceeded their expected life and so, we would not be able to provide any additional training if all of the simulators failed. So, it would have a catastrophic.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Clint Kellum: so, clint jonah kellum, department of finance. as it was discussed, the state penalty fund redistribution includes post receiving about $9 million less than it received in 16-17. so asking them to absorb an additional $1.8 million would come at the cost of an additional expense load, likely to other law enforcement agencies to attend training. and that's kind of how the reductions assume that's it's going to occur now. so that will make it more challenging for law enforcement agencies to attend and participate in mandated training.  and it is the funds that the highway patrol does use, and is appropriated. but we're not aware that this allegation has any direct effect on the appropriation, available for the highway patrol. so as we pointed out, i think that state being, or post being a state administering agency, that also provides minimum training standards, those minimum training standards also include regulation of laws and enforcement of laws in the community. there's definitely a direct nexus there, or at least a reasonable argument to be made that said that these funds could be reasonably paid from the motor vehicle account.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Emma Jung-worth: good afternoon everyone, i'm emma, department of finance. so i'm here today to provide a brief overview of the state penalty fund proposal. the state penalty fund was created as a depository for assessments on specified fines, penalties and forfeitures imposed and collected by the courts and counties for criminal offenses. state penalty fund revenues have decreased significantly over the past several years due largely to a decrease in traffic citations. given that this decrease in revenue is projected to continue, the state penalty fund can no longer support all of the programs that receive this funding. in addition, the cost of these programs have increased. however, the statutory formula has not been updated to account for these increased costs. as a result, many funds currently have structural deficits and some have receive funding backfills to provide temporarily solvency. to recognize a decline in state penalty fund revenues, the budget proposes to amend the current process by which the state portion of the assessment is distributed and instead provide direct appropriations and transfers from the state penalty fund to the various programs. to ensure program expenditures remain within existing revenues, the budget proposes to reduce the number of programs supported by the fund. the existing programs were evaluated and funding from the state penalty fund was prioritized for law enforcement training, victims services programs, and driver training programs. with that, i'd be happy to answer any questions about the general state penalty fund proposal. we do understand that there will be additional hearings to discuss the specifics of program implementation. but again i'd be happy to answer any general questions about the proposal.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anita Lee: Good afternoon members, Anita Lee with the Legislative Analyst Office. We have prepared a handout that I believe you guys have copies of. We'll be using that as a guide for our comments today. We'll be providing a quick overview of the State Penalty Fund and the programs that it supports. And then a comparison of the expenditure levels under existing law versus under the governor's proposal and then our assessment and our recommendation. So if you turn to page one of your handout, the state penalty assessment, which is highlighted on this table before you, is one of the various charges that are added to the baseline in compliance with state law. This table should look familiar to you as you saw it at our hearing two weeks ago. If you turn to page two of your handout, one of the numerous statutory distribution formulas requires that 70% of any payments that are used to address the state penalty assessment obligation be deposited into the State Penalty Fund, or SPF, with the remaining 30% going to county general funds. The flow chart in front of you then shows that additional state law requires that the state penalty revenues be redistributed to nine other state funds, to support 16 programs. The revenue that was deposited in the SPF peaked in 2008-9 at $170 million and has declined steadily since. If you turn to page 3 of your handout, I'm not going to going to go into detail, but we did provide an overview of each of the programs for your reference. If you turn to page four of your handout, we provide a table to summarize what expenditures would be for these programs under existing law absent any changes. If you look at the first three columns of the table, that shows 2016 -17 expenditures. Total expenditures are estimated to be 306 million with 97 million coming from the SPF and 209 million coming from other funds. This does include 24 million that was provided on a one time basis in 16-17 to address a decline in SPF revenue. The next three columns show 2017-18 expenditures. And so we estimate that 265 million in total expenditures would occur, with 90.4 coming from the SPF and 174 million coming from other funds. If you look at the last column in that table, you can see that it's a total decline of about $41 million from the 16-17 level and that the reductions are generally clustered around a few programs. If you turn to page 5 of your handout, we provide the same table then for the Governor's alternative expenditure plan. And the administration has discussed, they're eliminating the SPF formulas and allocating strictly to programs. And so, if you look in the 17-18 columns, you see that total expenditures are expected to be $269 million and that does include elimination of SPF support for four programs. Looking at the farthest column on the right, we see that this will be a decline of 36 million from 16-17 expenditure levels. We also see, in this column, that the reductions are generally distributed across many more programs and that programs that are deemed to be priorities by the Governor, such as training for state and local law enforcement, would receive smaller reductions than they otherwise would have under current law. If you turn to page 6 of your handout, we offer our assessment. So first, one of the key problems that we had previously identified with the state's existing fine and fee system is that the various statutory formulas made it really difficult for the Legislature to control the use of this type of revenue. The Governor's proposal to eliminate the SPF formulas will increase the Legislature's flexibility to reprioritize those revenues. However, because the administration doesn't specify how the reduction should be implemented, the potential impact on programs is unknown. Second, the amount of criminal fine and fee revenue that is deposited into the SPF can fluctuate from year to year. The administration's proposal does not include a plan for how to allocate additional reductions if SPF revenues in 17-18 are less than expected. Under existing law, the statutory formulas would have been responsible for allocating those additional reductions. And then, third, it is likely that the Legislature will likely have different priorities than the administration. The Legislature may want to eliminate different programs or provide a different expenditure level of reductions to programs or may want to direct programs to address the reductions in a particular manner to ensure that's consistent with legislative priorities. So if you turn to page 7 of your handout, the final page of your handout, in light of these concerns, we offer two alternative sets of recommendations. The first alternative is if the Legislature wants to focus specifically on the SPF. Under that scenario, we would recommend that the Legislature take three actions. One, modify the proposal to reflect its spending priorities. Two, to direct programs to take specific actions in implementing the reductions. And three, specify a plan to the extent that 2017-18 SPF revenues are less than expected. And to help the Legislature do that, we recommend that the Legislature direct each department to report in budget hearings on how it would implement those reductions. What impact those activities would have on programmatic operations, and then finally, whether or not there are additional funding sources that could be leveraged and used. Our second recommendation is if the Legislature chooses to take a broader approach to changing the overall distribution of criminal fine and fee revenue. We continue to think that this broader approach, namely removing nearly all statutory formulas, is preferable as it would maximize the state's ability to control use over this type of revenue. So as we mentioned two weeks ago, we do continue to recommend depositing nearly all criminal fine and fee revenue into the state general fund for subsequent appropriation by the Legislature. This would help ensure that funding was provided to programs based on workload need and legislative priorities, that programs are no longer disproportionately impacted by declines in criminal fine and fee revenue. And finally, it would eliminate the need for the Legislature to continuously identify and implement short term solutions to address structural shortfalls, or fund insolvencies, that are faced by other state funds, due to declines in criminal fine and fee revenue. So with that, we're happy to answer any questions.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Sanchez: good afternoon, madame chair and members. danielle clint sanchez, on behalf of the chief probation officers of california. just wanted to put a marker in that the chief probation officers feel very strongly, and it's very important that we get quality training into the field. and so, we just would encourage and ask that as this committee looks at what options are before them. that we ensure that we're both continuing to invest in peace officer training, which is really critical to many of the things we're talking about on a policy level in the legislature. and that we're also looking at how we can stabilize funding going forward. we have seen kind of declines and increases over the years, and as our kind of county departments are looking at ensuring that our officers get the best and most quality training, that it's important that we have some investments in those programs that we can continue to look at. we also, of course, understand that the state penalty fund is in the situation that it's in and that there are many challenges there that everyone is kind of grappling with. how do we address it, and where do we go from here? so, we understand the dynamics. but just encourage the committee to kind of be thinking about how we can continue our investments in peace officer training. and we certainly are happy to be a part of that and appreciate the thought that has gone into that to date.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 64, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Campbell: Hello, I'll move this closer. Hi, Mary Campbell with the Department of Healthcare Services. Do you want me to go ahead?
[{'start': 34, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Campbell: All right sure, again Mary Campbell, Department of Healthcare Services. So for the first issue I was asked to just give a brief overview of the department and the budget for the overall department before getting into the MediCal estimate specifically. So DHCS' mission is to provide Californians with access to affordable, high quality healthcare. Including medical, dental, mental health, substance abuse, disorder services, and long-term care. Our single largest program is obviously the MediCal program which coordinates and directs the delivery of services to approximately 14 million Californians or about one-third of the state. We in 2014 did implement the Affordable Care Act optional expansion which extended eligibility to adults up to 138% of the poverty level. This expansion and other increases in enrollment since 2013 have increased MediCal enrollment by more than 5 million people over the last four years. Outside of MediCal, the department operates several other programs, really those specialized programs for children or adults who have specific diseases including genetic diseases. We also operate cancer screening and treatment programs. And we oversee the country operation of specialty mental health and substance use disorder services. The Governor's January budget for 17-18 includes a total of $105.3 billion for the support of DHCS' programs and services. Of which about 19 billion state general fund, 67 billion is federal funds, and the rest is other funds, either reimbursements, or special funds. In addition, the January budget proposes the establishment of 35 new positions, the conversion of 18 existing limited term positions to new positions, to permanent positions, and then limited term funding. Both extensions and new to continue to support a variety of ongoing work in the department. Terms of the first question, regarding the 20% increase in the MediCal budget in the two years. We've continued to obviously experienced fairly significant growth over the last couple of years, related to the Affordable Care Act, in terms of eligibility. We're only starting to see that stabilize now in sort of what we're looking at for the 17-18 year. In addition, I think it's always important to point out that because the DHCS is on a cash budget, things can sometimes look a little strange because of shifting from time to time, given we're not on an accrual budget, the only department in the State of California. So that always can cost them anomalies. To the total fund change of about 20 billion from 1516 to the proposed 1718 is mostly federal funds and reimbursements. The main reason includes the Affordable Care Act the shifting of some managed care payments. From prior years to later years, as well as the hospital fee and the changes in the CCI estimates that we'll be talking about later. So while our total budget increased by over 20%, the general fund budget increased by only about 8%. Between 15, 16, and 17, 18, and the general fund changes really related to the 3 deficiency issues we're going to talk about in the next item related to CCI and the drug rebates with other shifts really being about timing of managed care payments including the hospital fee. So with that, I'll see if there are questions on this item.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Guadalupe Manriquez: Mr Chair, Guadalupe Manriquez with the Department of Finance. The Governor's Budget proposal is to spend 1.2 billion in 17-18 in Proposition 56 revenues. No Proposition 56 revenues are proposed to be spent in the current year, which is where the shortfall is in.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Metzker: Just Brian Metzker, LAO. We just wanted to note that we have reviewed the proposed funding and caseload changes in the Medi-Cal estimate and we find them to be reasonable. We note that most changes in funding in case load are driven primarily by growth in the program and not by specific policy changes in the Governor's Budget. And we will again review Medi-Cal funding and case load changes in the May revision, and will notify the Legislature of any significant changes at that time.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brenda Diaz: Mr Chairman and members, Brenda Diaz with California Coverage and Health Initiatives on behalf of the Children's Coalition, which includes Children's Partnership, Children's Defense Fund, Children out of PICO, and United Ways of California. We strongly support the inclusion of SP-75 for help for our kids in the budget, and our 41 local members in 50 counties have been actively engaged in this expansion. We're obviously aware of the pressure that the Federal Affordable Care Act uncertainty puts on the state budget, but we strongly urge you to continue making SP-75 a priority. Thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Chen: Kimberly Chen with the California Pan-Ethnic Health Network. I know this issue is going to be covered in a later hearing, but regarding the Newly Qualified Immigrant Wrap Program, there was a question that was raised here. And I'm not sure if we discussed that in terms of the estimates and when that would come out. We had some real concerns about the operations of that program.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Nguy: linda jonah nguy with western center on law and poverty. we also appreciate the administration's efforts in administering sb 75, but do oppose the newly qualified immigrant wrap program, as well as have concerns related to the elimination of the state only chdp program which we'll talk about at a later date.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tam Ma: Tam Ma with Health Access, just wanted to echo the concerns about the NQI Wrap and we look forward to seeing the Administration's estimates at the May revision. We do reiterate we have serious concerns about the program. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Ayala: laura linda ayala with the department of finance. the governor's budget. so regarding county eligibility administration funding, the governor's budget maintains the same level of funding for 2017-18. as provided in 2016-17, this augmentation of $655.3 million total funds, 217.8 general fund was agreed upon by the administration in the county welfare doctors association for both fiscal years to address the increase workload associated with the aca. and as my colleague from dhs mentioned, that is, we're hoping that a new budgeting methodology is implemented to address the county admin allocation in the future. and regarding, or do you have any questions on that? so, regarding the cost of living adjustment trailer bill, this proposal which is consistent with the past eight fiscal years amends the intel language and stature of dispense of the cost of leaving adjustment for counties in 2017-18. the counties will not receive a [unknown] however, they will receive a 655.3 million augmentation for aca workload.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jodi Hicks: Thank you, Jodi Hicks representing the California Podiatric Medical Association and great presentation. I just want to remind the Committee that podiatric services are considered optional benefits that were cut a few years back. And while we appreciate the department has since put in where podiatrists can be reimbursed in settings like emergency rooms and hospitals, that service is still not covered outside and in office visits. And, as we know, early visits of things like foot ulcers can prevent things like foot amputations down the road. So I would urge this Committee to reinstate podiatry services to try and help with some of these prevention and issues in diabetes, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Chen: Kimberly Chen with the California Pan- Ethnic Health Network. Thank you again, Dr. Goldstein, for raising this important issues. Communities of color are disproportionately impacted by diabetes. There have been tremendous efforts across our state to implement a lot of preventative measures, particularly in California, we're seeing the implementation of some really great programs on prevention there. I think what I would just highlight Of courses. The need for these practices to be shared among different parts of our state healthcare system and also to ensure that they're culturally and linguistically relevant because we know that the impacts are felt so much on communities of color. Making sure that they're in different languages, that they're being attuned to the role that food plays in many communities and being in tune with that. We know that many of the most widely adopted CDC practices are only available in English and Spanish and how are we addressing many folks in the API community, many of whom are underrepresented in diagnosis in pre-diabetes because of the ways that our bodies react to various parts of chemistry that are detected within diabetes screenings. So, thank you again for that presentation.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 83, 'end': 92, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sergio Aguilar: Sergio Aguilar, Department of Finance. Chair and members, so the Governor's Budget just proposed to use $1.2 billion Proposition 56 revenue to fund the Medi-Cal program growth for healthcare program service above the 2016 Budget Act, a level of state general fund expenditure. And so this $1.2 billion is helping the state continue to fund the expansion of services we've had in Medi-Cal, which now serves approximately 14.3 million Californians. And also, specifically, these revenue would help fund increased cost, primarily via capitation payments to health plans that provide care to Medi-Cal beneficiaries, for which the vast majority of the beneficiaries received their care through Medi-Cal Managed Care.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ben Johnson: Absolutely. This is Ben Johnson from the LAO. So in our analysis, we describe how Prop 56 funds are proposed to be used, and we estimate that a fairly substantial portion of those funds are used to actually pay for the state's higher share of cost for the ACA optional expansion population. The federal government, in 2016, is paying 95% of the cost, whereas in 2017, it's paying 94% of the costs. And so there's about $700 million increase in state cost and a portion of Proposition 56 revenues that we believe are being put towards that purpose. So in this sense, in one interpretation, they are supplanting federal funds in the Medi-Cal program as opposed to the state funds.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Guadalupe Manriquez: So Mr Chair and Members, Guadalupe Manriquez with the Department of Finance. Our interpretation of Proposition 56-
[{'start': 25, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ben Johnson: Ben Johnson again from the LAO. So every November and May we do complete a fiscal forecast in which for the various programs, Medi-Cal included, we project, ongoing, including out year, spending growth in the program. And we built in the cost of ACA optional expansion and other capitated payments that where Prop 56 funding is currently being used into our projections of increased spending in the program. So those were a part of our projections. I think, consistent with Department of Finance, we would have to find other state fund sources, absent Prop 56, such as general fund or, alternatively, would have had to make other spending decisions or cuts and so on, to be able to fund this with alternative funds in the absence of the Tobacco Tax money.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Adam Dorsey: So Adam Dorsey, Department of Finance. So there are some timelines that are in statute around the Fall budget development process and the Spring process. So I'll outline a little bit of that for you. So welfare and institutions code requires that the Department of Healthcare Services deliver an estimate to the Department of Finance on November 1st every year to help with the preparation of the Governor's Budget. As part of our processes to improve sort of accuracy of the budgeting process, we have an agreement with the agency that estimates will be delivered a little bit earlier. And so it was late October when we first received a draft estimate. We had an initial idea at that point that there could be some sort of a problem. But what my staff have been referring to, with respect to the confidentiality of the process, is that those numbers are always substantially different than what's in the Governor's Budget on January 10th. We are not at liberty to get in front of our Boss and disclose information that he has not made decisions on. And we continue to work with the department as part of our collaborative relationship to scrub things and make sure that they're in shape.
[{'start': 3, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Klaus: Okay, I guess. My name is Mark Klaus, I'm the President and CEO for Home of Guiding Hands. We operate a number of programs in San Diego and Imperial Counties, so we are a non-profit. We have been in business since 1967, so we support, as I said about 2,000 adolescent, adults and children every year. We also operate 25 ICF homes so there intermediate care facilities for the develop mentally disabled. Those 25 homes create base homes ICF are licensed by the Department of Public Health and reimburse I say almost entirely by medical. And by entirely we raised last year just over $450,000 to support the 150 residents that live in those homes. Our believe is about quality not institutional care and as I talk to our staff it's not about three hats and a cat, it's a bout exploring our communities, it's about quality of life. In addition that I'm also a board member of Developmental Services network and we have some thoughts and a ground quality. I would like the Committee to hear Doctor Remedy of little history, for about 30 years, California rates were established based on cost reports. Statistic sampling that were sent in to the Department of Health Care Services. And the department then looked at those cost statements and made some minor adjustments every year to our rates. That stopped in 2009 with Governor Schwarzenegger our rates were frozen at that time, at the 2008 levels. So that's about, at that time the proposal was to increase rates by about 7% our rates were frozen at that time and we have a number of ICF's going out of business and many more that I work with are really on the brink. Key components real quickly to our rate methodology, is really focused on quality. Number one though is to lift the rate freeze effective of August 2017 cost to do that in state funds is about 14.5 million. That's million, not billion. So that's a much lower number for the 7,000 plus people that we support in ICF's in California. Each year the rates would be adjusted by the average change for the most recent quarters, but really the thing that I want to talk about is the quality and the caterers. We've had a number of meetings with Department of Health Care Services looking at quality and caterers and to me I have a really difficult time coming to legislators or any local official. When I back in the day in Illinois I was elected to a couple of state positions. And everybody wants something, and when we talk about colors, we talk about rate increases. I get that, that's needed, but I really think that the state needs be paying for quality. So we're looking at some quality indicators. We would like to be able to continue to work with the Department of Healthcare Services on this proposal. Solicit their input in counsel, and look at a rate methodology that meets all state and federal tests for acceptability, and this isn't about my organization, this isn't about other providers, it's really about the people that we support. We opened our doors in the State of the art campus at Home of Guiding Hands in 1967. It's about people like Jeannie. Jeannie is a lady that lives in one of our homes. She moved in in August eighth of 1967. That's the only home that she's known and her medical needs continue to change. You know, we really want to work with her. We want to make sure that she has a good quality of life, good community experiences as well. I'm not sure of the other option is, you can see in your report they talked about negotiates right homes. We operate some of those as well and our rates with those homes are two and a half times what we get reimbursed in our ICF home. So we're just asking for your support to encourage Department of Healthcare Services which have been great to work with, but to look at a proposal as we come forward in the future, so thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1325, 'end': 1339, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3068, 'end': 3075, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3077, 'end': 3084, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Greg Louganis: Hi, good afternoon, Greg Louganis from APLA health and coach of the California HIV alliance here to present a proposal to increase reimbursement rates for the AIDS waiver program. So this is a program that provides in home support of service to over 1,000 of the most fragile people with HIV in the state. They help remain in their homes and avoid more costly institutional settings. Sadly the rates for this program haven't or most been increased since 2001, over 15 years ago. It's our understanding this program actually has the lowest rates of all of the community based waver programs. The program slowly disintegrating, so in 2008 there were 41 agencies across the state. Now there's less that two dozen. So our concern is that if we don't increase the rates, this program is going to disappear these services will no longer be available for people living with HIV. Just one example from an agency who's actually here today. Earlier this year there were unable to identify any home health agencies who'll accept the low rates and actually had a client who due to the low rates they can not receive nursing home care. This client had to go to the Multiple times and eventually was transported by ambulance four hours away, to Los Angeles to a skilled nursing facility. So, these are medical costs that really could have been prevented if this client was able to receive services in his home. So the bottom line is this program saves money, we have two studies, one from APL health just from this year that actually shows that sniff days dropped by 85% when looking at the year prior to enrollment, compared to the year after, and another study at Sierra Hills AIDS Foundation, Visits decreased 65% the year prior compared to the year after enrollment. So, again, this program saves money. Our proposal would increase the rates to be on par with other home and community based services waiver programs. Last year, the department provided an estimate of $4.8 million to achieve parity. We're currently working with the department on a revised estimate based on the most recent utilization data and there are several providers here who can talk about the more direct impact.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bob Bach: just to remember bob, on behalf of california association the medical product suppliers. so he's a provider of durable medical equipment and disposal medical supplies, authorized by a physician of their health care practitioner, and not here today asking for an increase but looking at the current rate methodology for dme in california. dme spans the gamut of very simple items, like a walker, to something very complicated, like a pressure ventilator for someone who's option dependent in the home. ccs children, the like, complex rehab equipment, which is computerized wheelchair with specialized seating systems, all those kinds of things, really runs the gamut. medi-cal rates are all-inclusive for all the costs of providing that equipment on a rental or purchase basis, so delivering it to the patient's home, instructing the patient on the use, maintaining it, getting a tar on authorizing the service, patient education, etc. it's all-inclusive rates. the current structure is, for a standard dme, 80% of medicare is what medi-cal reimburses for complex rehab and wheelchairs, it's 100% of the medicare rate. so the backdrop with medicare rates has been that, a few years ago they began to implement a competitive bidding program for a lot of dme, which has a series of faults, in terms of how it's been implemented is a blind bidding process. does not require the bidder who bids an amount to accept that contractual rate, but those rates go into the mix in terms of determining an average. so, the prices paying for rental and purchase of dme under medicare have dropped dramatically. congress recognizes the impact of these rate reductions and they're going in a series of stages. first in certain competitive bidding areas in california that expanded, then eventually, taking those competitive rates in los angeles area and applying it to a rural area like napa or sonoma. so, people who did not even bid those amounts were then being subject to those new medicare rates. so since congress recognized the problems with this, they passed the cures act in late 2016 at president obama signed it, which basically stop that right implementation and its tracks and actual reverse first part of it was done. so we'll approach the department on the problems with what's going to happen if this rate fully implemented, this provided proof at the 80 or 100 minus 10% provided rate reduction and then also, pending call back for the period 2011 through 2014 of the 10% that's yet to be implemented in 2017. so if you actually follow the medicare rates downward, apply the 10%, apply the call back, you'll see rate reductions of 40 to 60% of a current reimbursement. those rates are now sustainable and we believe access will be impaired. we began the cl already with special with ventilator patients which is even more complicated because these, in many cases, these ccs kids, you get paid a rental amount for the ventilator in the patients home, that has dropped from $1,100 a month to $645, could go lower, and with that rental rate, you are responsible for the care of that child, for the physical therapy, or the respiratory therapy, aspects of maintaining that child in the home. there on life support, if something goes wrong. it's 24/7 obligation and a variety of equipment that also comes with that ventilator rental which is not separately paid. so, the cumulative impact of those reproductions is going to be dramatic, and vent providers are really under the gun. so we've asked the department to do, what we've asked the committee to consider, is to make those medicare rates at 100% of medicare and to freeze them at one, one, 16, rates, which is currently what the department is using. so we're simply asking, don't go forward any further with those rate reductions, wait and see what the federal government does with competitive bidding. and what rate structure they finally employ before you implement more drastic reductions. thank you.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2090, 'end': 2095, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Christie Voy: hi, christie laura voy here, on behalf of the california clinical laboratory association, and wanted to thank staff for including us on the agenda today. i wanted to talk specifically about ab 1494 and implementation of that because that applies directly to clinical laboratories and we are here asking for the forgiveness of the retroactive recoupments that are coming about in regard to the delayed implementation of ab 1494, and so, how ab 1494 was passed in 2012. and it basically takes out clinical laboratory reimbursement rates and develops a unique process for re-calculating those rates on an annual basis and so as a part of that when it was passed, there was an additional 10% across the board cut to provider rates for clinical laboratory services, and this is in addition to the ab 97 cuts that are already taking place for clinical laboratories. originally, it was anticipated that the implementation of this new program would take about six months, and so, it was anticipated that this additional 10% cut would apply for six months. however, because of the difficulty in implementing the program, it ended up taking the department about three years to implement the program and so, that retroactive recruitment period applies from july 1, 2012 all the way up until july of 2015. so it's an actually a three year period, and what's there is this additional 10% cut, and so this money has not been collected yet, so we're asking for one time forgiveness for this retroactive recoupment of this three year time period. in addition to that, as a part of ab 1494, what happens is every year, the clinical labs submit data and the rates are re-established every year. so this first started, and the new rate took effect july 1, 2015 because the state is stuck with a computer system that's so old and it's difficult to update, the computer did not start paying this revised rate until february of 2016. so, there was a seven month delay period in which clinical labs were paid the previous year's amount, and so now we have the second retroactive recoupment period, in which there's a difference between the amount that was paid and the prior year's amount and so, this amount is going to be a little bit more difficult to collect from labs because it's not just a 10% amount. it depends on the specific test that was performed and a comparison between the rate and the prior year's rate and so some of these tests, the difference between the rate, and the prior year's rate are something like 10 cents, some 75 cents, some maybe $1 difference, and so we're looking at a period of seven months that the department, in order to collect this money, is going to have to reprocess each claim from all the laboratories for a seven month period over the state of california. so, that is going to be extremely difficult to calculate and to figure out, and then meanwhile, this is an annual process, and so the new rates took effect july 1, 2016. but again, the computer system that the department was not able to update those rates until february of 2017, and so again, we have a seven month delay, and so a third retroactive recoupment period in which the labs were paid the previous year's rate, and so we have come up with a plan to figure this out prospectively and going forward, and so we've introduced a bill and we're working with the department, and we do think we're going to be able to figure this out on a go forward basis and hopefully the bill will get passed and it'll work its way through, and there will be enough lead time for the department to be able to update their computer system. so that when the rates take effect on july 1st, the computer system will actually start paying that amount on july 1st, and we're hoping to get rid of this delayed implementation. so what we're asking for at this point is basically just kind of a truing up and looking at this on a moving forward basis. instead of trying to go back for these three retroactive recoupment periods and trying to go back for this seven month period in which the labs were paid the previous years rate on a per test basis, we really think that the time and effort spent trying to figure out how much that is, on a per test basis, really defeats the purpose of trying to move forward with this new program. and so we're just asking this point to move forward on the program, and to not spend time trying to figure out, during that seven months period, the difference between the current rate and the rate that was paid from the previous year. so that's what we're asking for.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sir Thompson: mr. chair and members. thank you. sir christie thompson, on behalf of the california medical association. i know you're running a little late and you have some other items, so i'm going to try to be as clear and concise as possible. we're here to talk about how the medical association and their proponents of prop 56 would propose to spend the new revenue created by the increase in the tobacco tax and i just wanted to take a quick step back to, so i think it's important to know how we got here. after the budgets of the great recession, provider rates within the medical system were cut. for physicians it was ab 97, this was a 10% cut in 2011, never been restored. most of those other cuts to the safety net programs have been, but typically as many people would know healthcare is often the last cuts to be restored. so through our advocacy to the budget trying to get ab 97 cuts restored it became increasingly clear to us that this administrations didn't really have the appetite to do provider rate increases to the general funded and it's a point well taken and that's really why we decided to run proposition 56. the goal of proposition 56 was two fold, create a special fund that would allow the medi-cal to make strategic investments into the medi-cal program with the goal of increasing access. now, all of this will read language of the statue, improving provider rates which california has 14.3 million patients in medicare. over double the next day and we pay the second lowest rates. so this is a major problem within the system and quite frankly we felt like we had really solved kind of a decade long problem that the system face. so, obviously, we were disappointed when the entire 1.2 billion was, we would call it swept into the general fund, but it is stated to be paid for programmatic growth. i think you heard a lot of discussion about supplementation at the hearing today, and a lot, i think, of confusion. i think it got made a little more complicated than it needs to be. really, i think the test of whether these funds are supplanted is, if proposition 56 didn't pass, would the state be still be on the hook for those obligations? and i think programmatic growth within the medical systems, it's a very clear that yes, they would have been and i think some of the statements today that without proposition 56, without allocating this money, we either have to basically make cuts to the medical system. that's something we didn't hear until the last couple months and something that we would have like to use in the campaign if that was indeed true and something that we would have like to use in the campaign if that was indeed true. if proportion 56 was necessary to basically maintain the status quo within the medical program, it's something we would have ran on and something that would have been included in the campaign materials. now, if you look at it both in the advertisements of the campaign and the attorney generals opinion, it's quite clear that this money, the portion that was allocated to medi-cal should go to provider rate increases. so to that end, we think it's pretty clear that these, that the proposition 56 funds that this committee should take a look at how those are allocated and see if it's consistent with the intent of the voters. i did want to mention the deficit talk, the 1.8 billion that we've been talking about. since we heard about this deficit in january, as an organization we've been struggling to really understand the basic fundamentals of the problem and here in the testimony today, i still don't think we can answer when the deficit was incurred, when did the state pay it back if they did, out of what fund did they pay it back with, and what effect it has on this year's current budget. those are fundamental questions. i think they're relatively simple, but we've been struggling to answer them, and i think today the committee ran into some of the same struggles we have been having. now, we're putting the finishing touches on a spending proposal of how we would like to see the proposition 56 funds allocated. i'll be presenting this all the officers in your staff the exact details, but i can kind of go into the general form of what we're looking at and basically, it's an incentive based payment program where providers are provided a one time annual payment, and they basically fall into two categories. those providers that are already seeing a high percentage of medi-cal patients. they would get a bonus payment as a reward for making sure that the medi-cal program's working and two, those providers that increased their percentage of the medical population. now, these, where exactly we land on these i think are up for negotiation. but, the important elements of this proposal is one, we tie the payments to increased access, and so we've heard the administration's concerns that provider rate increases can put future constraints on the budget, and we acknowledge that, but in our proposal we want to make sure that the new money we are investing in the medical program results in greater access for medical patients, and i think when you see the proposal you will agree. secondly, we want to provide the state, the financial flexibility to change the program, maybe target different providers, different percentage levels as the needs of the state change in future years, and finally, we want it to be relatively easy for the department to implement. so those are the principles that we have been working on on this proposal. again, those details are being hammered out this week, and i think we'll be able to share them with you in a couple days. but that's kind of the general overview of our organization, just want to thank you again, and the committee the time to talk today.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 55, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Beth Propel: beth health access california. like the california medical association, we were part of the campaign to pass prop 56, but in answer to your question, mr. chair and mr. vice chair from earlier, we were also very pleased to be in in the governor's council room on june 27th in 2013 when governor jerry brown signed the medi-cal expansion and committed the state of california. to the general fund sufficient, to make the state match for the medi-cal expansion. that was one of the most contentious sources of discussion, during the enactment medi-cal changes. and there is language specifically on point in the law, that speaks to what happens if the federal percentage drops from 90% and it was something the governor was very concerned about. he made that commitment in june of 2013 and it did not change until we saw this budget proposal, when they proposed not to honor that commitment. with respect to the prop 56. it was certainly our intent and we were involved in crafting the language at issue, that it be used to improve medi-cal. we had hoped, along with our friends the california medical association, we would be here today talking to you about health for all, and a number of other things to improve medi-cal. we acknowledge that provider rates are one of the things that the money can be used for to improve medi-cal, but not the only thing. in addition, the election brought us a bad surprise in another way with respect to the affordable care act and as we wait the deliberations in dc, we would urge caution. $1 billion, or 1,000,000,002. which sounded like a lot of money when we were working on the tobacco tax, does not sound like very much money, given what we're up against with the medicaid cuts, and the congressional budget office score of today. so when we're facing 15 or $20 billion in cuts to medi-cal, we want to be judicious in how we use what little revenue we have. thank you.
[{'start': 294, 'end': 305, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cathy Rosenburg: Chair members, Cathy Rosenburg and representing the Developmental Services Network and one of associate. The Association who represents all the ICFITT providers around the state, who served all the patients and the clients that we serve. One, we associate ourselves with the comments from Mr. Claus. This is a really cost effective way to serve an expensive population, and it's a population that we've served as already for decade. So when there are closures it is a very big deal for our patients to see change on where they move. We've also certainly made the point, that we are the most cost-effective place to serve these individuals. We want to encourage the Committee to take a look at this. We appreciate you hearing it today and then, on behalf of the San Francisco Ace Foundation, want to associate ourselves with. The comments of Mr Pulsifer, as he noted again, a very cost effective way to serve an expensive population, rather than in the emergency room or in more expensive facilities. So we encourage the Committee to continue to take a look, and hope to continue to work with the department to get a proper number. Thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 144, 'end': 150, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 293, 'end': 298, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 844, 'end': 852, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
David Kilburn: hi, my name is david and i'm executive director of access support network, in san luis obispo. we've been providing services for 33 years in san luis obispo, for people living with hiv and aids. we operate the aids medical waiver program there, it's very difficult at the rates that we are reimbursed to maintain staff, and we know that we run the program at a loss, but it keeps people in their homes. it keeps them with dignity of their homes and the familiar surroundings there. there is still stigma with hiv, so if someone goes into a long term care facility there's a lot of issues of dignity, and just staff understanding what hiv is. so now i really encourage you to suggestions of increasing this race to have parody with other wavered programs. thank you. one other thing. we just recently expanded into monterey county two years ago, when their aids service organization closed. we see a big need right now for opening an expanding the waiver program there, but i don't have the community support yet that 30 years brings, so i can't open a program at a loss. i can't even present that to our board as a suggestion, so if the rates were increased, we could probably expand into monterey county. thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rashita Green: Rashita Green with Ark Staffing Home Care, the local provider for the Age Medical Waiver Program here in Sacramento. Just like what he was saying, with rates still the way they are, it's difficult to find staff, to maintain staff, to find providers who will do home care, who will do homemaker services, things like that. They're just not going to accept the rates. It's too low. So, most of the time, we don't even have that service even though we're able to technically provide it. We can't financially support having those services and even with staff, if we lose somebody, it's a huge deal. Because we have to try and find somebody who will accept the pay that we're able to do, but we have a vulnerable population, and they have a lot of needs and a lot of services that we try to help them with. Diabetes, medication management all sorts of things, so it's very cost-effective and we're definitely in support of increasing our rates for that program. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Elena Ramirez: Good afternoon, my name's Elena Ramirez. I'm the program manager at Access Support Network. I'd also like to support Mr. Pulsifer's comments, regarding the AIDS Medical Waiver Program. That was actually a client that was sent in an ambulance several hours south to a sniff because our agency is not able to find a home health provider in our community that will accept our rates. None of them actually will. So, just like to thank the Committee and support Greg's comments. Thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 121, 'end': 129, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 457, 'end': 461, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Erika Hopkins: my name is erika sir hopkins i work for ultimate house services, i want to go ahead and reiterate the comments about increasing the funding for aids and hiv under the eighth waver program. we are currently the largest fqhc in orange county and los angeles and our is we currently treat about 1,500 of the most underserved communities of color, that actually are desperate need of our services at five of our sites. so we definitely ask that you increase the funding for this project so we can continue to provide the services, that our most vulnerable population needs. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brianna Pittman: Good afternoon, Chair and Members. Brianna Pittman with the California Dental Association, here to support the proposal that CMA discussed with you. We think that the only real interpretation of Prop 56, is that it's supposed to increase access above and beyond the current program. Most definitely is CDA's intent as a sponsor, a participant in the coalition in favor of Prop 56. I know that we'll be discussing Denti-Cal rates specifically later next month. But just wanted to raise our concerns with the governor's proposed budget and what we see as using $56 to supplant what should be General Fund expenditures. So we're working with CMA on that proposal, we'll be coming to talk to all of your offices, but as we said, think that the voters intended the measure and the money to go to improving access and that's what we're working towards. Thank you.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rand Martin : mr. chair and members, rand erika martin on behalf of the aids healthcare foundation, here in support of the aids medicaid waiver proposal. ahf has been operating a program like this for many years, are currently operating at an excess of a 20% deficit. they are passionate about the program, the know it works, it's cost effective, it keeps people in their homes, and they will not abandon the program even though they're losing money on it, but it does mean the money is coming from somewhere else. they do not want to be in the position of helping the state of california meet its budget when they're having trouble meeting their own. i urge you to support that proposal. thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 40, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Chris Frank: Mr. Chairman, members, Chris Frank with Maxim Healthcare Services. I'm here to support the Pediatric Homecare Enhancement that Dr. Woods brought up on behalf of some of Assemblyman Maienschein. We're the largest provider of private duty nursing in the state have about a thousand kids that we take care of. We have a very difficult time finding, retaining nurses to take care of these kids. We've had other providers leave the state. We have been asked by the state to supplement those providers, and we can't. So, we are turning providers away, I mean, we're turning kids away. Hospitals have asked us for help, we can't help. Waiting lists have been developed. There is a child in Dr. Wood's district that's been on a waiting list for two and a half years, a 14-year-old girl. Can't get her a nursing home, nursing coverage in the home and that's because of the rates, that's what it's about. Thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 131, 'end': 136, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 181, 'end': 192, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 687, 'end': 691, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Snyder: jennifer, here on behalf of the osteopathic physicians&surgeons of california first, and also the california association of health facilities. first, on behalf of the osteopathic physicians and surgeons of california, we want to echo the comments and support the proposal by the california medical association and also echo our comments that we believe that the prop 56, we are in agreement that that should be used for new funds and funds that can increase patient access. doctors of osteopathic medicine are primarily in primary care and primarily serve in rural areas that under served. and so would greatly benefit from those types of incentive payments or other things that you can improve to improve patient access. i think, we definitely need to, obviously, worry about what's happening at the federal level but you can have eligibility, but if you don't patient access, you don't have a program. so, we've been encouraged and we're very pleased by the committee, at least questioning and everything related to that. on behalf of the california association of health facilities, they represent over 400 intermediate care facilities for the developmentally disabled. we would encourage the committee to look closely at the proposal that was discussed earlier related to a 3% cola. these facilities have been around from the origination of the first movement of residents out of the regional centers. they provide quality care at a very low cost to the state. many of them are converting into the higher cost types of facilities, because they can't afford to stay in business. they are 100% medi-cal, rates have been frozen since 08, 09. a 3% cola will help keep them ahead of the game to some degree, and not have to close, and so, on behalf of caf, we would greatly appreciate your encouragement and entertainment of that proposal. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Steve Horn: Good afternoon, Steve Horne, President of the California Medical Transportation Association. I'm a civilian. I'm a provider. So listening to all of the testimony that's going on today, I can tell you that I personally have interacted with almost every provider group here. From a hospital discharge that can't get discharged because the DMA provider hasn't been authorized to supply the DMA equipment, from the Doctor that can't see the patient because the patient couldn't receive a ride. Why couldn't the patient receive a ride? Because the reimbursement rates are inadequate, they are extremely low and what happens is a provider providing medical transportation has to get a prescription signed by the Doctor, and has to submit a TAR. There's an excessive amount of paperwork that goes with that, and there's an adjudication process. When they cut the 10% with the increase in labor rates, increase in fuel costs, in church everybody's aware of that. If you drive longer than 15 miles without a patient on board, so if you have to drive 15 miles empty to go pick somebody up, you are operating at a loss. The majority of the non-emergency medical transportation providers in the state are 90% MediCal, Medicare doesn't cover our services. So, MediCal is the only one that does that, and so, respectfully ask to reinstate the 10% cut, I know we gotta our hands out everybody does but appreciate your time.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Barbara Glaser: Chairman and members Barbara Glaser, with the California Hospital Association. We like so many other organizations here today we're sponsor Prop 56. And we were very disappointed when the budget came out. We saw that these dollars were not being used to increase doctors rates, dentists rates, and other health care providers, because as we all know, with better rates, MediCal beneficiaries would have better access to healthcare, so we hope that this Committee, we thank you for today's hearing and hope that going forward you can reconsider how this dollars are spent.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Braden O'browski: mr. chair, members braden rand o'browski on behalf of the california association for health services at home, just wanted to speak to you briefly about the... bill that mr. wood presented. big supporters of this bill, this is a huge issue for us. we have plenty of kids that really need care, that we just can't provide coverage for. these are medical beneficiaries who just have them go back into the hospital, come out, go back into the hospital, come out, all it's doing is increasing costs. we would love to provide this service, that's what we're here for. home health agencies that want to provide this service, but just simply can't do it. thank you very much.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 173, 'end': 177, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Linda Nguy: Linda Nguy with Western Center on Law and Poverty. We don't believe that the Proposition 56 was crafted in a way to solely go to, exclusively go to provider rates. In light of Federal Funding threats, we do believe that Medi-Cal program as a whole needs to be considered. If there is a small window to build upon the Medi-Cal. We've heard from our legal aid partners, that they prioritize raising the income eligibility for the aged and disabled programs so that it's equal to 138% of the federal poverty line and amount of equivilent for all adults as well as the need to restore adult dental benefits, including gum treatment, which is crucial for blood control, for people with diabetes and partial dentures, as well as raising the rates for Denti-Cal.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ryan Spencer: ryan braden spencer, on behalf of the california academy of family physicians, we'd just like to echo the comments that were made by the panelists from the california medical association. and also add that the academy family physicians represents over 9,300 family physicians, residents, and students. these are primary care physicians. and primary care is usually the first point of access to healthcare for many individuals. and just a reminder to the committee when you're considering the appropriation of these funds, to remember that the aca appropriation, aca provider increase that was intact is no longer. and so please consider than when you're actually deciding how this money should be used. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jodi Hicks: jodi ryan hicks representing planned parenthood affiliates of california also a part of the prop 56 coalition, and want to support the cmas comments and also agree that the intent of the voter was to spend that money to improve access in the medicaid program, and we know provider rates do that, want to look at that though and make sure that we're also including clinics and that as where our health centers, vast majority of our patients are very, very low income and we provide that safety net. also want to support ccla's proposal, our health centers do over a million lab tests a year and did a nice job of laying out to a very complicated issue that has come before us for planned parenthood, it is to the tune of about $6 million that we have lost over this issue. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 135, 'end': 139, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Amanda Wollner: Amanda Wollner with the California LGBT Heath and Human Services Network. We represent over 60 LGBT serving organizations throughout the state. Here to support the proposal from the HIV Alliance which was presented by Mr. Polsifer to increase the AIDS waiver program rates. We believe this will greatly increase access for people living with HIV and AIDS in California, and would love to see the state make that investment. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 222, 'end': 230, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mary Campbell: Hi, Mary Campbell, Department of Health Care Services. So just to clarify, are you talking specifically about the two issues that you just asked about? So I think this is one of those complicated questions. I don't know off the top of my head the numbers of, I think, there are two different circumstances, two very different provider types, so I think we would have to come back and look at that. I certainly think we've always said rates is one part of access, there are other pieces that we also need to consider. So happy to have follow-up on that question.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Brooks: Hi. Good afternoon, Sarah Brooks, Deputy Director of Department of Health Care Services and appreciate the time to talk with you today. Excuse me. The Coordinated Care Initiative, which includes Cal MediConnect is focused on helping improve the lives of low income seniors and persons with disabilities in California. There are approximately 115,000 enrollees in Cal MediConnect today across seven counties, and hundreds of thousands additional beneficiaries who receive care through our Medi-Cal Managed Care Plans with respect to LTSS services. Early evaluation efforts show that Cal MediConnect is working. Participants report high satisfaction levels and are experiencing fewer hospitalizations and institutionalizations. The CCI itself consists of three different components. It integrates Medicare and medical services into one plan for beneficiaries who are eligible for both, otherwise known as Cal MediConnect. It integrates Medi-Cal funded long-term services and supports into managed care and requires mandatory enrollment for most other dual eligibles into Medi-Cal Managed Care. The implementing statute for CCI contained a provision requiring the Department of Finance, to determine if the entirety of CCI is cost-effective each January, and if not the entire program would be discontinued the following year. The Governor's proposed budget did estimate that CCI will not be cost-effective thereby triggering the poison pill, and ceasing CCI. Although CCI was found to not be cost-effective in it's entirety, the Duals Demonstration Program has shown the potential to improve the care and quality for those enrolled and help to keep individuals in their homes and community, thereby leading to likely long-term cost reductions and avoidance. The proposed trailer bill reflects this, striking a language authorizing CCI and replacing it with amended language that authorizes Cal MediConnect, MLTSS and Duals Demonstration, to continue with some modification. The administration proposes two key prorammatic modifications to the current programmatic structure. Those include the elimination of IHSS as a plan benefit, though beneficiaries will continue to receive those services as they did prior to CCI through fever service, and the delay of two years to January 2020 of the MSSP transition of the waiver to Medi-Cal Manage Care as a benefit as well. The DHCS will continue to work closely with our plans, our stakeholders, our advocates, as we continue to evolve and work to strengthen the program. You asked a couple of questions about passive enrollment. So, the Committee, our passive enrollment does continue to be a potential option to ensure sustainable enrollment in Cal MediConnect. We don't have a proposal on the table for Cal MediConnect today. Advocates themselves have preferred a voluntary enrollment strategy prior to passive enrollment. In 2016 we did work significantly with advocates to come up with a volunteer strategy and we continue to place our efforts today Into that strategy and move that forward. With respect to the recommendations of stakeholders, DHCS is committed to working with stakeholders on an ongoing basis as we continue to strengthen the CCI. The department does agree that continued coordination across systems of care is key, and we've taken a number of steps to strengthen both care coordination and referrals to long-term services and supports for this reason, including increased data reporting by health plans, as well as convening a work group with stakeholders on health risk assessments, which looks at standardizing questions across MLTSS and Cal MediConnect health plans. That will allow for better determinations when looking at care plans, in terms of overall care goals and needs. The plans and counties are still encouraged to collaborate on care and coordination and this is reflected in the revised trailer bill language proposed by the administration. Authorizing health plans and counties to continue sharing data and allowing beneficiaries to include both their IHHS providers and county social workers on their inter-disciplinary care team. And so with that I'm happy to answer any questions.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ben Johnson: johnson from the legislative analyst's office, and so earlier this winter, we did release a report that pretty systematically analyzes the governor's actions in terminating the cci, but proposal to continue certain major elements of the coordinated care initiative. we've given our comments on the ihss portions, at another hearing, and we'll continue to work with you on those. so i'll just restrict my comments to the non-ihss components here today. so while we are supportive of the governor's proposal to continue the certain major cci components, we do offer several options for legislative considerations on how to build on the improvements that have occurred under the cci going forward. one of these is to take another look at the capitated rates, that medi-cal, only seniors and persons with disabilities are paid. these rates pay based on whether or not they're in an institutional setting for instance, or if they're out in the community, and that's different than individuals who are in cal-mediconnect, who are paid a sort of more global rate, that provides additional incentive for managed care plans to encourage home-based and community services in lieu of institutional settings, which are both more expensive and, to some degree, less consumer-centered. another option we give for legislative consideration is to consider ways to boost enrollment in cal mediconnect. cal mediconnect enrollment did not meet the state's initial expectations despite passive enrollment, and despite other measures that the state has put in place. and so we emphasize at least one option would be to consider passive enrollment for individuals who are aging in to medicare, so that individuals who are turning 65. this would actually prevent the disruption in their benefits, as they would still have access to the same set of providers that they've been receiving prior to turning 65, while boosting cal mediconnect enrollment and helping to achieve both the improve care coordination and the lower cost that the initiative has intended to produce. so, with that i'm free to take any of your questions. thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susan DeMarois: good afternoon, i am susan, i'm the state policy director for the alzheimer's association. but today am here on behalf of 16 organizations, i believe you have seen a copy of the coalition letter. we represent older adults, persons with disabilities,unions and providers, all of whom jointly submitted a budget letter to this committee on the senate side. i wanted to start by saying we appreciate the governor's committment to the cal mediconnect program and to mltss through 2019. in order to realize the promise of coordinated integrated systems of care, we do have a few recommendations that were outlined in your analysis. the first is to strengthen care coordination. as originally envision, the cci promoted care coordination as a key component of the delivery system. we have two specific recommendations related to trailer bill language. the first would be under assessment, with the elimination of those coordinated care initiative we are losing the universal assessment piece and our coalition is recommending that trailer bill language require the state to develop a standardized, functional, and cognitive assessment, and health plan guidelines for developing care plans with respect to care coordination. we also would like to see standards for care coordination. we recommend developing trailer bill language requiring the state to draft and enforce required standards for care coordination, including referral to and coordination of services provided outside the health plan, including ihss and other home and community-based services. the words that we've been hearing are encouragement, and we would like to see something a little bit more than encouragement to make sure that that happens for older adults and people with disabilities. to ensure access to home and community-based services, that's our second area of recommendation. the availability of these services are essential to helping individuals remain in the community and to avoid institutionalization. many of these services are not available on a statewide basis nor are they funded at a level that could adequately serve every community in california. so, even within the cci's, enrollees cannot always access program benefits, and we have evaluation data that supports that. as many as 40% of people evaluated were not aware that they had the right to a care coordinator or coordinated services. so we would recommend that the state develop data to show availability and quantity of home and community-based services on a statewide or county-by-county basis. this would go to the network adequacy standards that we heard about under the federal medicaid managed care regulations. our next area would be maintaining choice in enrollment options. we recommend that the trailer bill language continue the requirement that pace be included as a cal mediconnect enrollment option, and also extend the requirement for pace to the enrollment process to mltss in addition to pace. and then the fourth area would be development of a long-term services and support infrastructure plan while we're continuing with cal mediconnect in seven counties through 2019, it's unclear what the delivery system will look like beyond 2019, and questions remain as to how the state is planning to develop an infrastructure to support the state's fast-growing and dramatically increasing aging and person with disability population. we need vision and planning for both the health plans and the homeland community base services providers beyond 2019. and we would recommend trailer bill language in this area as well to set forth priorities to measure progress in addition to transition timelines, we think are very important with this population and stability. as it stands, cal mediconnect is only in seven counties. so for the remaining counties there isn't a plan of any sort. so with that, i'd like to thank you for inviting me and including me and answer any questions that you might have.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Darby Kernan: Hi, I'm Darby Kernan with the California State Association of Counties. We support the CCI, and we hope that in a bigger picture of the whole issue that we can have some more time to show that the savings for the State are there and that the program is successful and can work. And so we appreciate you keeping the item open and giving us more time to do that.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Alley : Good afternoon. I'm Jennifer Alley with the California Association of Health Plans. We support the administration's proposal to keep the three pieces of the CCI going. Our members are very invested in the counties where it is and have seen some successes. And we also support any transitional plans or innovative ideas that are going to help streamline care coordination across the spectrum that are sustainable. Thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 34, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jolina Voris: chair and members, jolina jodi voris on behalf of the urban counties of california. all of the seven counties that are cci counties are open counties. i just wanted to make a couple of points. we've been in support of cci program since its onset. and we believed in the benefits of care coordination, however, we also point out a couple of issues, and it's hard for us to look at this in a vacuum without the ihss moe issue looming out there. but i will say, it was established as a three-year pilot but the implementation was staggered and there was some hiccups in the beginning with getting various notices out, so not all counties have had the full three years. san mateo was the first, but orange county just finished their passive enrollment in, i think it was august of last year. so, we still think there could be more time for more benefits and improvements to the program before the unwinding is happening. and also we would note that without ihss and the program, and without counties required to participate, which is what i believe is in the governor's budget, we're unclear how successful it's going to be in the future. so just to point that out to the committee. thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tiffany Anderson: tiffany jolina anderson on behalf of san mateo county, we would just align our comments with those made by csac and urban counties of california, in particular, san mateo is one of the seven cci pilot counties. just a few quick stats, overall, long-term care delays have decreased 33% in san mateo county. we've moved a 140 clients from costly skilled nursing facilities into the community, and improved time from the intake process to initial home visit for our beneficiary assessment from 75 to 28 days. overall, those streamlining efforts have been extremely successful in san mateo county. thank you so much.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Peter Hansel: Peter Hansel with CalPACE for the State Association of PACE Programs. Many of you are familiar with the PACE, Program of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly, representing 11 programs statewide serving about 7,000 very needy seniors who are kind of at the high-end of the scale, and overlap with the population served by the CCI. We're part of the coalition that submitted the letter that is referenced in your agenda. I do want to support all the comments that Mr. Morris made. In terms of the role of PACE in the CCI, just want to point out that PACE is included as an enrollment option for beneficiaries in Cal MediConnect, the dual eligible portion of the CCIS must been described, but it is not included in the enrollment process for the other two components of the CCI, and we're not really sure why that is the case. PACE is a managed care, fully-integrated program serving many beneficiaries that could benefit it, including the ones that have to make an enrollment decision or become enrolled in a managed care plan for their long-term supports and services. So we urge that that issue be given consideration on this item. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 464, 'end': 470, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sarah Steenhausen: good afternoon. sarah with the scan foundation. we just want to note that we really appreciate the state's continuation of both the cal mediconnect program and managed long-term services and supports through 2019. we are very concerned about the state's termination of the universal assessment tool. because we believe universal assessment really is the critical component to developing coordinated systems of care. it's very difficult to align services across the continuum if you don't have an adequate picture of a person's needs across social, functional, and cognitive. so to that extent we recommend in statute the development of language similar to what mr. morris was referring to, that outlines requirements for functional and cognitive assessments through the hra delivery process, as well as what the standards are for the administration of those assessments and how they relate to the plan of care. second, while we are very appreciative of the continuation of the program through 2019, we are also concerned about the fact that the state does not have a plan beyond 2019. and we know that there's issues with accessing services across the seven cci counties, as well as beyond the seven cci counties and we think that developing an integrated service delivery plan would really help address some of those challenges. so, thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 665, 'end': 671, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Linda Nguy: Linda Nguy with Western Center on Law and Poverty. We're still reviewing the TBL to ensure that beneficiaries do not go through another disruptive transition. We do urge the department and the Subcommittee to consider updating the Trailer Bill language to reflect consumer protections currently in place. For example, in the Trailer Bill language, continuity of care protections is six months currently. Current policy is 12 months. In addition, CMS has not approved, did not approve lock-ins in the original CCI language, so I would recommend removing that from the current TBL, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Nguy: Linda Nguy with Western Center on Law and Poverty. As written in the agenda, we support this proposal. But do question whether this is sufficient resources considering the long wait times our legal aide reports.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tam Ma: Hi, Tam Ma with Health Access California. We also generally support this proposal, and we do have some questions about whether this actually adds sufficient capacity for the Ombudsman's Office. And if I'm understanding the proposal correctly, a number of the nine limited term positions are just being converted to permit positions, which is generally a good thing. And then what the six new permanent positions, are those converted replacing the contract staff that is there now or is it in addition to the contract staff?
[{'start': 4, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michele Stillwell-Parvensky: stillwell-parvensky, children's defense fund california, also on behalf of the children's health coverage coalition. and would echo the comments of the previous speakers. we believe that investing in the ombudsman is very important for our families to be able to navigate their care. and so they are able to without long wait times, address the problems that come up. so we support this, but also encourage continued investments and addressing some of the problems of long wait times. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mari Cantwell: Sure, Mari Cantwell, Department of Healthcare Services. So I think at this point, our proposal, we think this is sufficient. I think what we have seen and because we have this new system, we've actually seen changes. And we're trying to make sure we're not over asking for things that aren't going to be needed. We have this new phone system that was put into place that's why we have this request before you today. We'll continue to provide updates on the metrics of what's happening from a wait time perspective call abandonment which I think is one of the issues that was being raised. And continue to bring that to all of you, so that you are aware of what's happening, what the metrics are and that can be for your consideration.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amanda Mattson: mattson, deputy legislative counsel, office of the legislative counsel, anne neville, director of california research bureau, ed howard, senior counsel for the center for public interest law, good morning. good morning. thank you, guys, for joining us, and thank you for giving us a little bit of the history and purpose of the licensed professions. so i know each of you have some opening remarks, so let's go ahead and just begin.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 72, 'end': 84, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 126, 'end': 135, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Amanda Mattson: Thank you, Chairman Salas for inviting me to testify today. My name is Amanda Mattson, I'm a Deputy Legislative Council at the Office of Legislative Council and I'm here to briefly go over the State of existing law with the Moscone-Knox Professional Corporation Act and how it interacts with the licensing acts under the business and professions code. Under the general corporation law in California, any person is legally authorized to form a corporation for any legal purpose, unless otherwise prohibited. One such prohibition on this is what has been known at the common law as the Learned profession doctrine. This doctrine was created basically and it said, a certain learned professions and then beginning it was lawyers, doctors, and dentists and then the 80s optometrist were added as well are not authorized to practice in the corporate form in the state because that'll be against public policy. The courts were worried that due to the nature of these professions with the trust in the fiduciary type relationships they had with their clients and patients that it wouldn't be a good idea to have shareholders or the needs of the corporation basically being placed between the patient, and the practitioner of that profession. In 1968, the Moscone-Knox Professional Corporation Act was enacted to statutorily authorize those professions that were prohibited from incorporating to incorporate at a professional corporation. the act itself did not authorize the existence of the corporations, but stated that if there is authorization in a licensing act of a profession, for a professional corporation to exist, then the provisions of the Moscone-Knox Professional Corporation would apply. Those provisions generally deal with the origination and organization of a professional corporation. They specify who can and cannot be a shareholder of the corporation, who can. And cannot actually give professional services to the public, which employees can and cannot do these things. There are also statutory prohibitions on certain professions practicing in the corporate form and the licensing acts, and those prohibitions make these professions only be able to incorporate under the Professional Corporation Act. So in summary, the Moscone-Knox Act itself did not authorize or prohibit any profession or vocation to practice in a corporate form or not. It merely said if there's authorization in the licensing act for a professional corporation to exist then the provisions of the Moscone-Knox Professional Corporation Act would apply. The act itself says that all other provisions of the general corporation act also apply unless there's conflict and this conflict is mostly seen in the provisions of who can and cannot be a shareholder, who can and cannot offer the professional services, and who can and cannot buy shares of the professional corporation. So in sum, under the General Incorporation Act, unless otherwise prohibited, whether a statutory prohibition, or a common law doctrine such as the Learned Profession Doctrine, a profession or vocation is authorized to form a corporation for any lawful purpose. If the licensing act authorizes the formation of a professional corporation. But does not expressly prohibit that profession from being able to only form in that way, that profession has the choices they can choose to form as a general corporation, or they have the option to choose to form as a professional corporation, and once they make that choice to form as a professional corporation, the provisions of the Moscone-Knox Act would then apply to that corporation. This is all I had to tell you today. If you have any questions please let me know.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 25, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 71, 'end': 85, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Kirchmeyer: thank you. thank you. thank you chairman solace and members. my name is kimberly jonah kirchmeyer and i am the executive director of the medical board of california. with me today is carry webb. staff counsel at the medical board. thank you for asking the medical board to attend today's meeting and allowing us to provide the committee with background information on the board's role with professional corporations. the medical board does not license any professional corporation and has a limited interaction with professional corporations. the board's main function is the licensure and registration of physicians and surgeons, and other allied health professionals. including licensed midwives, research psychoanalysts, student research psychoanalysts, and polysomnographic trainees, technicians and technologists. as you can see, this licensure and registration process involves sole individuals, not corporations. the board does approve accreditation agencies that accredit outpatient surgery settings, but the issue of being a corporation does not pertain to these entities. however pursuant to business and professions code section 2285, any physician who uses a name other than his or her own in any public communication, advertisement, sign, or announcement must hold a fictitious name permit. these fictitious name permits, or fnps, can be obtained by a sole physician, a partnership or a corporation. corporations applying for an fnp must comply with corporations code section 13401.5. the corporation, this corporation section describes what types of corporations are allowed and who can be members of these corporations. for example, a medical corporation, in addition to a physician and surgeon, may have other members that are doctors of podiatric medicine, psychologists. registered nurses, optometrists, marriage and family therapists, clinical social workers, physician assistants, chiropractors, acupuncturists, naturopathic doctors, professional clinical counselors, physical therapists or pharmacists. however, this code section also states that the sum of these shareholders cannot exceed 49%. therefore, in a medical corporation, the physician shareholders must hold 51%. and the others can add up to 49%. the board requests a copy of the original articles of incorporation when a corporation applies for an fmp. these are reviewed to ensure they have an endorsement stamp and a corporation number. staff also verifies information to ensure that the corporation has an active status via the secretary of state's website. for the board's licencing unit this really is the interaction with corporations. the board's enforcement unit also may review articles of incorporation in additional corporation documents. should the board get a complaint alleging a violation of the ban on the corporate practice of medicine. or determined during an investigation that there be a violation on the ban on the corporate practice of medicine more information is then gathered. the board determines who the owner of the practice is by reviewing many documents, including the articles of incorporation. the board may also review any management services agreement, and ownership documents. should a violation of the ban on corporate practice be found, the board may take criminal or administrative action against the physician and laypersons involved. these are the areas where the medical board is involved with corporations. and ms. webb and i are here to answer any questions the committee may have regarding the board's role with this issue.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 47, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 72, 'end': 97, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 183, 'end': 193, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3441, 'end': 3445, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jessica Sieferman: good morning, chair salas and committee members. my name is jessica kimberly sieferman, i'm the executive officer for the california state board of optometry. since its inception in 1913, the board has been charged with protecting the health and safety of the public through its licensing, regulatory, and disciplinary functions. today, the board regulates the largest population of optometrists and dispensers in the united states with roughly 12,000 active licensees and registrants. i thank you for the invitation and opportunity to participate in this hearing today. in your february 27th, 2017 letter, you requested hearing our organization's perspective on the role of regulating, both individual licensees and those professional corporation which are licensee owned, and are employed by corporations which are required to register with us or be licensed by our board. first i must state that the current board has neither discussed nor opined on the regulation of corporations and the impact on professional licensing, thus i cannot provide any formal perspective or opinion as it relates to this topic. if the committee would like, i would be happy to add this as a topic of discussion for a future board meeting. committee staff requested that i provided a brief history related to the board regulating corporations, insight as to why we stopped registering corporations, and the current role the board plays in professional corporations. from 1970 to 2007, business and professions code 3160 through 3167 set forth registration and operation requirements for professional optometric corporations. those corporations would need to register with the board by paying a $100 fee. and renew annually by paying $50 and submitting a renewal application. optometric corporations were also regulated by the corporation code and still are. at that time, however, optometric corporations were the only healthcare corporations required to register with both the secretary of state and the regulatory board. under that structure, optometric corporations would apply with the secretary of state's office. the secretary of state's office would issue the registration and certify the articles of incorporation and by-laws. and then the optometric corporation would apply for a board registration and submit the articles of incorporation that the secretary of state's office just verified. after a brief discussion in 2004, and more in-depth discussions in 2005, the board believed existing requirements were duplicative and eliminating the registration for optometric corporations did not appear to pose any potential harm to the public. rather, the board believed removing the requirement would streamline government and improve services to the public. omnibus bill eb 2256, effective 2007, repealed the registration requirement, to ensure licensees were still held accountable, eb 2256 added business and professions code 3111, which made any violation of the moscone-knox professional corporations act on professional conduct, which is ground for disciplinary action. post ab-2256, since 2007, the board has had minimal interactions with professional corporations. all the optimetric corporations practicing under a corporate name which were previously exempt from the fnp requirement are required to obtain an fnp from the board. as part of the application process, professional corporation provide a copy of the articles incorporation for preliminary compliance check with business and professions code 3111 which looks at moscone-knox. of those reviewed staff estimate, roughly 10 to 15% of the articles are incorrectly incorporated as general versus a professional corporation, and then applicant goes back to the secretary of state's office to correct the articles and incorporation. business and professions code section 3109 prohibits employment from any corporation or individual other than a licensed optometrist, a licensed ophthalmologist, or a healthcare service plan regulated by the department of managed healthcare. effective january 1, 2016, ab 684, a registered dispensing optician, which could be an individual, a corporation, or a firm may own a healthcare service plan if that healthcare service plan did not employ optometrists. ab 684, which moved the rdo program from the medical board of california to this board also allows a landlord tenant relationship between an rdo and an optometrist, provided specific additions are contained within a written agreement. in addition to other actions available to the board, business and professions code 655, violations could result in administrative fine of up to $50,000, thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 25, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 60, 'end': 86, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Virginia Herold: good morning, i'm virginia jessica herold. i'm the executive officer of the board of pharmacy. we are a consumer protection agency and our mandate is consumer protection. we regulate 140,000 businesses and firms that somehow either dispense, compound, or some way to transport our prescription medication into and from within california. so, we have more individual licenses, our individual licenses include pharmacies, pharmacy technicians, interns, and designated reps who were in charge of drug wholesaler premises. none of these individuals can be incorporated. they hold professional licenses or licenses directly with us as individuals. so we have that side. however, for our sites which we also license, there we see a lot of corporations. and for the main reasons we exist, for the hospital pharmacies and the community pharmacies that we're familiar with. we have 93% of our pharmacies in the state, and it's 93 for both the hospitals and the community pharmacies, or have at least one corporate structure in their ownership structure. we have very complex ownership structures that we regulate and i brought a couple of board cards. we require these as part of our application process. we collect from each level, all the way up until we get to real live people. so it's not unusual for us to have a number of corporations in the structure somewhere, we collect information on that level, we also collect information on limited liability companies until we go all the way to the top. and lots of times there's no individuals until the very top. and i have another simplistic organization of another company that we regulate. so with that said, in california it has already been said that anyone can own a pharmacy, but only a pharmacist can be in charge of that pharmacy. we however do retain the ability to regulate the owner, as well as the pharmacist in charge, as well as the individuals that work within that pharmacy that have professional license with us that will include pharmacists, interns, and pharmacy technicians. and we do use site and fine rather heavily at the board. a lot of times, we don't have professional issues as much as we have violations of law which are business-related for which we do site and fine. about 10% of our budget as it turns out typically every year, comes in from site and fines. we don't count on that money. it is what it is, okay. we regulate at the site level. that means if a corporation, of the 40 to 50 companies, we regulate more than 10 of them, so we regulate some very large players. we regulate the site individually, not at the corporate level. we have no ability to get to the corporate structure itself. 55% of our licensed pharmacies are housed within what would be called a large corporate structure such as walgreens, cvs, things of that magnitude. okay, we have found sometimes, and this is a concern for us, that when we discipline a site for a professional violation, for example where they have failed to follow appropriate dispensing of controlled substances is topical issue for us. we will go through and we will discipline the pharmacist in charge sometimes, sometimes the pharmacist as well as the corporate store at that level. we cannot get at the corporate level any other way other than to join forces with, in one case, we've joined with the district attorneys in three counties, where we have gone after corporate failure to staff pharmacies, so that they provide consultation to patients. and in that vein, they were able to prosecute and bring in fines of $500,000 against corporate themselves, in a manner that we could not do. okay, we also maintain current requirements for who owns the pharmacies. so if there is more than a 10% change in ownership, it has to be reported to us after it occurs. if it is more than a 50% change in ownership it results in a change of a permit number. we treat it as a brand new pharmacy at that point. we issue it a new number. and that has to be pre-approved by the board. so we retain some ability to regulate who owns pharmacies in california. and i think that's where i'll leave it right now, and i'll be happy to answer whatever questions i can.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Davina Hurt: Good morning, Chairman Salas Members of the Committee. My name is Davina Hurt, I am the chair of the Court Reporters Board and I'm honored to be here with you and thank you for shining a bright light on this issue. I am here with another Board member Carrie Nocella. And our Executive Officer, Yvonne Fenner.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 28, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 66, 'end': 77, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 251, 'end': 265, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 294, 'end': 307, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Deanne Pearce: Good morning, Chairman Salas, Chairman Hill and Committee Members. My name is Deanne Pearce and I am the Assistant Executive Officer for the California Board of Accountancy. President Alicia Berhow just joined us, so I can have her come up and provide opening remarks for us.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 28, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 39, 'end': 43, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 78, 'end': 91, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 184, 'end': 197, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alicia Berhow: thank you. good morning, chairman salas, chairman hill and committee members. my name is berhow and i am the president of the california board of accountancy and it is a pleasure to participate on this panel today. the california board of accountancy regulates over 100,000 licensees, the largest group of licensed accounting professionals in the nation and consists of over 94,000 certified public accountants and almost 6,000 accounting firms, including corporations and partnerships. cpas and accounting firms are authorized to provide a wide variety of accounting, financial management, tax planning and return preparation services. the california board of accountancy is first and foremost, a consumer protection board. our mission is to protect consumers by enduring only qualified licensees, practice public accountancy in accordance with established professional standard. we accomplish this mission through our licensing and enforcement procedures which ensure that those who practice public accounting in california meet california law, and professional standards, and we look forward to discussing today our role in regulating individual licensees and accounting firms. we're proud of our work to protect consumers and we're available at any point, any time to our members of the committee. and to the members of the legislature after the conclusion of today's hearing. so at this point, again, i'd like to turn it back over our presentation to dianne pierce, the california board of accountancy's assistant executive officer.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 39, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 50, 'end': 54, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 89, 'end': 95, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1456, 'end': 1469, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Laura Zuniga: Good morning. Laura Zuniga with the Contractors State License Board. I'll just turn it over to Mike Jamnetksi, he's one of the managers of our licensing division, for our presentation.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 95, 'end': 109, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Amanda Mattson: mattson, deputy legislative counsel, office of the legislative counsel, anne neville, director of california research bureau, ed howard, senior counsel for the center for public interest law, good morning. good morning. thank you, guys, for joining us, and thank you for giving us a little bit of the history and purpose of the licensed professions. so i know each of you have some opening remarks, so let's go ahead and just begin.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 72, 'end': 84, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 126, 'end': 135, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Amanda Mattson: Thank you, Chairman Salas for inviting me to testify today. My name is Amanda Mattson, I'm a Deputy Legislative Council at the Office of Legislative Council and I'm here to briefly go over the State of existing law with the Moscone-Knox Professional Corporation Act and how it interacts with the licensing acts under the business and professions code. Under the general corporation law in California, any person is legally authorized to form a corporation for any legal purpose, unless otherwise prohibited. One such prohibition on this is what has been known at the common law as the Learned profession doctrine. This doctrine was created basically and it said, a certain learned professions and then beginning it was lawyers, doctors, and dentists and then the 80s optometrist were added as well are not authorized to practice in the corporate form in the state because that'll be against public policy. The courts were worried that due to the nature of these professions with the trust in the fiduciary type relationships they had with their clients and patients that it wouldn't be a good idea to have shareholders or the needs of the corporation basically being placed between the patient, and the practitioner of that profession. In 1968, the Moscone-Knox Professional Corporation Act was enacted to statutorily authorize those professions that were prohibited from incorporating to incorporate at a professional corporation. the act itself did not authorize the existence of the corporations, but stated that if there is authorization in a licensing act of a profession, for a professional corporation to exist, then the provisions of the Moscone-Knox Professional Corporation would apply. Those provisions generally deal with the origination and organization of a professional corporation. They specify who can and cannot be a shareholder of the corporation, who can. And cannot actually give professional services to the public, which employees can and cannot do these things. There are also statutory prohibitions on certain professions practicing in the corporate form and the licensing acts, and those prohibitions make these professions only be able to incorporate under the Professional Corporation Act. So in summary, the Moscone-Knox Act itself did not authorize or prohibit any profession or vocation to practice in a corporate form or not. It merely said if there's authorization in the licensing act for a professional corporation to exist then the provisions of the Moscone-Knox Professional Corporation Act would apply. The act itself says that all other provisions of the general corporation act also apply unless there's conflict and this conflict is mostly seen in the provisions of who can and cannot be a shareholder, who can and cannot offer the professional services, and who can and cannot buy shares of the professional corporation. So in sum, under the General Incorporation Act, unless otherwise prohibited, whether a statutory prohibition, or a common law doctrine such as the Learned Profession Doctrine, a profession or vocation is authorized to form a corporation for any lawful purpose. If the licensing act authorizes the formation of a professional corporation. But does not expressly prohibit that profession from being able to only form in that way, that profession has the choices they can choose to form as a general corporation, or they have the option to choose to form as a professional corporation, and once they make that choice to form as a professional corporation, the provisions of the Moscone-Knox Act would then apply to that corporation. This is all I had to tell you today. If you have any questions please let me know.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 25, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 71, 'end': 85, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Kirchmeyer: thank you. thank you. thank you chairman solace and members. my name is kirchmeyer and i am the executive director of the medical board of california. with me today is carry webb. staff counsel at the medical board. thank you for asking the medical board to attend today's meeting and allowing us to provide the committee with background information on the board's role with professional corporations. the medical board does not license any professional corporation and has a limited interaction with professional corporations. the board's main function is the licensure and registration of physicians and surgeons, and other allied health professionals. including licensed midwives, research psychoanalysts, student research psychoanalysts, and polysomnographic trainees, technicians and technologists. as you can see, this licensure and registration process involves sole individuals, not corporations. the board does approve accreditation agencies that accredit outpatient surgery settings, but the issue of being a corporation does not pertain to these entities. however pursuant to business and professions code section 2285, any physician who uses a name other than his or her own in any public communication, advertisement, sign, or announcement must hold a fictitious name permit. these fictitious name permits, or fnps, can be obtained by a sole physician, a partnership or a corporation. corporations applying for an fnp must comply with corporations code section 13401.5. the corporation, this corporation section describes what types of corporations are allowed and who can be members of these corporations. for example, a medical corporation, in addition to a physician and surgeon, may have other members that are doctors of podiatric medicine, psychologists. registered nurses, optometrists, marriage and family therapists, clinical social workers, physician assistants, chiropractors, acupuncturists, naturopathic doctors, professional clinical counselors, physical therapists or pharmacists. however, this code section also states that the sum of these shareholders cannot exceed 49%. therefore, in a medical corporation, the physician shareholders must hold 51%. and the others can add up to 49%. the board requests a copy of the original articles of incorporation when a corporation applies for an fmp. these are reviewed to ensure they have an endorsement stamp and a corporation number. staff also verifies information to ensure that the corporation has an active status via the secretary of state's website. for the board's licencing unit this really is the interaction with corporations. the board's enforcement unit also may review articles of incorporation in additional corporation documents. should the board get a complaint alleging a violation of the ban on the corporate practice of medicine. or determined during an investigation that there be a violation on the ban on the corporate practice of medicine more information is then gathered. the board determines who the owner of the practice is by reviewing many documents, including the articles of incorporation. the board may also review any management services agreement, and ownership documents. should a violation of the ban on corporate practice be found, the board may take criminal or administrative action against the physician and laypersons involved. these are the areas where the medical board is involved with corporations. and ms. webb and i are here to answer any questions the committee may have regarding the board's role with this issue.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 47, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 72, 'end': 82, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 168, 'end': 178, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3426, 'end': 3430, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jessica Sieferman: Good morning, Chair Salas and Committee Members. My name is Jessica Sieferman, I'm the executive officer for the California State Board of Optometry. Since its inception in 1913, the board has been charged with protecting the health and safety of the public through its licensing, regulatory, and disciplinary functions. Today, the board regulates the largest population of optometrists and dispensers in the United States with roughly 12,000 active licensees and registrants. I thank you for the invitation and opportunity to participate in this hearing today. In your February 27th, 2017 letter, you requested hearing our organization's perspective on the role of regulating, both individual licensees and those professional corporation which are licensee owned, and are employed by corporations which are required to register with us or be licensed by our board. First I must state that the current board has neither discussed nor opined on the regulation of corporations and the impact on professional licensing, thus I cannot provide any formal perspective or opinion as it relates to this topic. If the Committee would like, I would be happy to add this as a topic of discussion for a future board meeting. Committee staff requested that I provided a brief history related to the board regulating corporations, insight as to why we stopped registering corporations, and the current role the board plays in professional corporations. From 1970 to 2007, Business and Professions Code 3160 through 3167 set forth registration and operation requirements for professional optometric corporations. Those corporations would need to register with the board by paying a $100 fee. And renew annually by paying $50 and submitting a renewal application. Optometric corporations were also regulated by the corporation code and still are. At that time, however, optometric corporations were the only healthcare corporations required to register with both the Secretary of State and the regulatory board. Under that structure, optometric corporations would apply with the Secretary of State's office. The Secretary of State's office would issue the registration and certify the articles of incorporation and by-laws. And then the optometric corporation would apply for a board registration and submit the articles of incorporation that the Secretary of State's office just verified. After a brief discussion in 2004, and more in-depth discussions in 2005, the Board believed existing requirements were duplicative and eliminating the registration for optometric corporations did not appear to pose any potential harm to the public. Rather, the Board believed removing the requirement would streamline government and improve services to the public. Omnibus Bill EB 2256, effective 2007, repealed the registration requirement, to ensure licensees were still held accountable, EB 2256 added Business and Professions Code 3111, which made any violation of the Moscone-Knox Professional Corporations Act on professional conduct, which is ground for disciplinary action. Post AB-2256, since 2007, the board has had minimal interactions with professional corporations. All the optimetric corporations practicing under a corporate name which were previously exempt from the FNP requirement are required to obtain an FNP from the board. As part of the application process, professional corporation provide a copy of the articles incorporation for preliminary compliance check with Business and Professions Code 3111 which looks at Moscone-Knox. Of those reviewed staff estimate, roughly 10 to 15% of the articles are incorrectly incorporated as general versus a professional corporation, and then applicant goes back to the Secretary of State's office to correct the articles and incorporation. Business and Professions Code section 3109 prohibits employment from any corporation or individual other than a licensed optometrist, a licensed ophthalmologist, or a healthcare service plan regulated by The Department of Managed Healthcare. Effective January 1, 2016, AB 684, a registered dispensing optician, which could be an individual, a corporation, or a firm may own a healthcare service plan if that healthcare service plan did not employ optometrists. AB 684, which moved the RDO program from the Medical Board of California to this board also allows a landlord tenant relationship between an RDO and an optometrist, provided specific additions are contained within a written agreement. In addition to other actions available to the board, Business and Professions Code 655, violations could result in administrative fine of up to $50,000, thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 25, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 60, 'end': 77, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Virginia Herold: good morning, i'm virginia. i'm the executive officer of the board of pharmacy. we are a consumer protection agency and our mandate is consumer protection. we regulate 140,000 businesses and firms that somehow either dispense, compound, or some way to transport our prescription medication into and from within california. so, we have more individual licenses, our individual licenses include pharmacies, pharmacy technicians, interns, and designated reps who were in charge of drug wholesaler premises. none of these individuals can be incorporated. they hold professional licenses or licenses directly with us as individuals. so we have that side. however, for our sites which we also license, there we see a lot of corporations. and for the main reasons we exist, for the hospital pharmacies and the community pharmacies that we're familiar with. we have 93% of our pharmacies in the state, and it's 93 for both the hospitals and the community pharmacies, or have at least one corporate structure in their ownership structure. we have very complex ownership structures that we regulate and i brought a couple of board cards. we require these as part of our application process. we collect from each level, all the way up until we get to real live people. so it's not unusual for us to have a number of corporations in the structure somewhere, we collect information on that level, we also collect information on limited liability companies until we go all the way to the top. and lots of times there's no individuals until the very top. and i have another simplistic organization of another company that we regulate. so with that said, in california it has already been said that anyone can own a pharmacy, but only a pharmacist can be in charge of that pharmacy. we however do retain the ability to regulate the owner, as well as the pharmacist in charge, as well as the individuals that work within that pharmacy that have professional license with us that will include pharmacists, interns, and pharmacy technicians. and we do use site and fine rather heavily at the board. a lot of times, we don't have professional issues as much as we have violations of law which are business-related for which we do site and fine. about 10% of our budget as it turns out typically every year, comes in from site and fines. we don't count on that money. it is what it is, okay. we regulate at the site level. that means if a corporation, of the 40 to 50 companies, we regulate more than 10 of them, so we regulate some very large players. we regulate the site individually, not at the corporate level. we have no ability to get to the corporate structure itself. 55% of our licensed pharmacies are housed within what would be called a large corporate structure such as walgreens, cvs, things of that magnitude. okay, we have found sometimes, and this is a concern for us, that when we discipline a site for a professional violation, for example where they have failed to follow appropriate dispensing of controlled substances is topical issue for us. we will go through and we will discipline the pharmacist in charge sometimes, sometimes the pharmacist as well as the corporate store at that level. we cannot get at the corporate level any other way other than to join forces with, in one case, we've joined with the district attorneys in three counties, where we have gone after corporate failure to staff pharmacies, so that they provide consultation to patients. and in that vein, they were able to prosecute and bring in fines of $500,000 against corporate themselves, in a manner that we could not do. okay, we also maintain current requirements for who owns the pharmacies. so if there is more than a 10% change in ownership, it has to be reported to us after it occurs. if it is more than a 50% change in ownership it results in a change of a permit number. we treat it as a brand new pharmacy at that point. we issue it a new number. and that has to be pre-approved by the board. so we retain some ability to regulate who owns pharmacies in california. and i think that's where i'll leave it right now, and i'll be happy to answer whatever questions i can.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Davina Hurt: Good morning, Chairman Salas Members of the Committee. My name is Davina Hurt, I am the chair of the Court Reporters Board and I'm honored to be here with you and thank you for shining a bright light on this issue. I am here with another Board member Carrie Nocella. And our Executive Officer, Yvonne Fenner.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 28, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 66, 'end': 77, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 251, 'end': 265, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 294, 'end': 307, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Deanne Pearce: Good morning, Chairman Salas, Chairman Hill and Committee Members. My name is Deanne Pearce and I am the Assistant Executive Officer for the California Board of Accountancy. President Alicia Berhow just joined us, so I can have her come up and provide opening remarks for us.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 28, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 39, 'end': 43, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 78, 'end': 91, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 184, 'end': 197, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alicia Berhow: Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Salas, Chairman Hill and Committee Members. My name is Alicia Berhow and I am the President of the California Board of Accountancy and it is a pleasure to participate on this panel today. The California Board of Accountancy regulates over 100,000 licensees, the largest group of licensed accounting professionals in the nation and consists of over 94,000 certified public accountants and almost 6,000 accounting firms, including corporations and partnerships. CPAs and accounting firms are authorized to provide a wide variety of accounting, financial management, tax planning and return preparation services. The California Board of Accountancy is first and foremost, a consumer protection board. Our mission is to protect consumers by enduring only qualified licensees, practice public accountancy in accordance with established professional standard. We accomplish this mission through our licensing and enforcement procedures which ensure that those who practice public accounting in California meet California law, and professional standards, and we look forward to discussing today our role in regulating individual licensees and accounting firms. We're proud of our work to protect consumers and we're available at any point, any time to our Members of the Committee. And to the members of the Legislature after the conclusion of today's hearing. So at this point, again, I'd like to turn it back over our presentation to Dianne Pierce, the California Board of Accountancy's Assistant Executive Officer.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 39, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 50, 'end': 54, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 89, 'end': 102, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1463, 'end': 1476, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Laura Zuniga: good morning. laura with the contractors state license board. i'll just turn it over to mike jamnetksi, he's one of the managers of our licensing division, for our presentation.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 88, 'end': 102, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark Campbell: Thank you Mr Chair. I'm Mark Campbell, Executive Director with CDIAC. We're here with a request to augment our personal services by 200,000. CDIAC is a special funded program independent Commission within the State Treasurers office. The request addresses a structural imbalance between our budget allocation actual expenditures for personnel services. As this continues the problem continues to grow, we are increasingly drawing from our operational budget to provide personnel services. In budget year, we expect a budget surplus of $100,000 in discretionary funds, that's 3% of our budget of which 50,000 represents and salary savings. As a result of a retirement, so we're really quite thin. And the request allows us to continue to pursue our statutory programs mandated by our enacting legislation. So we're seeking that fix to our structural problem that continues to get worse as we go forward. LAO?
[{'start': 24, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 903, 'end': 906, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Helen Kerstein: Helen Kerstein with the Legislative Analyst's Office, we're recommending rejecting the proposal. In our view CDIAC's expenditure authority appears to be sufficient to conduct its existing activities. Specifically CDIAC has consistently under-spent its budgeted amount. And so we don't think that there's evidence that they need this expenditure increase in order to conduct those existing activities. We would certainly note that there may be some value in additional activities that CDIAC would like to engage in, but we think it would be appropriate for them to return at a future date and provide those activities, and then the Legislature could consider them. Also just one last note, in our view it's normal for there to be differences and deviations in the amount of a budget that goes to personal services, that can happen for a variety of reasons, positions can be reclassified by the department for example, or they may have more experienced folks. But generally departments are asked to remain within budgeted authority and so we don't see a reason why this would be different.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dominic Guidair: Dominic Guidair Department of Finance we are supportive of this request. We feel it is reasonable for the situation that the department is facing.
[]
Becky Grajski: hi, becky jonah grajski with the state treasurer's office, actually we only have a, cadiac is on a downward trajectory, so, they're at 100,000 projected surplus for 16/17, but that's holding up in a vacancy for the past four months due to a personnel issue. so actually they'd be at about 50 and so next year, if they continue with msas and operational costs, their probably won't have maybe 18 or less in flexibility. so it's been going down. so it's been going down. i see.>>so there's not an even 200, and we provided charts to the consultants. so it's a definite downward trajectory.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ross Brown: Ross Brown with the LAO, no issues.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jan Ross: good afternoon, chair cooper, and members, i'm jan becky ross, i'm the cio and deputy treasurer of technology and innovation at the treasurer's office and i'm here to request nearly $800,000 to make permanent five positions in our data and government transparency unit, and this is not general fund, this is special fund per our boards, commissions, and authorities, for whom we provide all of their it services. this unit is dedicated to providing data and to open government transparency, and were these passed around, did you get a copy of this? okay, so what you have on top there is a two page summary of a little hoover commission report that was published in 2015 about making government more transparent, more customer-centric, and trying to find a total solution to, just, enlightened it services for government, and the report that it's attached to is the treasurer's bi-annual report.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 28, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 47, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 619, 'end': 625, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Helen Kerstein: kerstein with the legislative analyst's office. so we're recommending that these positions be approved on a two year limited term basis rather than on a permanent basis, and the reason for that is that we think this workload is largely temporary in nature. the treasurer's office has identified some specific additional activities they'd like to pursue up through 2018, we're not taking issue with those activities, but they haven't identified workload beyond that, so we think it's more appropriate to approve the positions on a two year limited term basis.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jay Chamberlain: Good afternoon, Mr. Chair, members. My name is Jay Chamberlain with the California Department of Finance. The Fiscal Recovery Fund was established, I'm talking about some administration proposed trailer bill that would allow to transfer money from the, or the Controller to transfer money, from the Fiscal Recovery Fund to the General Fund. I'll keep it brief, the Fiscal Recovery Fund was set up as part of the 2004 budget solution. The fund had two purposes; one was to service the debt created on that budget solution, the second was to pay back counties, there's a complicated financing mechanism, it was to make sure that the counties were made whole by this one-quarter percent tax rate that's been transferred. Those purposes have been filled. There is $170 million left in the fiscal recovery fund and what this trailer bill would do would be to allow the Controller to transfer that money into the general fund.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 62, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Betsy Barnhart: i'm betsy, chief of fiscal management for the department of business oversight. the department of business oversight requests $1.7 million and 11 permanent positions, effective 2017, 18, and $3 1 million and 9 permanent positions, effective 2018, 19, and ongoing. these resources will allow the department to improve consumer protection by extending current examinations to a greater number of licensed broker dealers and investment advisors, and to enforce violations that are found as a result. this request will be funded by special funds, and will not impact the state general fund.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Helen Kerstein: Helen Kerstein with the Legislative Analyst's Office, we don't have any concerns with the proposal.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Oleskwell: i'm sorry. my name is oleskwell, the franchise tax board.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jay Chamberlain: Jay Chamberlain, the Department of Finance.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Hill: Chris Hill, Department of Finance.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michele Stillwell-Parvensky: hi, michele jan stillwell-parvensky, children's defense fund, california, really thank the members of the subcommittee and staff for creating the opportunity to discuss the state earned income tax credit. the state eitc puts money in the pockets of working poor families in california, and stimulates our local and state economy. there's significant research showing the effectiveness of the eitc to boost income, address poverty, and improve child and family well being, and it's a core component of our campaign to end child poverty, which is critically important given that we have one in four california children living in poverty. really appreciate the comments today by the members of the sub-committee, and the assembly member, about the opportunities to strengthen and expand the california earned income tax credit. we had a group of 20 organizations leading on advocacy for low income children, who signed a budget letter supporting, strengthening, and expanding the credit, with three recommendations, one of which is really, as we talked about here, investing in outreach to ensure that eligible families receive their credit. as we know, we leave so many dollars on the table, and this is a real opportunity to draw down additional federal dollars into the pockets of working, poor families and into our local communities. there's a survey from the california budget and policy center that suggests very low awareness of this credit, less than one-fifth of families who are potentially, look like they would be eligible, were actually aware of the credit, so we need to continue and strengthen and increase the amount of outreach that we're doing. second, our organizations really think we need to address the inequity of the exclusion of self employed workers from the credit, as mentioned by the assembly member. self employed income is not excluded in the federal credit, or in any of the other states that have credits, until we think we need to figure out a solution here in california for addressing the concerns about improper payment, and there are strategies to do that, so that we're not excluding self employed income. and then finally, our organizations would recommend that we increase the caleitc income eligibility threshold. we appreciated that the legislature indicated in the 2015 budget bill a willingness, and an eagerness, and an intent to expand the credit, and we hope that we do that so minimum wage workers that are working full time are able to benefit from the credit, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nalleli Sandoval: sure. hi, my name's sandoval, eitc program manager with united ways of california, as representatives of several organizations who support eitc and expanded outreach to reach all households, we want to ask the state to expand funding to $9 million, to also include support of free tax services, even though 2 million were included last year, we can reach a lot more eligible households through extended and continued outreach. of the zip codes that were identified with the most potentially eligible caleitc recipients, 50% of them don't have free tax preparation services in their zip code, these are very low income households that would greatly benefit from also taking all of their refund home. so, helping people claim the credit to free tax payer services, can help them get the most money in their pockets, and also draw in federal dollars from, into the local economy from the federal eitc. also, we also appreciate that the state indicated in the past an intent to expand, like michele mentioned, and we'd be strongly in support of the expansion of the income eligibility trust hold, as well as to expanding to the self employed as well.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 987, 'end': 994, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mike Herald: Mr. Chair, Mike Herald with the Western Center on Law&Poverty, we know income matters, it makes a big difference in children's lives as they get older, so we would like to associate ourselves strongly with the first two speakers and encourage you to make some of the adjustments that they have recommended, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shanti Prasad: good afternoon, i'm prasad from alameda county community food bank, i want to echo my previous commentor's comments. this is a great program, and this is a great start, but it would make a significant impact in reducing hunger and uplifting poverty for the residents of alameda county, and throughout the state, if this were to be expanded to include full-time minimum wage workers, as well as the self-employed. and i also greatly support outreach efforts. united way's came into our food bank and helped us this year, but we really need a lot more than that. so, we hope to expand this program. thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Josh Friday: Good afternoon, Chair and Members of the Committee. My name is Josh Friday, I run Golden State Opportunity which oversees Cali EITC for me which is a statewide partner or one of the statewide partners doing all the education and outreach for this particular program. And in addition that, everything that my colleagues said which we support in an acknowledgement and recognition of Women's History Month for making an extra effort to reach to the women in our state who are eligible for this. And we live in unacceptable environment where 15% of women in the State of California live in poverty and we know that the EITC boosts not only employment for single mothers, but also health for mothers and health for babies and families. One quick anecdote I'd like to share with you very quickly which is by no means scientific, but is consistent with what we're seeing on the g round up and down the state in the work that we're doing. Thanks to your support in the outreach to these communities. On Twitter, we did a survey where we asked for single moms to tell us how they're spending the Earned Income Tax Credit. The results are 41% of the respondents said that they're using it to pay off debt. 27% of the respondents are using it to pay for school and 32% of the respondents are telling us that they're using this money that you guys are all supporting to buy groceries for their families. We know that these resources not only stabilize families, but stabilize entire communities which is why we're fighting so hard and working so hard and appreciate the support not only expand our outreach, but to expand the eligibility of this program and to make sure that we're covering more people not just those who receive W-2 income. So, thank you for all your support. Look forward to continue working with you.
[{'start': 63, 'end': 74, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Will Cook: Good afternoon, my name is Will Cook. I'm with the Governor's Office of Business and Economic Development. We have a couple of BCPs before you today. The first one, it relates to the California Competes tax credit. Go Business requesting $1.2 million from General Fund in fiscal year 1718 through 1920 to provide funding for the current 10 positions associated with administering the California Competes tax credit program.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Weatherford: Yes, Brian Weatherford with the Legislative Analyst's Office. We note that the California Competes program, the way it's currently written in law, will not be able to allocate tax credits past the 2018 fiscal year. Accordingly, we recommend approving the administration's request, which is otherwise reasonable for one year instead of for three as they requested. Longer term funding should be re-evaluated next year.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jonathan Fitzpatrick: fitzpatrick, department of finance. the administration notes that the proposal by the lao has merit.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Betty Yee: Thank you Mr. Chairman and Members, good Afternoon. Betty Yee, State Controller. I wanted to just personally come and thank you for the opportunity to make some brief remarks to open up the hearing on my office's budget. And for allowing me to go out of order today. Now in my third year as the Controller of California I truly do look forward to coming to work every single day and with a proposed annual budget of $205 million and approximately 1,400 co-workers I take my charge of providing independent fiscal oversight and managing the state's finances very seriously. I do want to take an opportunity to thank this Committee especially the Sub Committee and especially you Mr. Cooper, Mr. Chairman and Assembly Member Allen, both of you were on the Sub Committee for the past two years for your support of my efforts to hold the vendor accountable on it's actions on the previous state payroll project. As result of your assistance we were able to hold the vendor to its contractual obligations and effectively recovered $82 million for the state. That's 59 million in cash and 23 million in outstanding liability that we were able to recover from the state. Now setting that financial benefit aside, the settlement I believe sends a strong message to the vendor community that I can't get aware with landing contracts with a low ball offer, then try to make more money by charging more for things already in the contract, which essentially was the subject of this contract. And what I would like to do now is to give you an update about where things stand with respect to the payroll system. I can assure you the first thing that I am not doing is rushing out with a new request for proposal to build a new system. California is, we have a complex need for a payroll system that will work for the state. And it's very difficult to find an off the shelf payroll system that will work for California. And a couple of examples just to highlight the complexities of the system and some of you may be aware of them as you've heard from other departments, But our pay for our state workers is constantly changing based on what Cal HR is negotiating through the bargaining process. Meaning that whatever we buy or build will have to accommodate the unknown in many respects. Just last year, the state adopted new O-Plan deductions, these are other post-employment benefit deductions that require systems changes. Which means that any new system will have to have this kind of flexibility. Right now the California has 21 bargaining units with 612 different premium payment types that go beyond the base pay. No other state pays its workers on the last day of the pay period as California does. In fact California pays its workers five different ways. Monthly positive and negative, semi-monthly positive and negative, and bi-weekly. By contrast with the vast majority of businesses, and as near as we can tell, every other state, which pays its workers using a single schedule, not five different schedules. So right now, I am focused on two different elements on this front. First to say business process re-engineering effort. Which gives us an opportunity to take a look at what we have, how we do, what we do, and how it can be improved before we go out and look for a new system. Secondly we have a pilot program that will do something I believe all of you have access to already here in the capital. And that is an employee self-service portal for everyone in state government. The first stage which I hope to make available later this year would let our own employees of the State Controller's Office view their pay stubs, their W2's, their leave balances, and their employment history in our existing legacy system. Stage two would give employees an edit function so they can change their mailing address or update their direct deposit account. Or alter the withholding on their W4. Once we have successfully tested the pilot within the state controller's office, my goal is to get your approval and likely, additional funding to roll the pilot out statewide. It is an initiative that I believe will save the state money immediately and in the long-run it will work with our existing system and whatever new payroll system is eventually deployed in the state. Before you today I have a number of budget change proposals but before I have the staff walk through them. I want to thank you again for your time and to see if you have any question specifically on the pay roll system. And then I'm happy to just give a brief summary of the remainder of the BCP's before you.
[{'start': 52, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 682, 'end': 688, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 723, 'end': 728, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lourdes Morales: lourdes michele morales with the legislative analysts office, thank you mister chair. we have no major concerns to raise for the legislature regarding the proposal before you today. we do think it makes sense for the legislature to support an evaluation of various alternatives before the project moves forward that's the ultimate recommendation. we really inform that success of the project moving forward. however we would like to note that the it project approval process and the budget process may not necessarily align moving forward. the state controller's office anticipates to complete the alternatives analysis in august of 2018, shortly after the adoption of the 18-19 budget. if so the legislature may not have an opportunity to weigh in on the alternative selected before the next phase of the approval process, that being the procurement phase. as such we do recommend that the legislature require the state controllers office to come forward with a full evaluation of the alternatives before any subsequent stages of the planning is approved.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carla Castaneda: carla, department of finance and we support the proposal as well with the limited term resources as we're progressing through the project approval life cycle.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Urban: Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and members. My name is Jennifer Urban, I'm with the State Controller's Budget Office. The first proposal in issue number 12 is the fiscal implementation of SCO's control functions. The SCO is requesting $1.5 million from the general fund in 17-18 to support 13 positions in transitioning the state's accounting book of record from the SCO legacy system, to the fiscal system can provide support to fiscal departments. These resources will ensure that SCO continues to fulfill its obligations and responsibilities related to completion of the fiscal 2017 release.
[{'start': 50, 'end': 64, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ryan Miller: Ryan Miller, Legislative Analyst's Office, we have issued a couple of recommendations on this BCP. This is the second time you've reviewed the BCP, the first one came in 2014-15. And a substantial part of the work load associated with these security properties arise because of an 18 to 20 month waiting period in statute. A time that the State Controller's office is required to hold the properties before liquidating them into cash. Much of the workload, in our view, arises because of the waiting period and that's because, based on information we've received from the Controller's office, 99% of the properties have their corporate actions current, when they were made to the state. That is, that the mergers and other kinds of actions that make it difficult to liquidate the securities are current, and the state could sell them right away if we were to change the statute. Now some desire to keep the statute the way it is because there's value in being able to give the securities back to the owners in their current form. Some owners would prefer to get their securities back as a security rather than cash, of course. But the vast majority of people who do get their securities back in their security forms, get them back because of a different part of the program. Notices that we send them, that allow them to claim the properties before they even come to the state. Very few of them get them in their security form once they're with the state. So in other words, few owners are benefiting from the waiting period in our view and even of those that do get the securities in their original forms due to the waiting period, some are winners and some are losers. That is, some have their stocks increase in value while they're with the state, and others have stocks decrease in value while they're with the state. So because of the substantial workload that results from the waiting period and that few owners are benefiting from the waiting period, we recommend that the Legislature amend the statute to allow the controller's office to liquidate the securities immediately when they come to the state. Now, in cases where, say, an owner has initiated a claim process, has submitted a form and started that process, our recommendation will still allow the Controller's office to maintain them in security form for those owners. But we think that there would be a large workload savings that could either mean additional resources the Legislature commits to other purposes or could commit to other purposes within the unclaimed property program. And we think that that latter course actually could benefit more owners of unclaimed property than this BCP before you. So happy to answer other questions if you have them.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tom Yowell: hi, tom lourdes yowell from state controller's office. the cost increase, half of it is from the personal services. about $500,000 where we actually change some of the classifications that we were using in order to get the right classification for the level of work that they do. and as well, their salaries have increased over the three-year period, so that equals about 500,000. the balances in some o&e costs, operating expenses and equipment costs that we hadn't identified initially. $200,000 of it is for information technology cost, $138,000 is for an external consultant that provides information that helps us to do the reconciling of the funds and the past history, $83,000 of that is for postage, and that equals about $455,000, so those are the changes that were added to the additional costs.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eddie Bernacchi: Mr. Chairman, members, Eddie Bernacchi on behalf of the Construction Industry Force Account Counsel, organization made up of both labor and management. Primarily funded by The Associated General Contractors, United Contractors, the labor unions, and the Operating Engineers. We work very closely with the Controller's office and particularly the Commission. It is a body that was put in place in 1983 to oversee disputes of the Public Contract Code. At that time it's a voluntary act to opt in for agencies. In 1983, we had about a hundred agencies opt in, now we have well over a thousand. Getting funding to even have the Commission meet, for the staff to be there and have the Commission meet, in addition to have performing audits, to the benefit of both accused agencies who have been accused of violating the Public Contract Code and contractors or organizations or citizens that want to see some sort of adjudication, it is an important part of that Commission. It's been a long time coming to get this funded, I think it's a pretty small request and it goes a long way for our industry. In particularly, it keeps us out of litigation and saving costs for cities, counties, special districts and school districts, and for contractors and labor unions. So for those reasons, we hope you would take this under consideration.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dave Rex: mr. chair members. this this is dave tom rex, government operations agency. i'm going to turn it over to finance to give a brief overview on the budget trailer for civil service improvement initiative.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Patrick Campe: Yeah Mr Chair, Members of the Committee, Patrick Campe Department of Finance. The trailer bill before you represents technical changes to line statute with State Personnel Board rules, this'll kind of represent the administrative mechanics needed to facilitate and streamline hiring, recruiting. This aligns with our classification consolidation efforts, retention of staff and the overall civil service improvement efforts to make California an employer of choice.
[]
Mario Guerrero: Good afternoon, Chairman Cooper, Members of the Committee. Mario Guerrero on behalf of SEIU Local 1000. The Civil Service Improvement items being considered today, many of them are bargainable items, so we are glad that in the discussion the question of whether these items should be heard in the budget in the first place is appropriate, or if there is another venue, such as policy Committee. Local 1000, we're still analyzing these items, they're pretty lengthy. However, I can tell you that we are absolutely opposed to section 23, that would extend probationary periods for up to two years, and would add probationary periods between classifications. SPB currently sets a probationary period for each classification based on those duties of a particular classification and what's required. We believe that that is the appropriate process and place to do so. We also oppose all the sections that do away with statutes that make mention of SPB rules until we see these new rules and are able to evaluate them. An area of concern is what happens if we adopt these changes and get rid of the rules and statute? What happens between the time of passing the budget items, and the adoption of the new SPB rules? We understand that maybe drafts, I have not seen them yet. I look forward to seeing them. We are meeting with government operations agency staff and we'll be asking them for more information. Hopefully walking through this. Thank you for your time.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 31, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 59, 'end': 73, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Young: mr. chair and members, again michael, on behalf of california labor federation, we too have some concerns regarding this trailer bill language. if the goal is to again increase efficiencies and to hire workers more quickly, i struggle to see how quadrupling the probationary period from a minimum of six months to two years does that. again, it's a lengthy bill and we're still vetting with our unions to better understand the impact on our members and the impact on contract negotiations and the impact on employers, frankly. so we urge the board to take a strong look at this. excuse me, we urge the community take a strong look at this, to that this thoroughly, and we hope to have ongoing conversations with the administration about the impacts of the substantial changes, their impacts to our members. we also question whether or not the budget committee is the appropriate place for such substantial changes to policy. this might be a better conversation for the policy committee, thank you.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katie Hagen: good afternoon, katie dave hagen, deputy director operations, calhr. so i'm here, since we're getting towards the end of the day, i'll be very brief. thank you. we have, i think the committee had a couple of questions around our statewide training center, bcp? and, there was a suggestion that there be some sort of check in in the program. we'd be happy to do that. we regularly, publish reports on our website. we provide civil service improvement updates on government operations website. we recently published a directors report after we went department by department and interviewed directors on their workforce planning initiatives. and we plan to document the progress in our state training center as well as our engagement survey endeavors and a whole series of other civil service improvement efforts. so there will be opportunities to track our progress there. any other questions on the statewide training center?
[{'start': 16, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Osborn: Good Afternoon Mr. Chair and Assembly members. My name is Jennifer Osborn, I am the Fiscal Deputy with the Government Operations Agency. And we're here to present a budget change proposal for 1718. We're asking for a $160,000 in reimbursement authority and one position to develop and implement a data driven management initiative. The position would be two-year limited term. With the idea that we would sort of collect results and then potentially come back to the extent that the additional resources are warranted. Stu Drown is our deputy secretary for innovation and accountability here at gov ops. And he is the Subject Matter Expert on this issues. Ready to answer questions.
[{'start': 58, 'end': 73, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 519, 'end': 528, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nick Schroeder: sure, nick with the lao again. last year, the administration brought forward two proposals related to perb. the first was to address a backlog in processing cases in the office of the general council. and the second was to provide funds for perb to move its los angeles regional office after dgs identified that it needed to move the office. currently, it's located in glendale. and to date the dhs has not been able to find a location for their los angeles regional office so they are still in that glendale building that we were discussing last year. and as part of 16-17 budget act, the legislature appropriated $885,000 ongoing to pay for staff costs related, to address the back logs in the office of general counsel. and then, $100,000 one time funding for the glendale move. and then, $117,000 ongoing for increased rental costs. in addition, the legislature approved three positions. as part of the budget last year the legislature directed perb to report on its vacancies as well as it's backlog in processing cases. especially in the office of the general counsel this is important because this is really the first step of the review of these cases in perb. there's kind of a domino effect, there's a backlog within the office of general council creates backlogs elsewhere in the process. and they submitted the report in january and we're expecting another report in may based on their current workload. and based on the january report, it seems that the backlog in the office of general council's actually gotten worse. where one of the intents of the language the legislature adopted was that the appropriation be sufficient so that the perb can be able to process cases in a timely manner and be able to do this effectively and efficiently. and in the report, the perb basically defined the amount of time that is considered reasonable for its office of general counsel to process cases at 60 days, and currently, at it's last reporting period, it was more than 3 times that amount of time to process the cases. so it's cleat that perb is not meeting the legislative policy objective of processing these cases in a timely manner. what's not clear to us is whether the amount of funding it has currently is adequate to bring down that process in time, down to 60 days or whether they're might be some sort of operational efficiencies that can be gained. and so, as the agenda indicated we recommended some questions for the committee to ask, as kind of a first round of understanding perb's budget issues.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christy Bowman: mr. chairman, members, christy katie bowman again with the california professional firefighters. again i'm here to thank the committee and the staff for their previous attention to this important issue. the firefighters have been long protesting about how the lack of timely decisions that come out of purb we advocated before you in the 15,16 budget discussion, and this committee proposed an augmentation that went all the way up to the final negotiations of the budget, but was eliminated due to a claim that somehow that was an unsubstantiated request. so patiently, we waited while the administration did perform an augmentation last year, which again to quote the chairman, we are eternally grateful for that acknowledgement that there was a financial need in the agency, but i think you're asking tough questions this year as well as appropriate. the 60 day target was identified in the report however as sketchy or how small or short it was, just tells a story that if you have a conflicts at the bargaining table and you take a complaint where you charge the perp and they believe that 60 days is reasonable, that's still two months, okay. the crude timeline is 199 days average, that means people are taking longer. although some albeit shorter. so 199 days just for perb to tell you whether it's okay to go forward and have settlement conferences, mediation whatever is required in formal hearings to get to a proposed decision, which could take you another 160 to 200 days. so as you can see of the examples that i provided before when this committee acted in favor of an augmentation was, could you imagine you file a charge that says that the employers engaged in unfair bargaining? and you, in waiting for your perb charge get imposed on in that contract. and have to negotiate two more subsequent contracts before ever there is a decision that approved ruling on the initial dispute that happened four or five years earlier. so, as you can see, that's not justice. it doesn't provide any motivation for either party, not just the employee groups, management groups, but either party, to behave responsibly, and in compliance with the law, if you know that it can almost be irrelevant when you're finally told whether you acted appropriately or not. so, thank you for bringing this issue forward again. we urge the leo to keep digging. we appreciate any indulgence from finance to hear the prayers of those stakeholders who rely on this body for good labor relations and quickly settle disputes and see if there's an opportunity to give them the stuff they need. we don't want to go anywhere else. this is the expert body on labor law, and so we'd like it to be a functioning agency. so on behalf of the california professional firefighters we urge your consideration to provide them with the resources they need. thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Young: Mr. Chair, members, Michael Young at the California Labor Federation, we echo the concerns raised by the firefighters. We think it's critically necessary to provide her with the resources necessary to adjudicate these claims in an efficient manner. The timelines that our members have to wait now to seem these claims to fruition is just extraordinary long and it's extraordinary burdensome on the bargaining process and their ability to organize and their ability have faith, that the board can be productive and adjudicating their legitimate claims. So again we mirror those concerns that are raised and we urge that you guys strongly consider giving board Perb the necessary resources to make that board more efficient and productive for both public sector employees and public sector employers. Thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rose McAuliffe: good afternoon, rose, chief of budget. i have here with me mr. eric baggesen. he's the senior portfolio manager in the asset allocation area for calpers organization. he's here to talk about the question that you presented to us in regards to the discount rate. we have a presentation available that genevieve has handouts for the members.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 63, 'end': 76, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 300, 'end': 309, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
 : Are you ready to begin, Mr. Chairman? Good evening, or good afternoon. Yes, good afternoon. My name is Eric Baggesen. It's a pleasure to be here in front of the Subcommittee.
[{'start': 103, 'end': 116, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Greg Krotoll: Thank you, Mr. Chair and members. Greg Krotoll with the Department of Finance. So this language, we did bring the HDF on budget last year, part of trailer bill language. Part of the reason that we did that, it was kind of a two step approach. While we wanted to pursue combining all of the administrative expenses into one fund, we wanted to give CalPERS time to work through the technicals of combining the funds and that was ultimately our goal from day one. Moving forward, the reason we want to have one fund for all administrative expenses is currently, they're bifurcated between the CRF and HCF. Each one has a different cost recovery method. So the CRF is funded by an administrative rate that is assessed on all health plan premiums offered by CalPERS to state and locals. Whereas funding for the HCF is generated by a per-member, per-month fee that is built into the planned premiums for PPO and flex-funded plans. So utilizing a single cost-recovery method would simplify the process, and ensure that employers are not being charged twice for administrative costs. Also, this trailer bill language provides CalPERS with the flexibility to respond to changing employer needs to separate rates between the state and local agencies should the local agencies seek additional services that are above and beyond what the state is utilizing.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christy Belmore: Mr. Chairman, Members of the Committee, Christy Belmore on behalf of the California Professional Firefighters. I thank the Committee for their discussion and questions. We were involved in stakeholder conversations last year around this proposal, trying to identify the reasons there too. And when the final conclusions were made, and we were supportive of the action. I also have no recollection of it being couched as part one of a part two deal that we're somehow coming back to close this time. So, I appreciate the dialog. I was hoping I would also hear today what the problems were besides there's nothing inappropriate, everything was appropriate. But we want to change all of this, just in case there might be something inappropriate. Even though we don't know the impacts on both the state and local government contracting agencies for making such a wholesale change. because I think even the nature of the plans whereby these expenses go into are different, your managed care plans and self-funded plans. And so, it just seems like theres a lot more to know. So I appreciate the sharp eye that youre taking on this issue.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robin Madsen: good afternoon, chairman cooper. good afternoon. my name is robin christy madsen. i'm the chief financial officer for the california state teachers retirement system. and we brought before you three different budget change proposals, but in advance of the discussion of those proposals. i understand the committee had questions regarding our discount rate change, as well as an action that the board took related to a second tower at our headquarters facility. so i wanted to go through those first, if that's the pleasure of the yes, okay. so the discount rate change occurred at our february board meeting in response to experience study for the period 2010 to 2015. so based on the outcome of that experience study, our consulting actuary milliman made several recommendations for assumption changes. the recommendations made by milliman included reductions in the discount rate that were considered at both 7.25% and 7.0%. the board action considered both of those options and the board determined to take the more conservative approach and adopted the 7% return rate. how much. based on the information we have at this time, i see that there was a question of whether we expect that to change. there's no information available that would lead us to believe that, given that the board adopted the more conservative approach to that rate. okay. then the second question was around our headquarters expansion, and the action the board took was to appropriate an estimated cost for that headquarters expansion. but only authorized us to spend the money that was necessary to refine the cost estimates. the information presented to the board to this point has identified this option, which was to build a new facility and lease out any available space.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 31, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 60, 'end': 80, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Department of Finance: evelyn, department robin of finance, we have no further comments.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Baker: Jennifer Baker with the California Teachers' Association. We do want to commend the work that counselor has been doing regarding the discount rate and rate of return. We know these are very difficult conversations and they have a direct impact on our members and on our member's retirement security. And do appreciate the thoroughness that the counselor's board had in their conversation. And this is part of a regular process that they have going through their experience study to determine are they on the right trajectory. And they are always open to having the very difficult conversations. And so we know these are ongoing conversations they have. And we appreciate the thoroughness staff has had regarding that issue. Unfortunately, in regard to the building that CalSTRS is discussing. We have some very serious concerns about transparency with stakeholders, transparency about costs. There has not been clear communication with the stakeholders or the plan regarding the process of the building. We do feel that it has been rushed. Initially, we were told it would be an investment. And only at an actual board meeting was it disclosed that this would be a capital asset. And since our members are paying additional funds. And it's something that is going to be something our members would be paying for. We would ask that this item be held until the stakeholders feel that there's been the appropriate transparency in regard to all issues regarding the building.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Steve Juarez: good afternoon, mr. cooper, chairman cooper, and unfortunately, no members of the committee, but hopefully this will be shared with them. thank you for the opportunity to be here today. my name is steve department juarez, i'm the deputy treasurer for economic development and higher ed policy for the treasurer. but pertinent to this item, i sit as his designated as chair of the secure choice board. and so on behalf of the board itself, i want to thank both the legislature and the governor for prior support. and also for the support embedded in the asylum which is $50 million loan for 17-18 and then a total amount of 170 million over a four year period all of it in loans with the expectation that it'll be paid back shortly thereafter. we believe that once fully implemented, the secure choice retirement program will provide millions of californians with ability to save for their retirement. as a better way to ensure for themselves and their families. but also to reduce the dependent on public subsidy programs, because in fact these people will be better equipped to address their own needs. we are actively taking steps to get the program underway, including hiring exec director and staff to oversee the program. the staff has duly noted that actions in washington dc have raised questions about the future authority of programs like secure choice to proceed. should the congress and the president elect to disallow the department of labor rule adopted last october, that provided a very specific safe harbor from erisa. as the staff analysis points out however, the treasurer's position, supported by internal legal review. is that the october 2016 dr ruling, if in fact the october 2016 deal ol ruling was to be disallowed. that the program would still be allowed to move forward under the terms of current federal statutes and the safe harbor that was adopted in 1975 when erisa was first adopted. this is consistent with the position taken in a 2015 memorandum to the department of labor from kenel gates on behalf of the treasurer and the secure choice board. given that the us senate has not yet taken action, that mirrors the action taken in the house relative to the 2016 rule making. we are not even certain at this time if our legal interpretation that i've shared with you is even relevant. however, given that there's time to sort out these details, we have no problem with the staff recommendation to hold this item open pending further federal action and our possible response. and of course, we'll be sharing that with you and your staff.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 26, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 37, 'end': 43, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 197, 'end': 220, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1528, 'end': 1533, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1890, 'end': 1895, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nick Schroeder: Nick Schroeder with the LAO. As the staff indicate, as well as the department indicated, there is great uncertainty at the federal level. And because of that the staff recommendation is reasonable.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Daniel Saver: good morning members of the committee. my name is daniel, i'm an attorney with community legal services in east palo alto. our agency is a non-profit law firm that serves low income residents in san mateo and santa clara counties. i particularly work in our housing practice. i'm here to root a little bit of this discussion in the actual lived experience of people on the ground in this current political climate. and i'm here to share a story of one of my clients because for reasons that i'm sure you can deduce she cannot be here to provide her own story, which i think exemplifies the need for these sort of protections. for the purposes of this testimony, i'm going to refer to my client as maria. maria and her husband have lived in this country, they're both immigrants for approximately 20 years. they have two children who were both born here in the united states and are american citizens about 13 years old and 10 years old. they've been in their apartment in redwood city, the same apartment for about seven years. this is in the middle of silicon valley, a bustling area. there's a lot of opportunity, great access to services, they're walking distance from the school that the children attend. around christmas just a few days before christmas actually of 2016, the landlord at maria's home served her with an eviction notice, just a few days before christmas. maria sought legal assistance, immediately and was advised that this eviction notice was in fact invalid. it did not meet the statutory requirements necessary for an eviction notice. maria bravely decided to stand up for her rights and told the landlord, this notice is invalid, i don't have to leave. the landlord immediately began to threaten and harass and attempt to intimidate maria and her family into leaving. these threats and intimidation culminated first, in a text message that was sent and passed along to maria in which the landlord said, if you do not leave by the date specified in that notice, i will call immigration on you. this was then followed by a note from the landlord saying, i will be there at 5pm. on the date in the notice to make sure that you're out. i went maria's house at 5pm to wait with her, to accompany her. the landlord never showed up. i waited for awhile. i drove home. i get a call. a couple hours later for maria, it's dark she's scared. the landlord has showed up, the landlord has come into her apartment and the landlord is trying to communicate with her however it's difficult because maria doesn't speak english, the landlord doesn't speak spanish. so my client maria's 13 year old daughter. is confronting the landlord and translating on behalf of her mother. the landlord continues to threaten and intimidate maria and her 13 year old daughter. she's on the phone with me, the landlord refuses to speak with me on the phone. i'm trying to talk her down and just keep her calm. eventually the landlord does in fact leave. it's not until the next day that i'm able to speak with the landlord on the phone. when i am speaking with this particular landlord she tells me that it is her duty to call immigration on maria. she feels its an obligation to do so, because she feels that maria is here without papers.
[{'start': 50, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 697, 'end': 702, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 704, 'end': 709, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1293, 'end': 1298, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1376, 'end': 1381, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1559, 'end': 1564, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1758, 'end': 1763, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1894, 'end': 1899, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2164, 'end': 2169, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2325, 'end': 2330, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2507, 'end': 2512, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2585, 'end': 2590, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2734, 'end': 2739, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3134, 'end': 3139, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3202, 'end': 3207, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brian Augusta: good morning, chair members brian jonah augusta on behalf of the california rural legal assistance foundation pleased to co-sponsor this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Lange: Karen Lange on behalf of Mayor Edwin Lee in the City and County of San Francisco in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 31, 'end': 40, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Christopher Sanchez : Christopher Sanchez with CHIRLA the Coalition for Immigrant Rights in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 25, 'end': 31, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lizzy Beacon: Lizzy Beacon with the ACLU of California in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Galliano: Chris Galliano with the California Immigrant Policy Center in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrew Medino: Andrew Medino with Asian-Americans Advancing Justice California in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gabriel Garcia: gabriel brian garcia with the southeast asia resource action center also in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Deborah Carlton: Deborah Carlton with the California Apartment Association, we're at that in between level but I want to thank the author and the sponsors for agreeing to work with us. We have historically supported legislation like this and we want to make sure that we just clarify some sections of the rebuttable presumptions so that landlords don't find themselves in a spot where they're asking for clarifying information after there's a tenancy, and I think we're going to find some solutions there. So thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Justin Paddock: mr chair and members, justin gabriel paddock on behalf of california association of realtors. we've actually been working with the author and the sponsor on several occasions to resolve one issue that we have with the rebuttable presumption on section seven of the bill. we're actually very confident that we can actually reach an agreement on that measure, at which point we'll reassess our position. until then, we would ask that the bill is held in this committee until we can reach that agreement, for the simple reason that this is dealing with unlawful detainer actions and judiciary committee's probably best suited to address those issues, thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lexi Howard: Good morning Mr. Chair, and members, Lexi Howard with California Advocates here today on behalf of the California Judges' Association The bill simply restores a right that was already in place. Clarifies that the costs must be reasonable and allows for reimbursement of expenses. I appreciate the Committee's work on this and here to answer any questions, respectfully ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shari McHugh: good morning, shari justin mchugh, mchugh, koepke & associates, here today on behalf of the california self storage association. i would first like to start off by thanking the chairman, the author, and their staff for working with us on the amendments, and we're happy to be here today in support of the bill. i have with me this morning erin king, who is the executive director of the california self storage association to briefly outline the specifics of the bill. thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 33, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 35, 'end': 41, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 339, 'end': 348, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Heather Scott: thank you, mr. chair and members, heather shari scott on behalf of state controller betty yee, i want to thank assembly member daly for authoring this bill for the controller. mr. daly and the committee analysis have laid the issue out very nicely for you, the authority to advertise the unclaimed property program across multiple forms of media has been in place for more than 15 years, anecdotally, probably longer, but that's how far back the list system goes. we live in an age where information comes to people from many different ways and we need to respond in modern ways to modern times. the controller has a difficult task of getting the word out about this program for more than 32 million properties that we're currently holding. the ongoing flexibility to do so in a manner that is effective, with our very small budget to do this, would be greatly appreciated, and i ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 84, 'end': 93, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 127, 'end': 131, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 180, 'end': 184, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jim Ewert: thank you, mr. chair, members of the committee. i'm jim heather ewert with the california newspaper publishers association and i represent over 1300 daily and weekly newspapers in the state of california. let me first say that we're not opposed to the objective that the controller and mr. daly are attempting to achieve here. we think that broad base notice is a good thing. what we disagree over, however, is the means to get there. notices in newspapers of general circulation are the only types of notices that are actually going to push into a community, where people are going to have an opportunity where people are going to actually see the notices. they are published online. someone in order to get the notice is going to have to know what they're looking for and actively seek that out. notices and newspapers of general circulation are proven, they're effective over time, and i recognize that the requirement has been suspended each of the last 15 or more years. that was a process that was not done through a single policy committee. it was all done through the trailer bill process and had it been done in a policy committee, we probably would have been there saying the same thing that we're saying today. nonetheless, in each and every one of those years that the requirement was suspended. the controller's office continued to publish these notices in newspapers of general circulation as part of her overall or in the case the controller's overall attempt to notify the communities and this is a recognition of the effectiveness of these notices. as we understand it, in our conversations with the controller's office about this bill, it's their intent to continue to do so and so what we're seeing here is the that notices that are published in newspapers of general circulation right now, also appear online on those newspapers' websites in most cases. we have also at cnpa created a website called californiapublicnotices.com. where each and every one of the printed notices that's published is uploaded on a weekly basis to the website. so anyone who wants to get access to these notices online can do so. at no taxpayer expense and at no additional expense to the advertiser. published notices are archivable. they ensure that government agencies do what they're supposed to do and we strongly believe that this requirement should remain in the law and for these reasons, we are opposed to the bill. thank you.
[{'start': 52, 'end': 69, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 290, 'end': 294, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Regina Wilson: Good afternoon, my name is Regina Wilson, and I am the Executive Director for California Black Media. I would like to echo everything my counterpart here at CNPA has stated, but I just learned recently that the language in the trailer bill was suspending this requirement for some time, and just getting this information, it was troubling because I met with the controller I want to say in April of 2015, and the meeting that I asked for was about outreach with unclaimed property notices, and once I did my RFP, I learned that, I mean the request. I learned that there was an RFP out that I was never told about at that meeting. So, I think that there are a lot of problems with how the process works, and making sure that people know. I definitely know that African-American newspapers in this state have probably not gotten their fair share of that. The public's right to know this information and so I would look forward to working with whoever I need to work with, to ensure that there's a fair and transparent process, but definitely putting in a trailer bill language to suspend this for however long it's been suspended I think was probably unfair at best.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tiffany Johnson: Hi, so my name is Tiffany Johnson, I am Social Director of A New Way of Life Reentry Project. But before becoming associate director, I was a resident of A New Way of Life. So at a early age, I was sexually abused, for many years which led me on this path of destruction, self mutilation, no self esteem at all. That ended me up in a prison system that I knew nothing about. I served 16 years on a 15 to life sentence. I was told that I was a victim, yet and still, I had to take a plea bargain in order to avoid a longer stretch of time. I got out in 2010, April 28th, and I went into A New Way of Life. And I went there for just that purpose, seeking a new way of living. At A New Way of Life, I Learned so much about myself, my community, and my people, the environment, the laws, the structures, how my voice just my single voice can make a difference. I never knew that. And now, 7 years later I got off parole, I was able to vote for the very first time in my life and I'm 48 years old, that felt wonderful. I have even gotten in the mail a jury selection and I was like yay, I can go and sit on a jury, but I can't. And that's part of my road now. I'm constantly coming through doors but having other doors shut in my face. Is not fair, I've paid my debt to society. I've gave the criminal justice system over 20 some odd years of my life. When do it stop? When can I participate? Not just me, but other people out there. There are so many of us who come out and we pay our taxes, we pay our bills, we try to vote. If we can't vote we participate. And giving other people the knowledge that they can vote, right? And so I just want to be able to have my civil rights fully restored. And so I'm a supporter of this bill and I hope that you are too. Thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Endria Richardson: Good morning, I am Endria Richardson from Legal Services for Prisoners with Children and All of Us or None, we are proud co-sponsors of this bill, and we strongly support it. The process of voir dire already exists for thorough, rigorous, individualized assessment of people to determine their fitness to serve on a jury. Right now, our current law says any person who was at any time convicted of any felony, will never be fit to serve on any jury for any case. I think that it's time that we look at how reasonable or unreasonable that is. We think it's a highly unreasonable blanket exclusion and we urge you to pass this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sandra Johnson: my name is sandra jim johnson, i'm a member of all of us or none. and i'm a policy fellow at legal services for prisoners with children. and i support this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joseph Johnson: my name is joseph sandra johnson and i support this bill. all or none, and i think this bill should be passed. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cory Jasperson: mr. chair, members of the committee, jasperson on behalf of the judicial council. we have not had a chance, given the amendments on friday, to take a formal position on the bill. however, this is a legislative priority for the council, we sponsored legislation last year. on this topic we would like to work with the author, there's a similar bill on the senate side. the language is a little bit different, we'd like to harmonize the language in the two bills. but this is a top priority to address the concerns that the governor stated in his veto message from our new judgeship bill from a couple of years ago to do something to balance the courts that have judges in excess of their assessed judicial need with the courts that have too few judges who are in strong support. and i'm happy to answer any technical questions, if i can assist.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jean Hurst: mr. chair, members of the committee, jean joseph hurst here today on behalf of the riverside county board of supervisors. the county has a longstanding position of supporting, remedying the significant shortfall in the riverside county court, and we are supportive of all efforts to attempt to remedy that issue. we urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Morris Jacobson: my name is morris. i'm the presiding judge in alameda county. i'm not sure if we're in support or opposition. i'd like to explain very briefly. there's language in that bill that separates the money from the judgeships. i would point out that in california, there's approximately one judge for every 23,000 people. alameda county is right at about that line. riverside county is horrendously under judged, one judge for every 38,000 people. if you look at the money side of it, alameda county has a budget with 75 judges of $76 million this year. riverside county with 61 judges, $85 million. the money to support the judgeships has already gone through in the very sort of complicated waffen formulation. so long as this bill protects our money, we, for the good of the judicial branch and for riverside county, will not oppose the taking of two of our judgeships. we don't like it. we don't think that we are over judged. but the money portion of it is critical for us. the next cut that we take will result in layoffs and court closures. that's where we are right now.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Cass: Michelle Cass with the Service Employees International Union, we don't have an official position on this bill either. Given the amendments from last week, we think the bill is substantially improved. Like the judge just mentioned, it's critical that funding that would otherwise fund staff, not follow the judgeships. But I do want to go on the record saying that we don't think it's a good practice and policy in California to take from one court and give to another court, when all courts are under-resourced in varying capacities. We'd rather see an investment to the courts. Absent that, we think that the amendments that were taken last week were a substantial improvement from the introduced bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chad Finke: mr. chair, members of the committee, thank you. i'm chad jean finke. i'm the executive officer of the alameda county superior court. i just would like to echo the comments my presiding judge, judge jacobson, made, which is from the administrative side, our court has no opposition to the movement of two judgeships south. but it would be catastrophic for us if more money, other than what has already gone to the waffen, were taken along with this. thank you very much.
[{'start': 52, 'end': 67, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 198, 'end': 206, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Karen Lange: good morning. karen chad lange, on behalf of mayor edwin lee and the city and county of san francisco in support, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 51, 'end': 60, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Faith Conley: good morning, mr. chair and members, faith karen conley with the civil justice association of. california. we are respectfully in opposition to ab 814. i want to be clear that our organization stands behind the use of the unfair competition law to bring actions against businesses who are indeed acting in bad faith and harming california's consumers. it's important to note, as mr feurer contended, that the attorney general, county da's as well as certain city attorney's can enforce actions under ucl, but private citizens can also bring actions under the ucl. they can also use the consumers legal remedies act to bring actions if they are being harmed by a business as well. there's also, as you now know, the ability for da's and attorney generals to utilize their power of pre-litigation subpoena under ucl actions. it would seem that these layers of options available in the courts have been sufficient in bringing justice for consumers under section 17 200 of the business and professions code. we haven't seen a problem with it being enforced. we oppose the expansion of pre litigation subpoena to further government officials in these cases. we maintain that the power of issuing a subpoena before ever filing an actual action of alleged wrongdoing is of such intrusive magnitude that it should be maintained by those who are, as statute denotes, the chief law enforcement officials of the state. this view is not to disparage the role of a city attorney. that role includes among prosecuting issues, advising their cities on legal matters, financial matters, drafting ordinances, and arbitrating disputes regarding zoning ordinances. but the expansion of this power to a city attorney is unnecessary when that city attorney, should he or she feel it necessary, can simply work with his or her county district attorney to issue one. we believe ab 814 adds yet another layer, under the ucl, by which we believe would further clog the court system, rather than relieve it. it should be noted that if a business does not respond to a pre-litigations subpoena the city attorney would then have to petition the superior court for an order compelling a business's response. while this might seem like an easy undertaking, it then places the burden on the business to prove why a subpoena has been issued when no actual allegation has been filed for wrongdoing. we believe that the burden to show that pre-litigation of subpoena is reasonable should be with the city attorney when he or she requests the subpoena from their district attorney. the author and sponsor state the need for this bill because without pre-litigation subpoena power, the process of investigating claims of fraud against wells fargo, was quote on quote, more time consuming. that, again quote on quote, there will not always be a paper trail, or identifiable group of witnesses to help guide investigation, so the need for pre litigation subpoena is warranted. this seems to apply to any allegation of wrongdoing, even when there is no supporting documentation or known parties harmed will trigger the city attorneys to subpoena a business before ever claiming a filing of wrongdoing. we believe the current procedures protect the consumer. this current system provides a balance between government entities when enforcing the unfair competition law. it took months to investigate wells fargo. those months may have been stunted if mr. feurer had simply gone to his district attorney to request a pre-litigation subpoena. in closing, members, there are a myriad of approaches to suing business for alleged wrongdoing under ucl. this additional power of collecting documentation from those business, again, before a claim is ever made of alleged wrongdoing against that business, should rest with those who, as stated in government code section 26 500. in addition to bringing civil cases in their communities, rests with those whose most essential duty is investigating and prosecuting offenses on behalf of the people.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 382, 'end': 388, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3414, 'end': 3420, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kara Cross: Thank you. Good morning, Chair and Members of the Committee, my name is Kara Cross, I represent the Personal Insurance Federation of California, together, our seven member companies write the majority of auto and home owners insurance in the state. We oppose AB 814, because it's unnecessary, and burdens business with full litigation obligations, without there being enough evidence to show wrongdoing. This is a powerful tool, and it should not be expanded. As you know, the fourth amendment of the Constitution protects people from unreasonable searches and seizure, now, the government cannot knock on your door and walk in and look at all your closets. Likewise, the government should not be able to go into your office and look through all your file cabinets. But granted, companies are not people with individual rights. But, in California, in the majority of cases, it is not requiring companies to divulge confidential information without a charge of wrong doing. Particularly concerning this is because of less limits on the scope of pre-litigation subpoenas. It's a big deal, companies have to turn over thousands of pages of documents. It is a significant use of manpower. It is a significant cost to both businesses and to consumers. It could contain confidential personal identifying information, as well as trade secret information. For these reasons and more, we respectfully ask that the Committee vote no on this bill. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 72, 'end': 82, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Gould: Mr. Chair and Members of the Committee, Kevin Gould with the California Bankers Association in opposition.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Courtney Jensen: mr. chair and members, courtney faith jensen with the california credit union league also in opposition.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pat Zenzola: mr. chair and members, pat courtney zenzola with k p public affairs, here on behalf of the california mortgage bankers association, in opposition to the bill.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Margaret Gladstein: Margaret Gladstein here, on behalf of the California Community Banking Network, also here in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Buckman: Good morning honorable members of the Judiciary Committee. My name is Michael Buckman, and I'm here today to ask your support of AB 927. I serve as Co-Chair of Teach California, an organization committed to advocating on behalf of non public school children. More importantly though I am here today before you as the father of William, Julia and Jonathan, my 8, 5 and 3 year old children. William, Julia and Jonathan attend a non public Jewish day school in Los Angeles. My wife and I chose this school for our children because of our committment to our culture and tradition. We never expected that making this choice would create a situation where we would worry about their daily safety. How is a parent to react when their child comes home and tells them they had a lockdown drill today in school. William told me how the teacher locks the door, pulls down the shades in the classroom, turns off the lights, and he and his fellow students hide in the closet. Faith based institutions have always been subject to increased security risk. But as you are aware, the situation has escalated with the number of threats beginning to increase this year to the number of hundreds just so far. My children's school has worked hard to create a safe environment over the years. And it has increased tuition in order to cover the cost of security and technical equipment. Unlike other public schools in our area, we do not benefit from the public security personnel assigned to keep our children, staff and campus safe. Significant resources are expanded on these security efforts in lieu of money that would otherwise be going towards textbooks, teachers and educating our children. Unfortunately, we live in a world today where lockdown drills are now as prevalent as fire drills. All our children in all our schools deserve a chance to develop, learn and thrive in a safe and secure environment. On behalf of William, Julia and Jonathan and the hundreds of thousands of other California students like them. I thank you for your time and consideration and for keeping them safe by supporting AB 927.
[{'start': 70, 'end': 85, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 327, 'end': 334, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 336, 'end': 341, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 346, 'end': 354, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 389, 'end': 396, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 398, 'end': 403, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 408, 'end': 416, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 802, 'end': 809, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1904, 'end': 1911, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1913, 'end': 1918, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1923, 'end': 1931, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Lovell: John Lovell on behalf of the Association for Los Angeles Deputy Sheriffs, the Association of Deputy District Attorneys, the California Association of Code Enforcement Officers, the California Council of University. California College and University Police Chiefs Association, California Narcotic Officers Association, Los Angeles County Probation Officers, ASV Local 685, Los Angeles County Professional Peace Officers Association, Los Angeles Police Protective League, and Riverside Sheriff's Association. We apologize to the Chair, and the Committee for-
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christopher Sanchez : Christopher Sanchez with Coalition for Humane Immigrant Rights in strong support. We'll be getting our letter in soon. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Chris Coliano: chris jonah coliano from the california immigrant policies center in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Caliph Assagai: Caliph Assagai California Public Defenders Association also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: ignacio chris hernandez on behalf of the california attorneys for criminal justice in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cathy Sure: cathy ignacio sure on behalf of the aclu of california in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bruce Lisker: sorry. honorable assemblypersons, my name is bruce cathy lisker. i'm here to urge a yes vote on ab 359. on march 10th, 1983 my teenage world became a nightmare. i discovered my mother beaten, stabbed, and left for dead on the floor of our families sherman oaks home. it wasn't long before a corrupt lapd detective was unbelievably accusing me for the attack. i was cast in the notorious snitch tank at la county jail where i met a vile creature, known as robert hughes, a morally bankrupt jailhouse informant, with an extensive rap sheet. and one overriding mission to get out of jail. after conning me into innocent conversation, hughes told police i confessed to him. i was the fourth target of his efforts his lies inside of 18 months. police fed him cigarettes, food, flew him in private lapd aircraft and my prosecutor got him sprung from prison months early. hugh's lies and the criminal justice system that encourages them cost me more than 26 years of freedom and youth i can never get back. had ab-359 been the law of the land, my lawyer would've known that hughes had a lengthy history of severe mental illness, including documented psychotic breaks. he was given inducements to investigate and testify against me, had unrecorded conversations and interviews with police about the case, an undue influence rewarded his lies with the thing he coveted most, his freedom. all this was hidden or misrepresented by police and prosecutors. evidence is clear. jailhouse informant testimony is a leading cause of wrongful conviction in america. as demonstrated by the recent outrage in orange county, and investigations in at least five other california counties, this problem persists. please vote yes on ab 359, this society deserves no less. thank you.
[{'start': 45, 'end': 63, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 455, 'end': 468, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 631, 'end': 637, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 865, 'end': 869, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1067, 'end': 1073, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: Ignacio Hernandez on behalf of the California Attorneys for Criminal Justice, we are pleased to be a co-sponsorer of this measure and ask for your support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathy Scherer: kathy bruce scherer on behalf of the aclu of california, we are also pleased to be a co-sponsorer of this measure and urge your support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa O'Connell: Good morning, Melissa O'Connell from the Northern California Innocence Project, we are in strong support of the bill.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jasmine Harris: Good morning, Jasmine Harris with the California Innocence Project, also in strong support of this bill.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kelly Foster: Kelly Foster, California Public Defenders Association also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cory Salzillo: Good morning, Mr. Chair and members, Cory Salzillo here on behalf of the California State Sheriffs' Association. We do not have an official opposed position yet. The bill was amended on Thursday, not in enough time to get us proper vetting of the bill. But I did talk with the author's staff and indicate that we were going to come to Committee and express our concerns with the bill although again, not reflective in official opposition position. We will point a couple of concerns, one's bill covers all communication regarding info from, information from potential informant which that information may just be information about the security of institution may not be ultimately reflected in testimony. And so there's a little bit of a disconnect between what we're talking about here, about information and evidence or things that ultimately get entered into testimony and things that will never be part of a court record so we have some concerns about that. There's language that provides that If an informant has substance abuse history of mental health issues, that law enforcement, members of the prosecutorial team would be required to report those things to the District Attorney's office as part of this data collection or information collection. We think that puts law enforcement, possibly, I'm not a HIPAA expert. We think that possibly puts Law enforcement in the position of being required to violate HIPAA, if they're disclosing a mental health issue. So I think we'd ask for some clarity on that regard. There's also language in the bill that requires the information to be provided at least 30 days Before the preliminary hearing. Which may not be possible in every circumstance, it may be a matter of that the information is not obtained until after the preliminary hearing has taken place. So, I think there needs to be at the very least, a technical consideration of what happens when there's information that is achieved after a prelim has taken place or if it happens to be received within that 30 day window. But before the prelim, what happens? Is there an expectation that such evidence or information would be inadmissible, or would it be further cautioned? And ultimately I think we would point out that all of this information, if it does end up in testimony is subjected to court scrutiny. It's going to be vetted by a jury and in fact there's a jury instruction that requires a court to notify a jury that if an informant is providing testimony that the jury is to examine that evidence with caution. Not to necessarily disregard it but to weigh, to give it the caution that it is due given that it does come from an informant, we're also unclear how the non monetary compensation is going to be valued. So we understand that other things of value may be given as compensation. We understand the concern with that, but we're not entirely clear logistically how those things would be valued like a different cell assignment, or different privileges or duties. So again, not an official opposition but we do have those concerns. We look forward to continue working with the author to address those, if we are able, thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shawn Hoffman: Shawn Hoffman, with the California District Attorneys Association, in a similar position, as my colleague from the Sheriffs, we hadn't had an opportunity to analyze the bill in light of the recent amendments. But we do have some concerns that largely reflect those articulated by Mr. Sarzillo particularly those with respect to HIPAA and the logistical problems with the 30 days before prelim notification when the information may not be obtained until sometime after that. So we look forward to working with the author and his staff as the bill moves forward.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 284, 'end': 292, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lisa Nerenberg: thank you mister chair and members of the committee. i'm nerenberg, executive director of the california elder justice coalition. and we're a network of 70 organizations that were started in 2009 to provide a voice for vulnerable older adults. we span the spectrum from adult protective service workers to judges, criminal justice professionals, civil attorneys, educators, social service providers, and many more. i really appreciate the opportunity to tell you about ab-502 which would authorize san diego county to pilot a program permitting older independent victims of financial crimes to apply for victim compensation. currently only victims of violence are eligible. and to tell you why this is such a top priority for cejc. i'm sure by now you've all seen the headlines across california. older adults are being tricked or coerced into signing over homes or assets. it may be by caregivers or family members, simply getting their hands on a victim's credit or atm card but often times it's much more complicated. getting adults, for example, with cognitive impairments to sign over powers of attorney, deeds, bank accounts. you hear too, i'm sure, about scams and telemarketing fraud. i think these terms don't always adequately describe the true nature of these crimes. some perps operate from other countries as part of organized crime rings that seek out older americans. they latch on to them and unleash campaigns of intimidation and sometimes terror. but while you're likely to hear about the crimes, you're less likely to hear about the victims. victims often face eviction or foreclosure, lose homes, savings. some become homeless or dependent on public benefits for their families. some inadvertently, become accomplices in money laundering schemes or as mules, transferring or carrying money for the perps. some incriminate themselves by cashing counterfeit checks, and face arrest. others lose their credit, their credibility, even their families. many become repeat victims. once someone has been victimized, they're at extremely high risk for revictimization either by the same perpetrator or by others. trafficking in victim information is a lucrative enterprise for many of these scammers. victims may attempt to recoup their losses through phony reload scams, that way getting in even deeper. not surprisingly victims often become paralyzed by shock or shame or despair just when they should be taking action, or could be taking action to stop or mitigate the damage. and that's why victim compensation is so critical a da in san diego recently told us about a victim living in an assisted living facility. and an employee from the facility had started coming into her room and stealing cash when she wasn't there. when she started noticing the money disappearing, she began to doubt herself. she started thinking that she was imagining things and that she was slipping into dementia. this kept her up at night. she couldn't sleep. she was too embarrassed to tell anyone for fear that she would be whisked off to a higher level of care that she might not be able to afford so she kept quiet. with support though she was able to report the crime finally. came to court and the perp, was handed down a sentence that would make him think twice about victimizing other residents. another colleague, sarah bernard, who runs a support group for scam victims at wise and healthy aging in los angeles, asked me to tell the members of the committee and i quote, every member of this group of scam victims were suicidal at some point during their scams. so what is it that these victims need? well, clearly, they need counseling to address the immediate trauma. they need help developing safety plans, severing connections with perpetrators who may have access to their finances or personal information, they need support to resist the relentless pleas from perpetrators and often bullying. financial counseling is also critical. and what i mean by that is to stop the hemorrhaging and get victims back on track financially. that may involve advocating with debt collectors landlords or even the irs when they stamps have tax implications. some need hands on help to prevent foreclosure eviction, restructure budgets and debts, access to insurance and public assistance, subtle bankruptcy and banking issues. and some victims may need advocates to act on their own behalf, and in their interest.
[{'start': 57, 'end': 66, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 726, 'end': 730, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3319, 'end': 3332, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Carol Sewell: thank you, carol from the california commission on aging. the pilot project that we propose through ab 502, would be a groundbreaking approach. as lisa mentioned, we have not been able to identify any program nationally that can provide us data on how many elder and dependent adult financial abuse victims would use this type of service. we know that these services are beneficial. pilot programs in the past have demonstrated small numbers we know of a project in other county that identified crime victims who came in received office of counselling and accepted 5 sessions, the number of those who did accept that service was about 50% of referrals. so it wasn't everyone. i wanted to address a point that's raised in the analysis about the department of the governor's office of emergency services grant programs. there were innovative grant programs that were released last fall, and a number of groups have begun offering victim's services through those grants. we were actually involved in the development of those those are, i think there are 13 programs in the state that's not a demonstration of a state service, it's a local innovation and it is a different level. our goal with this bill really is to help the state acknowledge that elderly and dependent adult victims of these crimes, our criminal victims at the level of violent crime victim. these crimes have devastating impacts that are life changing and these people cannot recover. they're not in a position to go back to work. they're not in the position to continue their investments or try and go to court even. frankly, many of them are devastated by the thought that they have just lost what little future they had counted on for the last remaining years of their lives. we think this a very important thing. we've done a lot of work with the victim compensation board. they acknowledge that there's a need in this area. they are concerned about the fiscal impacts, and we acknowledge that. but we believe that by demonstrating through this one county project, we can show that it's not going to be a huge impact on the fund. and this crime is increasing 23% against these victims in the last four years according to the department of social services. this has to be the fastest growing crime in our state and possibly the nation. i think it's time that we started treating it like a valid issue that needs to be addressed. so thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 147, 'end': 151, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sean Hoffman: Sean Hoffman with the California District Attorneys Association, also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sean Hoffman: good morning, mr. chair and members, sean with the california district attorneys association. the sponsors of ab 264. this bill expands existing law governing post convicted protection orders in two important ways. first, as mr. low said, while existing applies to victims of domestic violence and sexual assault, ab 264 would add victims of certain gang related crimes. we believe this is a natural and necessary expansion of the statute to cover expenses where victims have particular reason to fear further retaliatory harm. second, ab 264, we expand the authority for a court to issue a post-conviction restraining order to include percipient witnesses of any of the covered offenses, if they can show by clear and convincing evidence that they've been harassed. the same standard that they currently have to show when they simply seek a restraining order. it's important to remember this bill does not require, or mandate a court to issue such a post conviction protective order of any length simply allows a court to do so at the time of sentencing for up to 10 years if the circumstances so warrant. victims and witnesses of any crime while they can currently go through a civil process to obtain a restraining order following conviction, that process is time-consuming for the victim or the witness as well as the courts. so in that regard, this bill does promote the efficient use of judicial resources by potentially avoiding a separate hearing and allowing a judge most familiar with the facts and circumstances of a particular case to decide whether to issue such an order. we appreciate the committee staff and i appreciate the author staff working to narrow the bill in response to concerns about some of the collateral consequences that may flow from being to subject to one of these restraining orders i appreciate your time this morning, and respectfully ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 229, 'end': 232, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dawn Koepke: Thank you, Mr. Chair and Members, Dawn Koepke on behalf of Crime Victims United, also in support. Particularly for victims in these kinds of cases, we definitely want to make sure that they are protected and that protection is actually proactive in these cases, especially for victims that may be fearful for their safety. Additionally, for those witnesses that come forward in these types of cases as well, knowing that they have the opportunity to seek these protective orders on a longer term basis will hopefully help ensure that their safety is protected, but also encourage them to actually come forward as witnesses in these cases, as well. It's definitely the interest of Crime Victims United to do this in a more proactive manner rather than making these victims and witnesses endure civil proceedings that can be arduous, very time consuming, and just difficult in terms of reliving those experiences when the courts, as they're kind of looking at this, have the ability to consider the details of that case in that A particular circumstance where as a civil proceeding they may not have all of the background and the details associated with that. So we really think this is a very good bill and really urge your aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathy Sher: good morning, kathy kathy sher on behalf of the aclu of california. we appreciate assemblymember low's work to narrow this bill but unfortunately, we must still oppose. california law provides a number of different avenues for protection of witnesses in criminal cases where there is reason to believe that a witness needs protection. witness intimidation is of course a crime with significant sentencing enhancements applying if the intimidation is gang related. the court in the criminal case has broad discretion under penal code section 136.2 to issue protective orders to protect witnesses during dependency of the proceedings. if after the proceedings are concluded, a witness suffers harassment as required under ab 264 for the court to consider a no contact order, the witness can, under existing law, seek a civil protective order. that process differs from the process proposed, for the new contact orders under this bill in some significant ways. first, the order can last no longer than five years as supposed to the 10 years allowed under this bill. this will lead some defendants under the control of the criminal justice system for a period, far longer than their sentences, or terms of probation. second, the terms of the restraining order allowed under ab 264 would bar all contact with the witness, while civil restraining orders can be crafted by the court may only restrain the respondent from harassment or from other specific behaviors. the end result will be more offenders who will remain subject to greater restrictions for a longer period of time. in many cases this will make it far more difficult for the offenders to reintegrate. a no contact order may in practice work as a bar to an offender returning to his former home or even neighborhood. if that would bring him into contact with the witnesses he is now barred from contact with. sadly, the end result will be more offenders returned to prison for violations of the orders even when there was no harm to or harassment of the witness. we ask for your no vote on ab 264.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 97, 'end': 100, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Phillippe Asagai: Phillippe Asagai, California Public Defenders Association in opposition for the reasons stated by the ACLU, thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brandon Greene: thank you, mr. chair and committee members. my name is greene. i'm an attorney at the east bay community law center in berkeley, where i run a clinic that deals with traffic issues and other sort of criminalization of poverty issues. we're in support of this bill for a number of reasons. one, as ms. renika just spoke about, the current system is not fair. so just a week ago we got a response to our public records act request on the alameda county superior court. in the last 5 years, they've issued over 300,000 civil assessments, all at the maximum statutory penalty of $300. despite the fact that the statute says up to $300, there's not been at least one case in the 300 some odd thousand that we've seen, where they have not issued at the maximum statutory penalty. secondly, there's no transparency, so a couple of weeks ago we issued, or filed motions on behalf of a client, approximately 11 motions to vacate his civil assessment, or to reduce the civil assessment. we put the exact same language on each of these motions. eight of those were granted, three were denied, and the judge did not issue any findings as to her rulings so there was no way for us to be able to either advise our client or to know ourselves what things that she may have considered or whether not she used any discretion or any consideration of his circumstances in general. as the bill contemplates, currently even if somebody comes to court, they have the case adjudicated. they are found not guilty or the case is dismissed against them. they then have to go through another process to have the civil assessment vacated, which i think puts an undue burden on folks. and my last two points would be that, we often times talk about, talk about poverty just from the income standpoint. but we don't talk about it in terms of people being resource poor. so when you add $300 on top of tickets that are already sort of excessive, people are going to be unable to pay that because the vast majority of people don't even have $300 to $500 in savings to accomplish that. and the last thing i would say is that the vast majority of people are going to, their first and only experience within the judicial system is going to be going through these traffic courts. and so, when you don't have fairness, when you don't have a system that is transparent, and when you have individuals going through situations like ms. renicka, that, in my opinion, causes people to have distrust in the system. and so, i think that we need to be very cognizant about ensuring that the system is fair so that people have a fair interpretation of the system.
[{'start': 55, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 301, 'end': 307, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2396, 'end': 2403, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mike Herald: Mr. Chair, Mike Herald with the Western Center on Law and Poverty, one of the cosponsors of this measure and we're happy to support it today in Committee.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lizzie Beacon: Lizzie Beacon with the ACLU, California, co-sponsor, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Caliph Assagai: caliph kathy assagai california public defenders association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: Ignacio Hernandez, California Attorneys for Criminal Justice, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sean Hoffman: Thank you Members. Morning, Mr. Chair and Members, Sean Hoffman with the California District Attorney's Association. As Mr. Bigelow said, AB 721 would simply extend an authorization that exists for other law enforcement agencies and peace officers to District Attorney investigators who are peace officers under section 830.1, and are required to undergo post-training. Penal code currently allows DA investigators to possess machine guns, no matter the barrel length. So, they could have a rifle with a 10 inch barrel, if it shoots fully automatic, or even a belt-fed machine gun. But if it's semi-automatic only, the barrel has to be 16 inches. Doesn't make a ton of sense. Let me give you a couple of reasons why law enforcement agencies and officers may prefer short-barrel long guns. Particularly, in the context of a DA investigator's typical activities. Longer barrels hinder movement within structures, which is important when serving search or arrest warrants in buildings and houses or defending against active shooter scenarios in our offices. Similar to what we saw in San Bernardino, on December 2nd, 2015. That situation occurred just a couple of blocks from the San Bernardino District Attorney's Office, which was placed on lockdown. Longer barrels also restrict the ability to enter and exit cars rapidly, while protecting victims, witnesses, or deputy Das who are under protection. This is an important aspect of a DA Investigator's job. It's not unreasonable to imagine a scenario in which someone's trying to kill an important or high profile witness. He's wearing body armor. Handguns, while small and easily concealable are not particularly effective against body armor. And finally, smaller firearms are easier to conceal under clothing, while trying to remain discreet, while engaged in these assignments. Ultimately, the decision to use a particular type of weapon, rather than another, is going to be based on the circumstances of the assignment, the tactical expertise of the officer or investigator. So in other words, even though handguns are short barreled, fully-automatic rifles have short barrels and we can already use them. Their use may not be appropriate, based on the circumstance of a particular situation. We believe it's important that a DA investigator have the same flexibility and authority as other peace officers, to utilize the correct type of weapon based on the circumstances. We respectfully ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 51, 'end': 63, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 124, 'end': 131, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: Thank you, good morning Mr. Chair and Members. Ignacio Hernandez on behalf of the California Attorneys for Criminal Justice, we are opposed to this measure. Couple of things, as background. In the past few years, five, maybe eight years, we've been involved and weighed in on some of the changes to the statute. As far as the rights for DA investigators to carry firearms, we've actually removed opposition, and been neutral on a number of bills in the past. I think we've kind of hit a critical juncture here. Here we are again, asking for expanded authority to carry another type of weapon. And what we don't have, and I think, what is a better approach, right now, is to catalog how many weapons are out there now? How are they being used? Is there really a need? Whenever these questions have been posed before this Committee, it's never been backed by evidence of how many of these weapons are actually necessary. How many situations, of which it's justified to use these weapons? We don't know. How many machine guns are already out there in DA's offices? We don't know. What we prefer, I think a stronger approach would be, is to look at the weapons that are available now, how many weapons are out there throughout the state. How often they've been used. And maybe we need to have a very unique requirement for Das. It's very different, they are in dangerous situations at times, and they are allowed to have firearms. But we need to actually look at what that is. And in some of the situations that were raised by my colleague and friend on the other side. The local law enforcement are really the ones that are going to respond to that. And they should be, the more traditional law enforcement, as we think about it. So this is looked at in a vacuum. I think we need more evidence, more information. And let's find out how many machine guns are out there. And if there are a lot of machine guns, do we really need to go here? Maybe we need to go here, instead of machine guns. I think there's just too many questions that need to be answered. For those reasons, we are opposed.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 64, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Keith Watley: good morning my name is watley. i'm executive director at a place called uncommon law where we provide counseling and legal services of people serving life sentences in california prisons. a lot of what we do is work with people who have suffered some type of trauma in their past. one of the very common refrains in restorative justice circles, is that hurt people hurt people. and what we see is that many of the thousands of people that we work with in california experience all sorts of violence, neglect, abuse, sexual assaults in their childhoods. and that contributed to decisions and actions later in their life. so we spend a lot of time working with them to help them understand those things and overcome those issues in order to say to be released from prison. in many ways we provide kind of a bridge for them to successfully rehabilitate themselves. and there's a gap, though, because most of the mental health services within the department of corrections are focused on providing services for people who have a diagnosed mental illness. and most of those services are driven by court order. some of which have helped obtain that requires a constitutional minimum in terms of mental health treatment. but if you don't have a diagnosed mental illness, you can't get those services. what ab 620 does is it helps increase access to those kind of programs for people who really need it. people need just a basic counselling therapy and understanding all the various factors that contributed to their criminality. so it can address those factors while in prison and be safely released.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danica Rodarmel: Good morning, Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee. I'm Danica Rodarmel, I'm a third year law student at Berkeley Law. And I've had the great fortune of getting to participate in, and help to facilitate, the Restorative Justice Program in San Quentin State Prison. Over the two and a half years that I've been involved in that program, I've seen men truly transform. Becoming more whole and healed through examining the circumstances of their lives that led them to commit the crime that brought them to prison. For many of them it's extreme childhood trauma that's gone unaddressed and unexamined until the arrive at the Restorative Justice Program where through the program they gain insight into theirselves. Their lives leading up to their crime, the impact their crime had on various people, and how to avoid committing that kind of harm in the future. I recently went and watched a parole hearing in Chowchilla State Prison. And it was a woman who had clearly not had the same kind of access to programs that the men in San Quentin have. And I was struck by the difference between how she was able to articulate herself and the men that I work with. And she was denied parole for the seventh time because she was unable to articulate insight into how she committed her crime and how she would be able to avoid causing harm in the future. And I know many people who have been released from San Quentin State Prison who were involved in the Restorative Justice Program while they were inside. All of whom remain free and involved in Restorative Justice Programs on the outside. Which I think speaks volumes to the value of these programs not only in gaining parole, but remaining successful when people are released from prison. Thank you.
[{'start': 61, 'end': 76, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: Ignacio Hernandez, on behalf of the California Attorneys for Criminal Justice. A statewide Association of criminal defense attorneys in private practice and working in public defender offices.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: Ignacio Hernandez, in behalf of the California Attorneys for Criminal Justice, in support the bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dawn Koepke: Hi there, good afternoon. I'm Dawn Koepke with McHugh, Koepke, and Associates on behalf of Crime Victims United. I'd like to thank the author for his willingness to work with us to ensure that we're incorporating all of the Marcie's law of rights afforded to victims under the bill. And so we look forward to working on this amendment with you once we see those amendments, and we'll be removing our opposition. Thank you.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sean Hoffman: thank you mr. chair and members, sean caliph hoffman with the california district attorney's association. unfortunately we're in opposition to ab 665 as it's presently written. our association doesn't oppose the underlying idea that veterans deserve some leniency. in fact, we were neutral ab 2098. we were ultimately neutral on sb 1227 that established the military diversion program, senator hancock's bill from a couple of years ago. unfortunately, the bill is currently drafted and the retro activity provisions, there are a couple of procedural problems with it. first of all, there's no standard of proof for showing eligibility or for the court to make that determination. and when we're looking at going back, perhaps, years or even decades, and considering whether someone's condition was considered at the time of sentencing. that's not something that may be readily available by looking at trial transcripts, something like that. even if that could be shown or that determination could be made, the bill contains no mechanism for the district attorney to be noticed and have an opportunity to be heard. on whether that person should be re-sentenced to whether there's something else that would weigh on that eligibility issue. we have reached out to the author's office. we've had good conversations with staff about hopefully being able to address those issues. so we look forward to continuing those conversations. but for now, we are opposed, thank you.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 394, 'end': 401, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Amanda Wilcox: Good morning, I'm Amanda Wilcox, here on behalf of the California chapters of the Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence. We have 28 chapters throughout the state. Many of our members, including myself that have lost a loved one to gunfire. We worked very hard on the two bills that the Assembly Member mentioned that prohibit the open carry of handguns in incorporated and unincorporated areas in California and also the bill prohibiting the exposed long guns in incorporated areas. Because we understood the risk of people carrying guns that can be seen, these are people who have no extra screening or clearance to do so when it's exposed unloaded a gun. But citizens react, they are alarmed, they do not know the intents of the person, law enforcement's come to the scene. Depending on the actions of the person, they may end up having to respond in a lethal way. And it's that risk to the public, to the individual carrying the weapon and as you heard, a real waste of law enforcement resources. We thought we'd solved the problem but as you heard, there's this donut hole issue of urban areas that are not incorporated where exposed carrying of rifles can occur. And it's common sense that that loophole should be closed. I'm from a rural area, this does not seem to be an issue in our area, and I think the way the bill's crafted recognizes that by leaving the discretion to counties, so we are in support of the bill.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 82, 'end': 87, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sam Paredes: Mr. Chairman and members, Sam Paredes representing Gun Owners of California, America's oldest pro-gun political action Committee, we have great concerns about this bill because we believe that it doesn't recognize the difference between urban situations and rural situations. Ive talked to several sheriffs throughout the State of California, where they have no incorporated cities in some of these, and they would be affected. As was testified here earlier, the intent is to allow the boards of supervisors to make those decisions as to whether they should allow them or not. Our concern is what'll happen here is the same thing that happened with the Prohibition of CCWs on school campuses and that the Legislature will come back and say, this is another loophole. Because when they find that many Board of Supervisors in rural communities make that decision to allow people to exercise their Second Amendment rights and open carry long guns unloaded. In their communities that their, the next step will be to come back and say, you know what? This is a loophole that we created and we don't believe that the Board of Supervisors should have the authority to make that kind of a decision. For that reason, Gun Owners of California is opposed to this bill.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alan Herzfeld: and mr. chair and members, alan on behalf of the judicial council. i just want to emphasize again the collaborative nature that the council brought all the stakeholders we could together to craft the bill, including yourself, mr. chairman, and this committee. and i'm happy to answer any other questions.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Emery: my story, my name is michael sean emery, i'm a 66-year-old gentleman born with cerebral palsy. i have a friend who works with me, i was raped, and my testimony can be of help. let's get more time for people who commit these crimes more time in prison.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debbie Marino: hello, my name is debbie michael marino. i would like to share my experience and feelings towards abuse on individuals with idd. it was my shower night and substitute personal attendant came into my room and asked, are you ready for your shower?. i said, yes. he began to undress me. he took me to the shower room. took my towel off and started to wash me. as i'm getting bathed by the stranger, i immediately knew he was up to no good. he washed me down, then suddenly he put his fingers up in my vagina. i knew this was something that he enjoyed by the unforgetful look in his eyes. i felt so scared. i cued that it was wrong he was not supposed to do that. i screamed. someone came in and rescued me and then took me back to my room where i told them what happened to me. and i did, in fact, press charges on him. he wasn't punished. people with disabilities are victimized at a much higher rate than others and many are specifically targeted because they're unable to adequately defend themselves. all victims deserve equal protection under the law. ab 516 will allow for equaltible punishment for those who commit heinous crimes against victims who do not have the ability to protect themselves. i too need protection. referring to the quote earlier by judith lewis herman if the abuser tries to make sure no one listens. i hope you will do the opposite and make sure that someone does. thank you for listening.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1258, 'end': 1277, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Lovell: lovell, on behalf of the association for los angeles deputy sheriffs, the association of deputy district attorneys, california association of code enforcement officers, california college and university police chief's association, california narcotic officer's association, los angeles county probation officer's union afsme local 685, los angeles county professional peace officers association, los angeles police protective league, and riverside sheriff's association, all in support of this important bill, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sean Hoffman: Sean Hoffman, with the California District Attorneys Association, also in support
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Usha Mutschler: good morning, usha debbie mutschler on behalf of the california state sheriffs' association in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Natasha Minsker: good morning, natasha with the aclu of california. respectfully, we are opposed. we greatly appreciate the good intentions behind this bill, and mr. maienschein's commitment to this issue. we believe that, given the existing sentences that are available in california law, further increasing sentences will not lead to public safety benefit. and we would encourage focus on prevention, detection, and greater prosecution of these offenses, which we think will lead to greater protection for vulnerable populations. we urge a no vote, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 149, 'end': 160, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Casey Bates: You may begin. Good morning and thank you for allowing me to appear. My name is Casey Bates, I'm Assistant District Attorney. I'm appearing on behalf of Alameda County District Attorney Nancy O'Malley, who is both a sponsor and in support of AB 993. As I see this bill members as a effort to clean up this section. And allow for the recording of video testimony for children who are under the age of 14 and under the age of 10 who have been the victims of the most serious sexual offenses that of rape, oral copulation, and sodomy. I view this as a clean up bill in so far as it simply adds two sections to a list of bills, or a list of penal code sections that provide for this ability already. And I think this is a good bill, I urge your aye vote. Thank you, any other witnesses?
[{'start': 80, 'end': 91, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 186, 'end': 200, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sean Hoffman: Sean Hoffman with the California District Attorneys Association, also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : brian usha south usha with usha the usha moraga usha police usha department, usha i'm usha a usha police usha lieutenant, usha in usha strong usha support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 27, 'end': 31, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 122, 'end': 126, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Usha Mutschler: good morning, usha  mutschler with the california state sheriffs association, in strong support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Edward Machtinger: Thank you very much for allowing me to provide testimony today. My name is Edward Machtinger, I'm a Professor of medicine and Director of the Women's HIV program at the University of California San Francisco. I've been working in Public Health and treating people living with HIV for over 20 years. I'm going to briefly review key scientific developments since the laws being discussed today were originally written. These developments require reassessment of the public health implications of HIV related criminal laws. I'd like to start by acknowledging that there is no evidence that the existing HIV related criminal laws have helped reduce HIV transmission. Multiple studies have found no association between HIV criminal laws and HIV disclosure, condom use, abstinence or numbers of sexual partners. ASA current forms, the laws have not work for their intended purposes. Since this laws were inactive, their have been extraordinary advances in the treatment of HIV. We've developed simple, potent HIV medication that is so effective that when taken regularly makes the virus completely undetectable in a person's blood. This allows that person to be healthy and live a normal life span, and also makes it impossible for them to transmit the virus to others. This fact has been confirmed by two very large international studies. From a public health perspective, to prevent new HIV infections at our communities, it is essential that we overcome any obstacle for people living with HIV to access and remain on treatment. We've also Learned that HIV related stigma which is the fear and the fear and isolation that it creates, makes it much harder and much less likely for people living with HIV to get tested, engage in care, and take the very medications that allow them to be healthy and uncontagious. In other words, the laws don't work for their intended purpose. And instead actually increase the risk of HIV infection in our communities. There are many reason for HIV related stigma, but state laws that criminal lies HIV are among the prime contributors. These laws, as they are currently written are not only outdated and ineffective but they are actually dangerous. Because they increase instead of decrease the risk of HIV infection. So this is not a partisan issue. It's not a political issue. It's not a matter of conflict in medical science. It's an issue that should be decided on the basic principles of public health, the proposed law presented today, bill presented today to modernize these laws is crucial to achieve our shared goals of reducing new HIV infections, and helping those living with the virus be safe, healthy, and empowered members of our community. Thank you very much for your consideration.
[{'start': 75, 'end': 92, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cammie Dodson: Thank you. My name is Cammie Dodson, I'm a fellow at Positive Women's Network USA, or PWN. PWN is a national membership of women living with HIV, including women of Trans experience and allies. We're proud to be one of the co-sponsors of SB 239. SB 239 is a much-needed step toward ensuring the safety and dignity of women living with HIV. While laws criminalizing HIV status have been touted as protective of women, these laws have been disproportionately used against women, especially women of color and they make women living with HIV more vulnerable to coercion and violence. While women are 13% of the people living with HIV in California, they made up 43% of the people criminalized under existing laws. While black women make up only 4% of people diagnosed with HIV in the state, they accounted for 21% of people who are subject to criminalization. The disproportionate impact on women may be even be more drastic than these numbers show because it's likely that Trans women have not been accurately included in these statistics. The current laws make women living with HIV more vulnerable to violence and coercion. Women living with HIV are already twice as likely to face intimate partner violence than women in the general population. These laws provide an additional tool for an abusive partner to exert power over someone living with HIV. And a threat of prosecution does prevent some women living with HIV from leaving violent relationships. For example, one of our members, a Latino woman living with HIV was in an abusive relationship for four years. Every time she attempted to leave, her partner filed to come after her using HIV criminal laws, he also threatened to have here kids taken away. Which is a very real fear that many women we've heard from have under these laws, and just this prospect is enough to keep them trapped in a cycle of violence and control. These laws create an environment of legally sanctioned stigma that keeps women living with HIV in fear and unable to trust institutions that should protect them. Another one of our women, of our women living with HIV members, an African American transgender woman said quote, "I didn't report my rape because I was worried about being prosecuted for nondisclosure by my rapist," end quote. These laws need to be changed in order to address the stigma, fear, and violence that shapes the lives of too many women living with HIV. On behalf of PWN's members who are women living with HIV. Who strongly support these changes. Thank you so much for your consideration of this bill.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joe Micheals: Madam Chair and Committee Members, Joe Micheals for Equality California, we are proud to be a co-sponsor of this bill for all the reasons you have heard. We urge your support today, thank you.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Becca Cramer: cramer, on behalf of the aclu of california as well as two of the other co-sponsors black aids institute and land legal who were not able to be here in person. all three of us are in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amira Hazenbush: Good morning, my name is Amira Hazenbush. I'm with the Williams Institute. We're a law and policy research center at ECLA School of Law, and we don't oppose or support bills. But I did the research on the HIV criminalization law, and I'm here for any questions that you may have.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Glen Bacchus: Glen Bacchus for Drug Policy Alliance, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Emily Harris: Hi, Emily Harris, from the LA Baker Center for Human Rights, in support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jody Hicks: Jody Hicks on behalf of the Planned Parenthood Affiliates of California, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Bouters: Madam Chair, members, John Bouters Californians for Safety and Justice in support.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tion Dierezz: Tion Dierezz, member of PWN and a positive woman in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jen Flory: jen on behalf of western center on law and poverty, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Raymond Brickhouse: raymond jonah brickhouse, aids project of the east bay, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carl Baker: good morning carl raymond baker, i represent apla, no longer apla excuse me better aids project. i'm from palm springs and i am a gay positive man and i am not a felon.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jonathan Cook: jonathan carl cook, rainbow community center of contra costa county, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Emily Herio: emily jonathan herio, project inform, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: Ignacio Hernandez, on behalf of the California Trains for Criminal Justice, and also on behalf of the Free Speech Coalition, in support
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Coral Fagen: I am Coral Fagen with the western regional advocacy project and I am in support.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Emily Bender: bender from the sacramento lgbt community center and we are proud to support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shawn Meerkamper: Shawn Meerkamper from Transgender Law Center strongly in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stephan Ferris: stephan emily ferris, ingent northwine, on behalf of bay area lawyers for individual freedom, and i support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 22, 'end': 38, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Woods Ervin: woods stephan ervin, also with tgi justice project, and i support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Seth Bramble : bramble here on behalf of more than 325,000 members of the california teachers association. we urge your support.
[]
Kat DeBurgh: Hi, Madam Chair, members. Kat Deburgh with the Health Officers Association of California. We are neutral on the bill, but we want to thank the author and the sponsors for working very closely with us on the language. Thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : Excuse me, due pass as amended to appropriations.
[]
John Lovell: john woods lovell on behalf of the association for los angeles deputy sheriffs, the california association of code enforcement officers, california college and university police chiefs association, california narcotic officers association. los angeles county professional peace officers, los angeles police protective league and riverside sheriffs' association. this is a good sense bill. you're talking about people who are on the front lines of first responding activity, often in high intensity situations where unhappily, these things happen. this is appropriate, we commend the author for bringing this forward and we support the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ryan Pierini: Yeah Ryan Pierini with Southern California Edison. I want to thank the Senator for bringing this bill to the Committee. We're in support.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alicia Priego: alicia john priego on behalf of san diego gas and electric and also socal gas in strong support of this bill. as noted in the analysis, our employees have been victim of attack and think that this is an important measure.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jacob Moss: Good morning, Madame Chair. Jacob Moss on behalf of Pacific Core and SMUD in support.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marty Veranacar: madame chair, members, marty alicia veranacar on behalf of the california district attorneys association, we're in support. thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shane O'Brian: Oh sorry, Shane O'Brian. I came here to tell you my story and personal experience with nitrous oxide, laughing gas, or what's commonly known as whip-its. I started using nitrous about a year ago. Not much at first but my habit gradually grew. Over approximately six months, I was inhaling nitrous on an almost daily basis. I worked my way up to doing almost 200 canisters a day and the symptoms came on slowly at first. The first thing I noticed was a loss of balance. Not knowing anything was wrong, I associated it with an injury to my leg that I'd had in July, but it began to slowly impact my walking, and I starting having to reach out and support myself to be able to get around. A few weeks later, I noticed that I didn't have much feeling in my feet, like a sock that you couldn't feel at all, and shortly afterwards my toes started being harder to move normally, and eventually I couldn't move them at all. This whole time I was still using nitrous, because I had no idea what was going on, and in my mind, if dentists were able to use nitrous, then it couldn't possibly be dangerous. Over the next few months, my walking became worse, and significantly more difficult. And it became impossible for me to do my job at the time, which was delivering pizza. Eventually, it came to the point where I couldn't walk at all, and I could only stand for a very short period of time. I was in a wheelchair for about three months, and normally I walk with a cane now. I was forced to go on medical leave from my job, which I can probably never go back to, and I was physically unable to go to college this spring. If anything can be taken from my experience, it's that nitrous is a dangerous drug. And having it be sold in smoke shops is blatantly allowing these stores to peddle a drug with serious potential for permanent damage. I might never fully recover and I hope that you can help prevent others from making the same mistake I did. Thank you.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Patrick O'Brian: Good morning, I'm Patrick O'Brian, I'm Shane's dad. My story starts in August of 2016, when I went to visit my son for his birthday. As we walked to lunch, I noticed he had a particular gait. It's hard to describe, but it reminded me of an elderly person with some balance issues. I asked what was wrong, and he told me he had fallen on some stairs, and had hurt his leg badly. Fast forward a few months, and I get a call from his mother and she's telling me he needs to go back to the emergency room. She caught me up on recent Doctor and ER visits, of which I had been unaware. His continued deterioration and her concerns, because of those, I drove down and took him the next morning to the ER. I was shocked to see his condition, he could barely stand, and walking without assistance was impossible. He needed a wheelchair to get from the car to inside the hospital. And on the drive down, I asked about these canisters I saw about the house and he mentioned whip-its. He explained to me what they were and how they were to get a quick, cheap high. And I'd never heard of them but became concerned about its use. During the admission process, I noticed he wasn't truthful with some of the questions they asked him. The Doctor and his team came it to assess my son and they were very concerned, seeing a 20-year-old man with neurological issues. I told the Doctor, previous to the issue, my son was a healthy young man and able to perform whatever tasks he wanted or needed to do without restriction. Later, I spoke to my son about the need for honesty with the Doctor and told him if he doesn't give the Doctor all the information, the Doctor can't make an informed diagnosis. I left the room under the guise of needing to use the men's room, and went to speak to the nurse. I informed her about his withholding important information, that they may want to ask more questions about drug use. They came to the room later and asked me to leave, and he told them he had been using whip-its. Once the truth was revealed, he was immediately scheduled for multiple MRIs of the spine, neck, and head. And he spent over three hours in the MRI that day. My then 19-year-old son was able to walk into a smoke shop to easily, legally, and cheaply purchase a large quantity of nitrous oxide. In my opinion, there isn't a viable reason to sell this substance in a smoke shop or to the public in general. My concern about whip-its, AKA nitrous oxide, is the damage is causes to the central nervous system. It led me to reach out to Senator Nielsen and share my story. I'd view the abuse of the substance as a public health hazard, and I'm very excited to know that this concern is being taken seriously. Fortunately, we caught this in time and his prognosis is good, although he may never fully recover. And as a father and a elementary school principal, I would like your support.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 39, 'end': 44, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2530, 'end': 2537, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brandon Epp: Madam Chair and Members, thank you, I'll keep this very brief. My name is Sergeant Brandon Epp with the LA County Sheriff's Department, we're in support. I provided you with the pictures you're looking at of these two smoke shops. My intent was to visit about five smoke shops last weekend to get what I needed. But after two, as you can see, the pictures tell a store and how it's marketed. And I will advise you that I asked the store employees if they sold heavy cream and sugar, so that I could make my whipping cream at home. And they did not sell heavy cream and sugar, unfortunately. But thank you, we encourage your aye vote.
[{'start': 83, 'end': 94, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Lovell: john marty lovell, association for los angeles deputy sheriffs, association of deputy district attorneys, california association of code enforcement officers, california college and university police chiefs association, california narcotic officers association. los angeles county professional peace officers association, los angeles police protective league, and riverside sheriffs association, all in support. we want to commend senator nielsen for bringing forward this literally lifesaving bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 439, 'end': 446, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Usha Mutschler: good morning madam chair and members, usha john mutschler on behalf of the california state sheriffs association, in support.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Allison Anderman: good morning, i am allison usha anderman, an attorney at the law center to prevent gun violence and americans for responsible solutions. the law center was formed after the california 101 mass shooting and provides legal and policy expertise to legislators nationwide. now in conjunction with ars, led by former congresswoman gabby giffords and her husband, mark kelly. on behalf of these organizations, i urge you to support sb 536, a bill we have co-sponsored. on january 1st 2016, in california the groundbreaking gun violence restraining order law went into effect. to date, this law has been use to temporarily disarm people on the terror watch list, domestic abusers and suicidal individuals among others. as a new approach it is important to study the effectiveness of the gvr law. and leading researchers in this field have received grants for that purpose. to accomplish this, academics need to examine the actual cases in which gvros were filed using basic identifying information that is listed in the california restraining and protective order system, carpos. doj is not explicitly authorized, however, to grant researchers access to carpos. a california law that makes criminal history records available to researchers does not apply to gvros since they are civil rather than criminal orders. preventing bona fide academics from accessing this data was clearly not what the legislature intended when in 2016, it created the firearms violence research center, fvrc, and stated that state agencies, quote, shall provide to the center the data necessary to conduct its research. despite this language, doj requires express authorization to release civil order data from carpos to bona fide researchers from ferc and elsewhere. sb 536 provides that authorization while also ensuring appropriate privacy and confidentiality protections. accordingly, i urge you to vote aye on sb 536, thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 326, 'end': 340, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 358, 'end': 368, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nick Wilcox: Good morning, Senator Skinner. My name is Nick Wilcox on behalf of the Brady Campaign to prevent gun violence. And I have to admit, it is very nice to sit here and say good morning, Senator Skinner. Thank you. We've been involved in this bill for a long time as Senator Skinner knows. We support it greatly, we believe the research on the effectiveness of the bill is critical to determine if and when changes might be needed to fine tune the bill. I'd like to confine my comments to one line of the opposition letter. The opposition clearly, there's problems with DOJ being the party to approve the disposition of the data and the research. They say clearly in the eyes of the author, all research is not created equal. And I would simply say that indeed all research is not created equal, that is true. Gun lobby has a record of falsifying data and misapplying methodology. And there needs to be some filter to make sure that the research that is done on this is credible. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 29, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 42, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 71, 'end': 76, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 190, 'end': 197, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 270, 'end': 277, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jody Hicks: Jody Hicks with the California Academy of Family Physicians in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Craig Delews: madam chairman, members of the committee, craig with the firearms policy coalition. the letter that he was quoting from was in fact our letter of opposition which unfortunately didn't make the analysis. i will note that the big challenge that we have here is when the research center was put together, it was put together with this specific purpose of seeking to disarm citizens, or civilian disarmament as we see it. it was put together with a specific bias and what we're saying is we're not saying don't research. we're not even saying that they can't get the data. what we're saying is, is that all organizations that seek to research this particular topic ought to have equal access to the data. as was stated by one of the supporting witnesses, they've already said that the department of justice is already telling them. no they can't have access to the research center, they can't have access to the data. well, if they're going to deny them and it's at their discretion. then what's to say any other entity that is legitimately seeking to research this topic we'll get access to the data? we are not under the illusion that this body is interested in actually studying firearms or firearms violence. what we know is that civilian disarmament is the goal of the organization and the researcher. and we would just like to see that the research that's actually done and can have access to the raw data. so we can make sure that real, objective research is done and for these reasons we oppose this measure.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sam Peredes: Madam Chair, Sam Peredes representing Gun Owners of California, Members of the Committee. We echo the comments that were made by my colleague, Mr. Deluz. We want to also take umbrage with the accusation that the gun lobby has falsified research. As a matter of fact not many of the members of the gun lobby have do the research. They're done by academics all over the country. And the fact that they disagree with the results that are done, developed by academic research cannot be characterized as us falsifying any sort of information. That kind of a comment before a Committee like this, that is taking on a consideration of an issue of this importance. Where you are saying that you want to have research conducted with regards to gun violence. We don't have a problem with that. We would like to make sure that that information is available to researchers from other organizations. Our concern is when you have the discretion in a place that has tilted to those who are more towards gun control forever. We have a concern about that. The folks that are running the California Research Institute have never come up with any sort of a document. That has showed the validity or the usefulness of firearms in society. Everything has been tilted and that's why we have great concerns. And if this bill were to say, we're going to make this available to all academic researchers, to all of the organizations that want to conduct research. We don't have a problem with that. What we do have, is when somebody gets to pick and choose as to who is qualified to do research. For those reasons, we are in opposition of the bill. And would like to remove our opposition if that is a consideration that would be taken up by the author. Thank you.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 147, 'end': 152, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Craig DeLuz: madame chairman and members of the committee, craig allison deluz with the firearms policy coalition. one of the unintended consequences, and oftentimes, when someone is arrested and not tried, they're not charged or not convicted is oftentimes that arrest record stays on their record. and so when that individual goes to exercise their right to keep and bear arms, whether it's to purchase a handgun or to apply for a concealed carry permit, oftentimes during that background check process, the arrest may come up, but there is absolutely no position of that particular arrest. what we believe is one of the unintended side effects of this measure is that it will in fact if an individual is able to go and get this disposition of having the record sealed, at the very least it will give them the ability to be able to note that there was a disposition so that unnecessary delays or restrictions on a person's right to be able to exercise their rights will not go forward. in particular, since this body passed a myriad of laws last session along with proposition 63 that are so complicated that even the department of justice cannot figure out how to implement them. it would not be surprising to have law enforcement arresting folks for things that are not crimes, which they do now. but i have this instances take place and then have that individual, once again. innocent individual do know fault of their own have their rights either delayed or denied. we believe that this measure, we don't believe it to be the answer but we do believe to be an answer. and is for that reason we support this measure. thank you.
[{'start': 46, 'end': 65, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: hernandez on behalf of the california attorneys for criminal justice, a statewide association of criminal defense attorneys, and private practice and public defender offices in support for different reasons than the prior witness.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Woods Ervin: Good morning, chairperson and Members of the Committee. My name is Woods Ervin and I am the policy director at TGI Justice Project. I am here to speak about SB 310, the Name and Dignity Act. TGI Justice Project works with currently and formerly incarcerated transgender people, and through my work with our members, I am familiar with the physical and psychological impact on transgender people when they aren't able to have a legal name and gender marker that affirms their identity. We've heard stories of transgender people in prison attempting to change their names and gender. The process is long, ultimately ending in many people being denied without explanation or response. As it currently stands, guards and other prisoners call transgender people by the name on their birth Identification documents. This constant use of the wrong gender and name has serious psychological, emotional, and spiritual impacts on a person, and is, itself, violence. Being identified constantly by the incorrect name and gender can cause people severe psychological discomfort and be an ongoing implication that transgender people are an other in society. This can lead to depression, anxiety, and suicidal ideation. Not being well mentally translates into not being well physically, resulting in high blood pressure, self mutilation, and in some cases, suicide. This all from an ongoing assault on a transgender person's sense of self. For transgender people released from prison trying to find a job and housing is even more difficult when their name and gender presentation does not match the name and gender marker on their legal documents. One of our members told us recently that she did not apply for jobs because she was afraid employers would be less likely to hire her because of discrepancy between her appearance in her interview and the info on her ID documents. While trying to complete hours of programming as part of parole requirements, transgender people that have the added step of working to file a name and gender marker change with the courts, it would be much simpler and more empowering to leave prison with all this resolved. Prison conditions and the reentry process are challenging enough. This bill is a simple measure that would give incarcerated transgender people a moment of respite and dignity that would set them up for success in reentry to rebuild their lives. I am strongly in support of SB 310, the Name and Dignity Act. Please give incarcerated transgender people access to basic dignity and vote aye on this important bill.
[{'start': 67, 'end': 78, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joe Michael: good morning, madame chair and members. joe for equality california. we are proud to be among the co-sponsors of this bill, and we urge the committee's support today. thank you.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shaun Meerkamper: Shaun Meerkamper from Transgender Law Center, also a co-sponsor, also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Becca Kramer: Becca Kramer, from the ACLU of California, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cammie Dodson: dodson, positive women's network usa, strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Emily Harris: Good morning, Emily Harris, on behalf of the Women's Policy Institute of California, and we're a proud co-sponsor of this bill.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Erthwein: jennifer craig erthwein and stephen farris from bayer area lawyers for individual freedom. we also very strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 28, 'end': 42, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Emily Bender: Emily Bender with the Sacramento LGBT Community Center and we proudly support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Emily Heerio: Good Morning, Emily Heerio from Project Inform in strong support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Coral Vagan: hi, i'm coral jennifer vagan with the western regional advocacy project and i'm also a co-sponsor and i support.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cory Salzillo: good morning madam chair and members, cory here on behalf of the california state sheriff's association, regrettably, in opposition here to sb 310 today. we look forward to continuing to work and discuss the bill with the author and proponents, but unfortunately, given the language today, we are in opposition. we're certainly sensitive to the issues highlighted by the bill and by the testimony. the bill does raise numerous logistical and policy concerns. however, there's no limit on the number of times a person may petition for a name and or gender change, and i'm not insinuating that that would be something that a person would do this. a person who is undergoing a gender change or has undergone a gender change, would use the process but, there are people in custody who would attempt to use the process just to be problematic. again, not what we're talking about here in terms of the people we've heard from today but, there is that opportunity. there's no differentiation in the bill between a person who's serving a short commitment or even a pre-trial inmate, someone who hasn't been sentenced yet or someone who is indeed sentenced to a multi-year term of incarceration. there's no requirement that a person actually be transgender to undertake the name change process by the bill. again, these are potential process issues that might be able to be addressed but that aren't today. gender changes happening during incarceration will definitely create and exacerbate classification in housing issues within a custodial facility. allowing inmates to change names and gender in the facility also could complicate identification issues when it comes to things like other pending criminal matters, maybe in other counties, interactions with other government agencies like child services, health services, and reconciling criminal history data with other agencies. so, again, we are concerned about the provisions of the bill. we're happy to continue working with the author on it, but at this time, we are opposed. thank you.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Greg Burt: greg coral burt with the california family council in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeff Stone: right, but you understand my concern that if you have a stone that's in prison that has an axe to grind with a person outside of prison, that has a high propensity for recidivism and that violence for whatever reason. that there should be some notification to a victim of a crime, that was maybe a violent crime, that a person formally known as stone whose name now is jeff ... or something like that, is going to be getting out and we want to be aware of it that, that person is going to get out, change of state we should be, be aware.
[{'start': 345, 'end': 350, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 369, 'end': 373, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
 : And I would imagine the proper notification needs to take place as it currently does. You just have to package this process a little differently to fall in line with current changes in what's already existing in jails and prisons.
[]
 : The world is changing, these are issues already in our systems. CDCR is trying to effectively deal with these issues.
[]
 : You think we have issue with a name change in prison? I hope all of you had an opportunity read this small publication. Time magazine had an article about gender identity, expression, and our millennials.
[]
Marty Veranacar: Thank you, Madame Chair. Members, Marty Veranacar, on behalf of the California District Attorney's Association. We're in support of this measure.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Usha Mutschler: good morning, madam chairman, members. mutschler on behalf of the california state sheriffs' association. we stand in support of the bill.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Jenkins: amy on behalf of the orange county board of supervisors in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mica Doctoroff: Good morning, Madam Chair, members, Mica Doctoroff on behalf of the ACLU of California here in respectful opposition to the bill. This bill would expand law enforcement officers ability to deny cite and release, and instead, send people to jail, at a time when the momentum in California and across the country is heading in the exact opposite direction. Federal, state, and local elected officials. The California Chief Justice, the American Bar Association, criminal justice academics and researchers, and experts across the country, members of law enforcement, and California communities and families are all calling for fewer people to be in jail, and for us to be expanding the pre-trial release. There are, as you've already heard and as noted in the analysis, there's some eligibility and discretionary exceptions to the cite and release statute here in California. But they're generally limited to crimes involving violence or violations of protective orders, emergencies, medical emergencies and situations where the officer cannot identify a person. This, the expansion here at SB284, is not within keeping of the spirit of the other exceptions. And as noted in your analysis, and as discussed already, existing law already includes as one of the enumerated reasons for nonrelease, when there is a reasonable likelihood that offense or the offenses would continue or resume or that safety of persons or property would be eminently endangered by release of the person arrested. I don't see why that would not cover shoplifting. I would respectfully disagree with the characterization of this, this morning. And with that, we respectfully oppose, thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: thank you, mr. chair and members. ignacio jonah hernandez on behalf of the california court reporters association. we are the sponsor of the bill. and also on behalf of the los angeles county court reporters association, northern california court reporters association, sacramento official court reporters association who are all in support of the bill as was described as just increases access for the deaf and hard of hearing. in our courtrooms there's an issue where in some courtrooms the official court reporter is being asked to play a dual role. both taking down the verbatim record, and also providing the card captioning services for the deaf and hard of hearing individual. this sets up statewide protocols, based on best practices, where we'll have separate individuals. and also certification ensured that whoever is providing card captioning services for the deaf and hard of hearing, actually are trained in that skill, because it is different. they do have to type beyond 200 words a minute, and other things. so, this essentially codifies best practices. it does not, i just want to, last thing, i just want to clarify. it does not replace the priority for providing an american sign language interpreter to those who need it. this is simply addressing the card captioning services, which is a backup in the event that the asl interpreter is not available or the individual is not verse in asl. i want to thank the committee for all of its work, working with us on the amendments and ask for your support.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Barrera: jennifer ignacio barrera behalf of the california chamber of commerce, and we're in support of ab 913. we have obviously been involved with this committee, and others on ada reform measures in the past several years. and believe that any reform in this area, it needs to look at the issue with the balanced approach respecting those in the disabled community who have civil rights. and as well as respecting the small businesses who will end up really being a targeted and abused with regards to extortion like top type law suites very, very small group, a plaintiff attorneys has been acknowledged in the analysis and by the author of this bill. and so when we are going to support legislation in this area, we try to make sure that it does have a balanced approach, and that those two interests are being respected. and we actually believe that ab 913 achieves that balance. one, it only addresses a very narrow group of plaintiff's attorney's who are attacking and targeting small businesses. two, to file 15 civil lawsuits in one year is quite extensive, and any attorney who plans on pursuing each one of those lawsuits would be underwater to try and pursue 15 different civil lawsuits in one year. that's a lot of dedication for one attorney to handle. so it really is that small group of attorney's who are filing these lawsuits in order to leverage a quick monetary settlement, and that's the group we that we want to try to address, and we believe ab 913 tries to target that group. i disagree that this is a ban on filing lawsuits. as the author mentioned, it is up to the judge as to whether or not to issue the pre filing order, and even if they do, it does not mean that the person who has filed 15 lawsuits in that prior 12 months can't go and file another lawsuit. all it requires is that there be leave of court, that a judge analyzes the lawsuit first to make sure that there is a likelihood of merit on the claims, and that it's not being done for the purposes to harass and annoy. it's not a ban, it's just a simple procedure that the litigant has to comply with before they can move on with a lawsuit. so, again, i disagree that it is banning any future lawsuits by these individuals. it's just a procedure that is similar to other procedures that have been put in place by prior ada reform measures. i also don't believe that's going to undermine any of the other legislation that's been addressed in this are. we were sponsors and supports of sb 269 last year, that again puts certain protections in place for businesses who proactively go out and obtain a custom inspection. this bill is complimentary to that it doesn't change those provisions, it doesn't address any of those reform measures, it simply compliments it and again targets a very a narrow group of individuals who are pursuing these lawsuits against businesses not to improve accessibility, but to leverage quick monetary settlements. with those reasons, we do believe it creates a balanced approach and are in support of ab 913. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Faith Conley: morning, faith jennifer conley with the civil justice association of. california. i would echo the comments made by the chamber. we support ab 913. we've also worked historically with the legislature on ada reform. we supported ab 21, we supported sb 269, we've historically supported the rights of disabled californians to have access to businesses and local buildings as well. we still believe the shake down of businesses by a small number litigants is still occurring, we still believe it's on the rise. we think ab 913 is a balanced approach to that. and, with that, i would ask for your aye vote on this bill.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Audrey Durfor: audrey faith durfor on behalf of the california building industry association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Faith Lane: Faith Lane, on behalf of the California Association of Joint Powers Authorities, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Gould: mr. chair and committee members, kevin audrey gould with the california bankers association, in support.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anthony Goldsmith: goldsmith, californians for disability rights, in opposition. it's not a ban, just heard that, yes, it's a ban. it's intended to allow an analysis of a person's right to vindicate a violation of their civil rights based, a trigger point, on a number of lawsuits they file. it's meant to create a chilling effect and that's the exact effect it's going to have. in looking at the issue of prefiling orders, the ninth circuit court of appeals having dealt with this, both in the context of disability rights and other contexts. has held that the number of lawsuits a person files if not, cannot be the basis for opposing a pre filing order. this law, ab 913, respectfully, does not contain anything with respect to procedural safeguards that federal courts have held to be absolutely critical. in a case called moi the ninth circuit stated with respect to pre-filing orders in general. as to what could the harm be, the court said, among all of your citizens, he is to be restricted in his right to access to the courts. as far as he is concerned, his future filings run the risk of delay, and even possible rejection before he can call upon defendants to respond to those filings. we cannot predict what harm might come to him as a result, and he should not be forced to predict it either, what does he know, what is a sword, i'm sorry, what he does know is that a sword of damocles hangs over his hopes for federal access for the forseeable future, put plainly, the court also stated, an injunction cannot issue merely upon a showing of litigiousness. nothing in this bill that i've seen goes beyond, or is required, in order to promote the ability, or allow the ability, which exists for courts to determine that a person is a vexatious litigant, or a person should be exposed to a pre-filing order. the statements about the number of lawsuits being filed, the number of lawsuits being filed in california and california courts have dropped, the number of lawsuits overall, they've been moved to federal court, precisely because of the actions of the legislature. and i don't think that this law, which is a procedural law, which will only impact state courts, is necessary, nor justifiable, and i believe it will run afoul of constitutional protections, it touches not only the right to due process of law, but the rights under the first amendment to have access to the courts. there may be people who are abusing their rights under the ada and our state laws by engaging in predatory litigation, we all know that, there's nothing new to that discussion, however, this bill immediately puts a tint of illegitimacy merely based on the number of lawsuits filed, we think that's inappropriate, we think, we believe it would be unconstitutional. we don't believe it will reduce the number of lawsuits filed, more will move to california, out of california into federal court, or it will stay the same, and the law doesn't create a benefit, to my mind, for anyone, other than those seeking to cast a taint on those who file litigation to enforce their rights, we have-
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 808, 'end': 811, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kevin Baker: Good morning, Mr. Chair and members, Kevin Baker for the American Civil Liberties Union of California, also in opposition for many of the reasons stated by Mr. Goldsmith. The bill does burden a fundamental right, the right to petition courts for redress of grievances is part of the first amendment, the courts have also located it in the due process clause, the protection clause, and the privileges and immunities clause, it's very clear that that is a fundamental part of our system of government. I understand that there are concerns about the number of filings with respect to disability rights access, disability access, it nevertheless is the case that there are widespread violations of disability access laws. And the legislative scheme in both the Americans Disabilities Act and in California, is to allow for individuals who are excluded to bring actions to vindicate their rights, that's what appears to be happening. This bill would burden the exercise of those rights for no reason other than the fact that the plaintiff has previously had recourse to the courts to vindicate their rights on prior occasions, which does not appear to be a sufficiently compelling governmental interest to prevent people from exercising that fundamental Constitutional right. With all due respect to the author, the absence of a cover letter from legislative council indicating that there are Constitutional questions, I don't think is the determination by Leg Council that they act as not have Constitutional infirmities, and in any event, if forced to choose between the omission of Legislative Council and the considered analysis of this Committee, I would tend to go with this Committee, thank you very much.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 160, 'end': 169, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Evelyn Abouhassan: Evelyn Abouhassan with Disability Rights of California, I don't think I could have said it more eloquently than my two predecessors here, and thank you for the opportunity to be heard, which is more than what this bill would do if I was considered a high frequency litigant in this case. This bill really, it isn't needed, beyond the Constitutional issues, Disability Rights California has always come to the table to work on a compromise for both businesses and the disability community so that we can ensure our rights are, our voice is heard, and access is a right for all people with disabilities. There's been a lot of reform in this area and this bill is completely unnecessary given what's been done in the last few years, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Connie Arnold: Thank you, Chairman Stone and Members of the Committee, my name is Connie Arnold, I'm a-
[{'start': 20, 'end': 25, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 67, 'end': 80, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Hicks: Thank you, Randy Hicks out in California Disability Rights, California Alliance for Retired Americans, strong opposition. Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sabina Tacker: Sabina Tacker with the Consumer Attorneys of California in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Heuer: good morning, i'm kevin kevin heuer, chief operations and programs officer for second harvest food bank. my organization's mission is to end hunger and malnutrition in santa cruz county. the good news is it's not about producing more food but about having the will to create a food system that ensures no one goes hungry and we have an efficient distribution system to make it all work. when food donors have greater clarity about protections afforded to them, when food safe trained gleaners and food facilities can rescue donations and get them into the hands of my hungry clients, our food system becomes not only more efficient, but also more just. ab 1219 means more food, more nutrition, and more dignity on the plates of the hungry and the working poor, and that's a recipe any of us should be proud to serve. thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Romero: good morning chair members, melissa kevin romero with californians against waste, an environmental group first of all, i would like to thank assemblymember eggman for her leadership on this issue, both on waste reduction and hunger. so, food continues to be the most prevalent item in our waste stream in california, with over 5.5 million tons of food landfilled each year. and at the same time, we have a large portion of our population that is food insecure. uneaten food and other organic waste contributes 8.3 million tons of greenhouse gases each year which is about 20% of the states methane emissions. so, ab19 is going to fill those gaps in current california law. it's going to get more food to those who need it by clarifying that apparently wholesome food that's past the shelf life date is protected. by expanding the types of donations that are eligible for protection, such as those directly to individuals, and by creating a method to promote these laws so that more businesses can understand how they can make safe donations to help those in their communities who are in need. i respectfully request your aye vote.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 156, 'end': 162, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Andrew Shane: andrew melissa shane, california association of food banks, proud to sponsor. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matthew Allen: matthew andrew allen with western growers association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Emmel: mr. chair and members, melissa matthew emmel on behalf of the legislative task force of the california chapters of the solid waste association of north america, here in support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Enrique Ruacho: Enrique Ruacho on behalf of the Los Angeles Unified School District in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Fearing: Good morning, Jennifer Fearing on behalf of the California Association of Nonprofits in strong support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 22, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kevin Baker: morning, mr. chairmember. kevin melissa baker for the american civil liberties union and for california. the analysis is quite thorough and i'm sure the committee understands him, mr. gloria has, i think, presented the bill comprehensively. the bill really does not go beyond existing law. what it does is really codify existing law, the education code where that is most, i think, immediately accessible to school administrators who will be looking to enforce these questions. we have had occasion to represent clients in these issues including christian tipman recently in a controversy against the clovis unified school district. we think it would be helpful and appropriate if this provisions were codified in the education code so they would be just more readily accessible to the school board, when they needed to make these decisions.  thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 184, 'end': 190, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Paula Treat: yes, paula kevin treat, on behalf of the pechanga band of luiseno indians, and the calusa indian community. one, i wanted to make sure. the record doesn't show that tasin has already sent in a letter of support, and that's nine additional tribes. including pechanga that belongs to tasin, so we'll give that to the committee to make sure it follows the file. second, beyond the fact that tribes are government to government, and there are certain liberties that are given to them, the cultural and spiritual background of the tribes is key and one of the things that you'll hear from the opposition is that no one's not been able to graduate, or proceed with their graduation proceedings. and that this bill is needed, and i would highly disagree. a pechanga student, there is a traditional pechanga sash along with eagle feathers and beads, not only very tastefully done, but traditional and cultural meaningful, very meaningful to the tribes, to their parents, to their grandparents, it has ancestral value, it's a right of passage, and in case after case, the pechanga students have not being allowed to wear the sash, they've not been allowed to have an eagle feather, which only tribal members are supposed to have in the first place and these are parts of their cultural and there tradition as most the luisenos who including pechanga members will tell you there luiseno catholic or they're luiseno lds or luiseno christian. it is part of their woven fabric of where they come from. and to tell them that they cannot do this, they cannot wear this at a time where it's a milestone for their families is very disheartening and very, i don't know, un-american in my opinion. so one of the things is that the sash has not been allowed we would ask that this bill get overwhelming support by bipartisan members of this committee and continue to honor the traditions and the cultural values that our tribes have.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1369, 'end': 1376, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1397, 'end': 1404, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1412, 'end': 1419, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dorothy Alther: Good morning, my name is Dorothy Alther and I am the Executive Director for California Indian Legal Services. We are also the sponsor of the bill and strongly support it. I'm here today just to answer any questions that you may have about the bill and the more recent amendments that were added. Thank you
[{'start': 25, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bo Mazzetti: good morning, mr. chairman and committee. my name is bo paula mazzetti. i'm the chairman of rincon band of luiseno indians. i'm also the vice president of the southern california tribal chairmen's association. and, for the record, the southern california tribal chairmen's association, central california tribal chairmen's association, and northern california tribal chairmen's association support this bill. the reason we're here because there's not clarity for the board, the school board. so helpfully this adds some clarity. we in southern california, through the tribal chairman's association, have been presenting, bestowing, on our students the eagle feather for 25 years, so it's not something new, it depends on the district, how they interpret the code and that's what some women, gloria's trying to do is clarify it a little bit. we'd rather work together versus litigate and waste money. and that's what this bill is intended to do. hopefully, not litigate but work together, thank you.
[{'start': 53, 'end': 70, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 791, 'end': 797, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cathy Christian: Yes, Mr. Chairman. Cathy Christian for the United Auburn Indian Community in support.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
James Jack: mr. chairman, members, james bo jack on behalf of the sycuan band of the kumeyaay nation in strong support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Frank Molina: Mr. Chairman, Committee Members. Frank Molina on behalf of the San Manuel band of Mission Indians and San Ynez Band of Chumash Indians in support.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Harold Kelso: Morning Mr. Chairman. Committee Members. My name is Harold Kelso. I'm Vice President of the California State Association of Letter Carriers and I also represent the National Association of Letter Carriers here today. I am here to give testimony as to why this Committee should support Assembly Joint Resolution 6, dealing with the United States Postal Service. Delayed mail negatively impact businesses, hurts residents, communities, and the economy, and drives customers away, resulting in lower revenue, and damaging the overall financial situation of the United States Postal Service. This is most evident if the Postal Service is allowed to reduce delivery services to five days a week. Doing this would delay timely delivery of mail, including newspapers, newsletters, bill payments, letters, invitations, and even medicine. In addition, if these cutbacks are allowed to occur, it would seriously affect hundreds of postal employees in California alone. Over 22% of whom are United States military veterans, many with disabilities. Furthermore, this resolution addresses protecting the current door to door delivery that small businesses, non-profit organizations, and over 40 million residential customers, many of whom are seniors, rely upon. These citizens rely upon the postal service to receive their mail delivery to their residence daily. According to the government accountability office cluster boxes are so unpopular compared with a door to door deliver of mail that less than 0.8% of business door delivery customers when given the voluntary choice opted to go to the cluster box deliver. And for residences just 0.1% agree to this change. How would the other 40 million USPS customers react if they were forced to convert to cluster box delivery. In some locations the Sostal Wervice has been soliciting customers to convert to a cluster box that could be placed anywhere, a sidewalk or a location at the end of a street. Meaning customers would have to retrieve mail from a cluster box. Security of this system has been an issue in some communities where these boxes have become easy targets for theft, vandalism, and tagged with graffiti. After bringing forth the issues just mentioned, along with many more, we believe that this resolution should be supported and passed by your Committee. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 52, 'end': 64, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maita Paniyagwa: Good afternoon, my name is Maita Paniyagwa, I am a pharmacy technician at Pacifica Hospital of the Valley in Sun valley. When I became a single mom at 19, I knew I had two choices. I could get a minimum wage job and struggle for the rest of life to provide for son Christopher or, I could try for a brighter future by trying to get a good paying job in healthcare. At 19, I entered a program to become a pharmacy technician in the hopes that I could give my son a better life. The courses themselves were tough but manageable. But big problems started when my clinical hours begin. I had to quit my job because there wasn't enough time to do that and my internship hours. It was like having a full-time job that didn't pay. I had to get into debt to cover the rent, childcare, diapers, formula and other basic necessities. A lot of times, I even had to ask my babysitter to please, give me a few more days to come up with the money to pay her. It took me years to pay back all the debt that I had to take on to get through my clinical hours. But the hardest was completing my clinical hours was the time I spent away from my son. He was just one year old at the time. I missed out on so much of his life during my internship, feeding him, tucking him into bed, seeing him learn to walk, I even missed hearing him say his first words. I feel like I missed out on a whole chapter of my son's life. After a lot of hard work, long hours, and many tears, I made it through my clinical hours. I've now been a pharmacy technician for 16 years. I love my job. But I wish the internship system hadn't made it so difficult for me to get here. People, especially single moms like me, shouldn't have to sacrifice so much just to get a good paying job in healthcare. That's why I'm sharing my story and working so hard to pass AB 387. Other moms like me must be able to have a medical career without seeing our families in our life suffer so much, thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 265, 'end': 276, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michelle Cabrera: Thank you, Mr Chair and Members, Michelle Cabrera with the SEIU, California, we're the sponsors of this bill. On behalf of our 50,000 allied health professional members, and our 700,000 statewide, we'd like to thank the Chair for carrying this bill. AB 387 is based on extensive interviews with committed allied health professionals like Maita, who experienced being brought into hospital works that interns to the guys of clinical training. And who are then required to perform hundreds or even thousands of hours of work with little or no immediate supervision for paying patients. There is nothing wrong with the concept of works for extender in the health professions, as long as that individual is fairly compensated. We understand that this policy would bring about a major change in a culture of training an education for allied health professions and that's exactly what we are after. In this case, the employers have exploited a loophole to staff their radiology departments, pharmacies, and hospitals with free labor. The opposition have argued that these individuals are students who are covered by their educational loans or student financial aid to get by. But the clinical hours we're specifying here are separate and above classroom learning time. These are hours performed in real health facilities with real patients. Nevermind that most students can barely survive even with financial aid and students' loans. Researchers released a report earlier this month showing that one-third of community college students go hungry and 14% are homeless nationwide. The average community college student is barely getting by. And in most cases presented here, there's no option for a paid internship. The opposition argues that trainees are being supervised while they're working. In fact, this concept of supervision is built into the very structure of health professions. For example, scope of practice in the medical field dictates ongoing and continuous chain of delegation and supervision by those who have the highest levels of training and competency in a field, to those who support them all the way through to unlicensed aids and assistants. This is a field where health professionals are always providing some level of direct or indirect supervision and or delegation and yet, some of these individuals are compensated for their work and others are not. Traditionally, male dominated fields already meet this bar of fairly compensating individuals who are meeting training requirements. Whether it's a CPA, a construction worker, engineer, electrician or military allied health professional in training, many professions inside and out of the health arena compensate men for on the job work experience. By creating an industry standard in a series of female dominated professions where individuals contribute as many as 25 million hours of unpaid labor each year, the health industry has also created a serious barrier for low income individuals who wish to gain access to good paying middle class jobs. What good is a STEM education in elementary or high school if you literally can't afford to spend hundreds or thousands of hours each year paying someone else to work? And the trainee is paying, whether it's through their educational loans or foregoing other paid work, whether it's having to pay for childcare, parking, or transportation. It's the trainees who pay for the privilege of doing work in hospitals that are in turn, getting payment through their patient's insurance.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 338, 'end': 343, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mitch Ceama: Thank you, Mr Chair, members, Mitch Ceama with the California Labor Federation also in support.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stephanie Johnson: johnson, pharmacy technician at the community hospital, san bernardino in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lisa Williams: williams, kaiser west los angeles, medical secretary, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Angel Espinoza: angel jonah espinoza, community organizer, seiu also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 43, 'end': 47, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sam Rodriguez: Mr Chairman, Members of the Committee, Sam Rodriguez, United Food and Commercial Workers. We represent 160,000 members across the state but most importantly for this particular bill, we represent pharmacists and pharmacy techs. And this is a time I think we can reset The rules rewrite the rules because this is indecency situation for pharmacy techs, thank you. We support the bill.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alex Sejalo: sejalo western center on law and poverty and we also support this bill.
[]
Angela Demaio: demaio, appointments and advice call center, kaiser, san jose, and i support.
[]
Rachelle Campbell: My name is Rachelle Campbell, I'm the Program Director at Foothill College for Radiologic Technology. Thank you for this opportunity to speak. My program is accredited by JRCERT. JRCERT does not allow students to be compensated for hourly work in the clinical setting, the reason for this is to protect the students. I know it's hard to understand that I believe students need money. But there cannot be strings tied to that money, where they may be put in situations that they are not ready for. They are not health care providers, they are students. I work my students on a weekly basis, under direct supervision and indirect supervision. Either I'm standing in the room with them, or I'm right outside the room. But we are ready to assist, because they need that help. The other issue I have is that clinical settings walk away for a variety of reasons. I fight, on a yearly basis, to make sure I have the couple of spots that I have. I have 22, currently. I lost to Kaiser hospital and lost 10 spots. So I went from 32 students I could take in a year to 22. I get 300 applications a year for people that would like to come into our program. I cannot accommodate all of them. This bill has the probability of closing my program. So we're going to go from 22 to zero. That's not just me, there are seven other programs at Foothill College that are in the same boat. So if our goal is to help the students, there has to be a different way. I am very pro-student, I fight for my students, I work with my students. I spend 60 plus hours a week working with my students. They're not with me, I'm online with them, helping them do homework, meeting them in the clinical setting and listening to their issues if I could drive them to the clinical setting, I would. If I could pay their bills, I would. There has to be a different way that does not affect the program's closing. Thank you, I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joy Guthrie: thank you committee. my name is joy angel guthrie. i represent the society of diagnostic medical sonography, 28,000 members. i'm also a program director of six accredited stenography programs in the state of california, including the first advanced cardiac stenography program in the nation before mayo. we are accredited by caahep, and accredited programs require that the students have a minimum of 1000 clinic hours. they are very much against paying the students because they need to protect the students during their clinic time. sonography is a very operator-dependent modality and they are required to go through a very rigorous program and we voluntarily, ask for this national accreditation. and we are very culturally aware in our student base is a melting pot of all programs, in the last program we had 100 applicants for only 18 slots. and in the last 15 years that i've taught, i have 100% placement rate in full-time sonography positions. so what we're trying to do is protect the students, in each semester they learned a different organ. they have to go through abdominal and vascular and echo and we offer the only accredited pediatric echocardio program in the state of california, so that we can detect congenital heart disease before they're born and after they're born. so they are not workers. we are providing direct oversight with these students, and they do not complete their clinical competencies until right at the end of their program. at which time then they are eligible, because they're in an accredited program, to sit for their national board exams. stenography is dictated by two models, one is an accredited program and the others are unaccredited. and these poor students, they get into these unaccredited programs, the prerequisites are very low, and they are told that they are accredited. and they're accredited to do business as a vocational school, and there's no requirement for clinical training afterwards. so this bill would set up an opportunity for students to go through non-accredited programs with no clinical training, and this would not provide success for our diverse population. thank you very much, we oppose the bill.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael McCue: my name's michael joy mccue, i'm the director of the doctoral of physical therapy education at sacramento state. again, the-
[{'start': 10, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jana Shingle: dr shingle, i'm the program director of a physical therapist assistant program at a california community colleges and in opposition.
[{'start': 3, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Dorn: dorn, a director of clinical education at the sac city pta program in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Mackaley: mr. chair, members, chris on behalf of the california ambulance association, in opposition.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Janet Fantazia: Janet Fantazia from Minister Junior College in opposition. I'm a respiratory therapist and faculty member there, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amber King: Amber King with the Association of California Healthcare Districts in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Schneider: Jennifer Schneider on behalf of the Occupational Therapy Association of California in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Megan Albright: thank you, mr. chair members, megan michael albright on behalf of the california dental association in opposition.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dave Huseman: Dave Huseman, Foothill College, Director of EMS, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Zorn: Linda Zorn, Butte Committee College in opposition. We have four allied health programs.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ashley Walker: ashley megan walker on behalf of mount san antonio community college in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nancy James: Nancy James, I'm the Dean of Nursing and Allied Health at CR College, opposition
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sabina Karr: karr, assistant dean from sierra college, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Valerie Fisher: good afternoon, i'm fisher, and i'm the deputy sector navigator from the health workforce initiative from college of the sequoias, in opposition.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Thomas Vu: Good afternoon Chairman and members, Thomas Vu, with the Association of Independent California Colleges and Universities also in opposition.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sean Henshil: Sean Henshil for American Medical Response, also respectfully opposed, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Myrna Martin: myrna on behalf of the california children's' hospital association, also in opposition.
[]
Andrew Martinez: Andrew Martinez, California State University system in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Abe Hajela: abe, california speech language hearing association in opposition.
[]
Michelle Baca: michelle ashley baca with the california medical association. we actually have an oppose unless amended position on the bill and hope to continue conversations with the sponsor and others office. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Steve Knight: Steve Knight, Program Director of Diagnostic Medical Sonography at Foothill College, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dave Butler: Dave Butler representing California Society of Pathologists and California Radiological Society in opposition. Matt Robinson, California Association of Health Facilities. We don't have a formal position on the bill. We do have concerns, mainly because we need to first figure out how to find our current minimum wage mandate. And the whole ripple and the compaction issue, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 111, 'end': 124, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark Schott: Thank you Mr. Chairman. Mark Schott with California Rural Legal Assistance Foundation. The bill not only strengthens a worker's access to IIPP, but it's also going to have an important role in improving compliance with a requirement that employers have in IIPP. In the last 25 years, DOSH has done many things to try to encourage employers to comply with California law requirements, including tailoring the regs to provide exceptions for some requirements for small employers. Providing employers with a downloadable online IIP template to use for their business. And providing some employers who utilize an online template with a good faith defense to the first citation. The statistics that I passed out to you show that there's a significant degree of non-compliance in this state, despite the fact that 26 years have passed since IIPPs were required for most employers. Just to briefly summarize, in the last two years for which data is being provided to you, more than 4,500 citations have been issued by DOSH against the employers who have violated the IIPP requirements. We think this bill because it gives DOSH the opportunity to cite an employer for failing to comply with the requirement that you provide an electronic or physical copy of the IIPP. Will encourage employers to comply with the underlying requirement that they have an IIPP. So we ask for your support.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Doug Parker: mr. chair, members of the committee. thank you. my name is doug michelle parker. i'm the executive director of worksafe, a health and safety advocacy organization that works throughout california. we strongly support ab 978. it addresses three things. first, employee involvement. experts will tell you that employee involvement is essential for an effective health and safety program and this bill promotes that. second, it allows employees to be informed. employees have the most at stake, more than anyone, in terms of ensuring their own health and safety and they have the right to be informed. if an employee can request an employee benefit plan document and get a copy of that, and have the right for that to be enforced with $100 a day penalty, as is the case under federal law, they ought to be able to request this required document that it helps ensure their health and safety. and then third, it ensures representation, it allows employees to exercise their rights through a representative. this is typical of many other laws in california. personnel records, an employee can rely on a representative to seek personnel records. to obtain a copy of an employers written hazard communication plan and specific information about hazards in the workplace and medical exposure data, as well. so this fits consistently with those other laws. and finally as worksafe, we work a lot with legal aid organizations throughout the state. and we know that given the fear of retaliation and the intimidation that's so common, particularly among low wage and immigrant workers, that the ability to act through a representative is critical, thank you.
[{'start': 59, 'end': 79, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrew Medina: Andrew Medina of Asian Americans Advancing Justice California in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rene Bayardo: thank you. thank you mr. chair and members, rene doug bayardo of seiu california also in support.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marti Fisher: Marti Fisher, California Chamber of Commerce, we're not here in opposition at this time, we're here with concerns. So we'd like to discuss our concerns and the things that we think still require some work. First of all is the approach proposed by the bill for requesting the employers IIPP that we have a concern about. First the IIPP is merely a road map for the employer to know the provisions that they're in compliance with and how they're going to proceed. It doesn't include the actual safety practices that are in place. The safety practices are part of other documents and requirements that include information for employees and are provided by other means of communication such as postings and trainings. Regardless of the actual usefulness of the IAPP to employees, most employers, as a matter of course, share the program with their employees. Those that don't, and an employee has an interest, there's no reason to keep it from them. So we support providing the IIPP to the employee. However, this bill defines who can request and receive the program and who can be involved in that process. The bill states that the authorized representative of the employee can request a written copy and that the representative is anyone who has been authorized in writing by the employee. We don't, we definitely don't like this expansion of who can represent the employee. It's overly broad and it's troubling to insert a new definition where no such a definition currently exists. Under current rules, under CALOSHA, the authorized representatives, their union representative, there's an employee, employer and union relationship. All three are related in the employment context. And we believe that it is within that relationship that the IIPP should be requested. So we're opposed to the expansion and we hope that we can continue to work with the author and the sponsor to narrow the request to get the copy.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicole Rice: Yes, Nicole Rice. Mr. Chair and members, Nicole Rice, California Manufacturers and Technology Association. And we too are not here in opposition at this point but we do have concerns. First, I'll associate myself with the comments that were made by the Chamber and then also I'd like to raise two additional concerns that we have with the language as in print. So there's also a requirement that the employer provide this information within five business days. And we feel that there needs to be some flexibility related to the means by which that request is made. For instance, if the employer is going to be able to respond in a timely manner, they need to ensure that the information that the written request was made. So we'd like to see some clarification related to that. Secondly, as Ms. Fisher indicated, the bill calls for the IIPP to be provided with attachments. And there is no statutory or regulatory requirement for attachments to that IIPP. There are concerns that this requirement is vague and arbitrary, it can lead to confusion of what exactly employers need to provide. And if we want to address this provision, in the provision of additional information and documents, we feel that that's should be a different discussion and not the one included in this bill. We too have been talking with the author and the sponsors of this bill, we'll continue to have those conversations. And we're hopeful that we can address all the concerns that we've raised here today.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 41, 'end': 52, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 795, 'end': 801, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rebecca Griffin: And I thank you, Chair, and Committee Members. I am Rebecca Griffin. I'm the Assistant Director of California Programs for NARAL Pro-Choice California. And we mobilize our more than 150 member activists around the state to protect and expand reproductive freedom. And we're proud to be here with our partners today sponsoring the Reproductive Health Non-Discrimination Act. One of our guiding principles at NARAL is that there's no such thing as economic security without reproductive freedom. And what this bill does is make sure that people can make the best healthcare decisions for themselves and for their families without the fear that they'll risk their livelihoods in doing so.  Other women around the country have already paid a price for those choices because of gaps in existing laws. And right now where we're facing a federal government that is attacking reproductive freedom at every turn and condoning the type of discrimination that this bill prohibits. We feel like this is the time for California to take a stand for our values and make sure that our workers have the best protections possible. So we respectfully request your support, thank you.
[{'start': 52, 'end': 67, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nikki Goering: Good afternoon, Nikki Goering with Planned Parenthood Affiliates of California, and we support this bill.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 21, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Maya Ingram: maya rene ingram with the aclu of california, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shane Gusman: shane with ..., in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Bartholow: Jessica Bartholow, Western Center on Law and Poverty, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Renee Biardo: Renee Biardo, SEIU California, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alicia Lewis: lewis on behalf of the american association of university women of california, the american congress obstetricians and gynecologists of california as well as the american society of reproductive medicine.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cynthia Rice: Cynthia Rice, California Rural Legal Assistance Foundation, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sam Rodriguez: Sam Rodriguez, United Food and Commercial Workers, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Barrera: good afternoon, mr. chair and members of the committee. jennifer maya barrera on behalf of the california chamber of commerce and we are opposed to this, although it kind of feels like an oppose, unless amended position. we don't actually disagree with the policy on that an employer, one shouldn't even know about your medical information with regards to any reproductive choices that you hav,e or two, they should be able to retaliate or discriminate against you on that basis. and so, we're not opposed to the policy that this bill is trying to address. our opposition basically comes from the fact that a lot of these are already covered in the fair employment and housing act with regards to the pregnancy disability, and any related conditions associated with pregnancy itself. the regulations that the department of fair employment and housing have adopted deal with perceived pregnancy, so even if you're not pregnant, but an employer perceives that you're pregnant, you can't be discriminated against that basis. obviously, sex discrimination. there's cases out there that says, if you hire a woman and you expect that she's in her years that she may have a child, you can't discriminate against on that basis. marital status is already a protected category, as well. so if you're not married and you show up to work and you're pregnant or you're perceived to be pregnant, an employer can't take action, retaliation, discrimination on that basis. and so our concern really is the fact that this should probably be in the government code under the fair employment and housing act, and not the labor code. when you put it in the labor code, then we have two different enforcement agencies, the labor commissioner's office and the department of fair employment and housing enforcing the same basic protections. but they have different processes, they have different authority, different jurisdiction, different damages with regards to the labor code versus the fair employment and housing act. then so basically, we don't want two conflicting agencies enforcing the same rights. so we'd like to see it moved to the fair employment and housing act. the second part is with regards to subdivision a2 of the bill dealing with a document or a waiver. we're not really sure what that's trying to get at, and so, it makes us very nervous when it's ambiguous as to the scope of what that is trying to protect. it talks about the fact an employer can't require you to sign a document or a waiver that impacts your reproductive health choices. one of our concerns was does this impact insurance coverage that we're offering to our employees that may not cover certain items, such as elective surgeries that have to do with reproduction and whether or not employers ultimately be reliable for that. it gets into the family leave laws that we have, if an employer may not allow leave beyond what's already covered. is that impacting your reproductive choices? so we're kind of nervous on that ambiguity, but to the extent that can be clarified. again, it's kind of like an opposed and less amended position. so, we just need some clarification and movement out of the labor code. thank you.
[{'start': 56, 'end': 77, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sandra Palacios: Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and members. Sandra Palacios, representing the California Catholic Conference, in opposition to the bill. We've met with the author and staff to express our concerns with the bill, and we do wish to continue working with her on specific provisions of the bill. We believe the bill's a bit ambiguous at this point. It's targeting all employers in California in an attempt to address what we believe are unsubstantiated claims of employee discrimination pertaining to reproductive choice. The bill impacts all employers, but seems to diminish conscious religious liberty rights of faith-based organizations.  Under existing law, religious employers are subject to exemptions that will conflict this new mandate including the protections we currently have under first amendment for faith-based employers. The bill will specifically deny religious employers the first amendment protection to refuse our codes of conduct with the tenants of our faith. It gives blanket authority to all employees and to their dependents as well to engage in types of behavior disregarding the principles that a religious employer may have incorporated into the workplace standards of conduct, what's commonly known as their code of conduct or code of ethics. On the surface, the bill seems to seek legal protections from discrimination and retaliation for reproductive decisions, but the bill undermines codes of conduct and value that bind religious employers and their employees. And makes them vulnerable to discrimination lawsuits not only from their employees, but as the bill is written in an unprecedented manner now with dependents of employees as well. So, there is no other place in current law. We do not see it where rights of employees are extended beyond the employee to other individuals including dependents. The bill's language fails to clarify that particular extent of these new liabilities and specifically as referenced in the author's fact sheet, the morality clause, we believe for us is offensive, because we do have a code of conduct. This designation of morality class in the office fact sheet is a bias description we believe of a code of conduct, it's actually a contract that was agreed upon and ratified by union members in some of our Catholic schools, high schools. And in effect, the bill seems to redact or negate contractual unit agreements highlighting, perhaps unintended consequences in the bill. As a side note though, ... case which was mentioned in the analysis as well. It was a 9-0 decision by the Supreme Court. So, it was upheld nine to zero. In conclusion, 569 contradicts current lawful exemptions and First Amendment protections for religious employers. The bill in its current form should be revisited before moving forward. We welcome an opportunity as one of the most family friendly employers across the nation to continue further dialog with the author and her staff, but at this time, however, we urge your no vote on 569. Thank you.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Phillip Escamilla: Yes, I'll be brief. Thank you. Phillip Escamilla, William Jessup University. We are the only Christian private university in the capital region. We are opposed to this bill. We appreciate the intent of the author to ensure that employees in California are not subject to discrimination. We absolutely agree, if that's a value that should be upheld. We also believe, in our case, that we as a Christian employer should be able to make determinations pursuant to our policies, which are based on our faith which we believe are best for our employees and our institution. We would argue that, that is as the previous speaker said is actually a constitutionally protected right. We're also appreciate to the extent that the ministerial exception would apply to this particular bill.  We would suggest that it should actually be expanded to include all nonprofit religious employers. We actually are a significant employer in terms of the amount of employees that we have working for us and our policies are based on beliefs that are similar to those of the entities such as churches would be protected by that ministerial exception. Thank you and we would ask for your no vote.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Greg Burt: my name is greg jennifer burt with the california family council, in opposition, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Miller: Thank you chair members, my name is Michael Miller, I'm with the California Association of Wine Grape Growers. I want to thank the author for carrying this bill for us. As the sponsor, in California there are more than 6,000 wine/grape growers, producing more than $2.5 billion worth of wine grapes creating economic opportunity of almost $60 billion. Many vineyards are managed by vineyard management companies that are licensed as farm labor contractors. In a recent survey, by the Farm Labor Contractors Association, we found that 13% of the licenses were renewed after the expiration date of the license. In 76% of those cases that are reviewed, thy were renewed more than 30 days later, with 40% of them being renewed more than three months after expiration. Existing law requires that there be sufficient facilities and personnel. We're finding as we talk to vine/wine contractors, that they're experiencing situations where, they get a letter saying we need additional information to process the license application and many cases that information has already been provided. So it seems like there are additional resources necessary as the author pointed out that, that give information technology. They can be data management tools or other tools that will help them process information more quickly and get the licenses we need more quickly, thank the Committee for concerns in this legislation. Thank you additional witnesses and support.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tyler Blackney: Tyler Blackney with The Wine Institute, also in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeremy Smith: thank you mr. chair and members of the committee, jeremy greg smith here on behalf of the state building and construction trades council also in support.
[{'start': 50, 'end': 67, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Todd Blumestein: Thank you Mr. Chair, Todd Blumestein for the Southern California contractors Association also in support representing employer groups. This is a very easy fix for the Legislator to consider, it's changing a definition. They came from a rather odd determination that stated trees, from the DIR, stating that trees are not things that were previously constructed. It seems a little odd when you're talking about demolishing a tree or making a public road safe to travel. It seems like an odd interpretation, one other point to, to consider. The main trigger for public works projects is whether or not public funds are used. In the case that our friends from the laborers organization mentioned that case was 100% publicly financed. This makes perfect sense to fix the law. We ask for your support, thank you.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Staci Heaton: And that was my letter. Staci Heaton with the Rural County Representatives of California we have met with the author on this bill but we do have strong concerns about this bill. We have 35 member counties in our organization, many of them currently dealing with the immense tree mortality disaster across the state. Many of them are using public funds from the State Responsibility Area Fund, and also the California Disaster Assistance Act Fund to do tree removal projects around the counties in order to ensure public safety and welfare so that trees are not falling on homes and public roadways. These are projects that cannot be delayed, and we feel this bill has the potential to have unintended consequences on those projects. That need to get done immediately. Tree removal is a skilled labor and we understand that. There are only so many contractors to go around right now that are doing this removal work and they are in high-demand and they are all being used and we would like to not see these projects get delayed because of such a bill as this one. We are committed to continue working with the author's office however, so that we can, hopefully, come to some sort of, in the impasse on this. So, we're going to continue talking and, hopefully, be able to remove our concerns, thank you.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kirstin Kolpitcke: Thank you, Kirstin Kolpitcke with the California Forestry Association. We have submitted a letter with the chamber opposition, oppose unless amended. We have met with the authors office we've also met with the sponsor's office and we're committed to continuing to work. Our concern comes from several different positions that we stated in the letter. The first is that we think this bill could be more narrowly tailored as indicated if the issue is prevailing wage for tree removal around construction or demolition. I don't think we would have any problem with that bill. Where it starts getting a little bit iffy for us is when we're talking about tree removal as it regards to Timberlands. So if we could exclude, specifically exclude Timberlands If we could narrow the bill where we're talking about construction and demolition, either of those things, I think, would satisfy and remove the concerns that we've heard today. With regards to the tree mortality issue, in addition to the fires that Lake County had, the Governor's declared an emergency on the tree mortality issue. There have been 10 counties that have declared, passed a resolution declaring the emergency, however, under the requirements, in order for them to be able to access the emergency funds, they have to meet a matching requirement. Nine of those 10 counties are so impoverished that they haven't been able to meet the matching requirement to be able to remove these trees that are dead and dying and need to come out of the forest ASAP. So the one county that has accessed those, has used their entire general fund to be able to access the federal funds. So adding prevailing wage, in regards to this tree mortality emergency, isn't necessarily helping the situation, it could be exacerbating an already dangerous situation. Secondly, Timberlands and the products are a commodity. So when they get to Lowes and Home Depot, and you're looking at a two by four from California that required prevailing wage, and a two by four from Canada, Georgia, or any other place that doesn't have prevailing wage, we can't charge more because we used prevailing wage, it's a commodity. So the price is fixed, in terms of, no one is going to pay $1.75 more for a two-by-four or $0.50 more for two-by-four, because it looks the same as the ones sitting next to it at the store. So we're hopeful that we may be able to narrow the bill and resolve our concerns, but those are the issues we'd like to raise, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marti Fisher: marti jeremy fisher, here on behalf of the california chamber of commerce, also in opposition unless amended.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shawn Hoffman: Thank you Madame Chair. Member Shawn Hoffman with the California District Attorney's Association. I'd echo the comments of my colleague from San Diego and ask for your support.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Natasha Metzger: good morning metzger with the aclu of california. regretfully we remain opposed to the bill. we appreciate that the amendment has improved the situation, but we continue to believe that the bill gives too much discretion to judges to put people on probation for lengthy terms. this really came home to us reviewing the cases in which this issue was discussed, and over and over again in the cases. seeing examples of people being kept on probation, courts attempting to keep people on probation for 10 11, 13 years for the sole purpose of paying restitution. and in two of the reported cases, the restitution that was being sought was for the crime of welfare fraud. so people who are literally destitute, being kept on probation for more than a decade in an effort to make them simply pay restitution. we appreciate senator anderson's goal of advancing rehabilitation. we think that the current amendments, as i said, improved a situation but don't go far enough in limiting the focus to that goal of rehabilitation. we believe that people should not be kept on probation for 10 years simply for the purposes of collecting restitution, for example. and we think that the overall ability to keep people on lengthy probation periods needs to be more strictly reigned in. so we urge you to take further consideration with this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 825, 'end': 833, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Harris: i'm harris. i'm with the national center for youth law and we are proud to support sb 439 principally for two reasons. it will result in better outcomes for young people. and it will improve public safety. regarding better outcomes research has shown that the juvenile justice system as was just referred to can have long lasting, profoundly negative psychological and health impacts on young children. these youth almost always have underlying needs that should be addressed outside the juvenile justice system. many youth who have had early justice system contact have suffered early age maltreatment, trauma, learning problems, or other unaddressed conditions. these needs are better managed through child welfare systems, mental health systems, school-related services, or through the provision of health care, or other community-based services. while the young person is able to receive those services within the supportive context of their family and their community. it is also wasteful to use the expensive resources of the juvenile justice system on very young children. the data shows, as was also just referred to. that these offenses rarely result in sustained petitions. importantly, providing youth services in the community is much more effective and less expensive. this bill will also improve public safety. research has shown that formally processing youth in the juvenile justice system does not thwart future crime, but, instead, causes the increased likelihood of future criminal behavior. while this may seem counterintuitive to some, it is true because youth who touch the juvenile justice system are more likely to commit future crimes than youth who are treated outside of that system. for those reasons, i ask you to support sb 439.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Caliph Assagai: caliph on behalf of the california public defenders association in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mel Assagai: mel jonah assagai on behalf of compton unified school district. i want to thank the senator for bringing this bill forward. it really puts justice where justice should be in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rachel Liebman: Hi, Rachel Liebman on behalf of the Burns Institute, strong support and co sponsor.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mica Doctoroff: mica mel doctoroff on behalf of the american civil liberties union of california in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kim McGill: kim mica mcgill from the youth justice coalition. we're honored to be co-sponsored on this bill. thank you, senator mitchell.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 116, 'end': 124, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jay Green: jay kim green, youth justice coalition, on behalf of all of the youth in my community and all the children, i firmly support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vanessa De Leon: Vanessa De Leon with the Youth Justice Coalition in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lupita Carballo: carballo from the youth justice coalition, i strongly support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathleen Tomasino: tomasino with the youth justice coalition and i strongly support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Josa Muscadeen: muscadeen, age 16, and i'm with communities united for restorative justice and i support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Juan Toppiez: juan jay toppiez, 17, and i'm with communities united for restorative justice and i strongly support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maureen Washburn: maureen juan washburn with the center on juvenile and criminal justice, a proud co-sponsor in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Mendoza: mendoza with cuff 15 in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Merexa Calvez: merexa maureen calvez, youth justice coalition in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nancy Smith: thank you. good morning committee members, my name is nancy merexa smith. i am a supervising deputy district attorney here in sacramento county. and i have the privileged of supervising our juvenile justice court here in this community. i am here to speak on behalf of my office asking for opposition to this bill. i am in a trenches in our juvenile justice system day in and day out. i am sitting with my collaborative juvenile justice partners, working to assist the youth who are brought before the juvenile court, sitting with their families, and sitting with crime victims. although it is rare, there are very serious cases involving children who are age lower than 12 years, for instance, 11-years-old, that are brought before our juvenile justice court. in preparing for today, i reviewed cases that my office has had over the last several years of youth who were 11-years-old. to be clear, these are not insignificant, low level cases. these are not schoolyard fights. these are cases of 11-year-old children who have committed forcible acts of sexual abuse against other younger and more vulnerable children. these are youth who have brought a large knife onto an active elementary school campus with the stated intent of killing a teacher the child didn't like. these are cases involving robbery, physical assaults, often targeting other younger, more vulnerable children. there is no question that these youthful offenders, the youngest in our system, have significant mental health needs and emotional challenges. but our juvenile justice system, as it exists, is geared to address these youth, to help them with the care, therapeutic treatment and rehabilitative needs that they clearly pose, while providing them with appropriate placement, secure and stable placement, as well as supervision. it's a delicate balance in juvenile justice court to focus our attention on the rehabilitation of a very young child, a young life, and to set it back on course so that we dont see that young person back before us in the adult criminal justice system. that's our goal. the beauty of the juvenile justice system, in this state, is that we work together as a team. the district attorney, the public defender, the juvenile justice judge before us, and the probation officers in court, we work with a collaborative approach to all pour resources into even our most youngest offenders to try to help them get to the core of the issue, and prevent them from ever engaging in the type of violent behavior i've described. the juvenile justice system is the only system that is uniquely designed, under our law, to provide this balance, to not only protect the child that is before the court and prevent anything more serious from happening, but also to protect other children, others in our community, at the same time. again, providing care, treatment and rehabilitation for that child. to suggest that other agencies in our state are equipped to address such violent, serious behavior, say, for instance, of the 11-year-olds i've described, the actual cases that have existed in this county, is just not realistic. child welfare is not capable of providing all that the juvenile justice system provides. the department of health and human services, the educational system, they're not equipped to address all the needs these children bring to the table. in fact, on a regular basis, my colleagues and friends from the child dependency, child welfare system here in sacramento county, call me and ask for help when there is a young child at the children's receiving home who is violent, out of control, and threatening the safety of all the other abused and neglected children who are there. and i will do whatever i can to help when appropriate. for all of these reasons, setting this number in the law will tie the hands of all of us well-meaning, well-intentioned persons. we're all in this together to help protect children and we need to ensure that every child has safety and security in our community. thank you.
[{'start': 54, 'end': 72, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Larry Doyle: good morning, madam chair, members. larry nancy doyle on behalf of the conference of california bar association. we're the sponsors of this bill and very much appreciate senator atkins picking it up. we tried legislation last year to restore the honorable discharge program because it's an incredibly effective way of helping youth who are on the right track to continue on that track to have the productive lives that they are seeking and to overcome what is the principal hurdle that they have to overcome, that this allows, is to be able to obtain licenses as senator atkins mentioned. cosmetology, barbering, things that they are now precluded from being able to obtain. last year, we sought in a piece of legislation, assembly bill 2390, to simply restore the program by changing a few of the names and realized it was a much more complicated issue than that because of the complexities of moving from having everything centralized to the state level to going to the local levels. ab 625 right now is a much better bill, but the key is that we have finally after two years of effort, engaged the department of corrections or rehabilitation and others. and they're in the process of developing the real structure to make this happen so that we will have an effective, honorable discharge program once again, and these youth can be well served. so we thank you for your consideration, and hopefully you will support the bill.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 178, 'end': 184, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 571, 'end': 577, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
David Steinhart: thank you. my name is david. i'm the director of the commonweal juvenile justice program. my connection here is that i was involved as an analyzer and drafter in the bills that realigned parole in 2010 and then honorable discharge became a casualty, you might say, of realignment and became obsolete. so what we lack is a structure for restoring honorable discharge. and sb 625 provides that framework and it really is a restoration project of something that worked in the past and served the goals that have been mentioned by the author and others. and has real value as an incentive for good performance by those who complete the djj program. the challenge has been, as noted, to come up with a structure that is compatible with realignment, and the bill creates that framework by assigning the role of determining honorable discharge to the board of juvenile hearings as reformulated last year. and the good news is that bjh and cdcr have come around after the experience of not coming to agreement in last year's bill. and so we have a very viable and promising discussion in which the details are very close to being worked out. but the framework that this bill puts in place is critically important. also we need to decide further on what is the role of local court and probation in coordinating with the board of juvenile hearings in making this structure work. so, again, this is a solid framework. i'd be happy to answer any questions that members of the committee might have. and in a context of, i think, non-opposition. in our view, this deserves to go forward, and has all the elements of working well. thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rachel Liebman: hi sorry. rachel larry liebman of the burns institute offering strong support.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Usha Mutschler: Good morning, Madam Chair and members. Usha Mutschler on behalf of the California State Sheriffs Association, in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Kando-Kaiser: Danielle Kando-Kaiser on behalf of Commonsense Kids Action in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kalifasa Guy: thank you. madam chair and members, kalifasa on behalf of the california public defenders association. all though it's commendable to want to protect minors from sexual exploitation by adults, sb 500 is poorly drafted, bad public policy, and in some cases criminalizes behavior which is more appropriately dealt with through litigation. aspects of the sb 500 are duplicative of existing law, forcing someone to engage in sexual conduct against their will is already criminalized in california law. it's called rape and it's in penal code section 261, which provides that where rape is accomplish against a persons will by means of force, violence, duress, menus or fear. immediate and unlawful bodily injury on that person or another. also, it's covered under duress, which means the direct or implied threat of force, violence, danger, retribution. sufficient to coerce a reasonable person of ordinary susceptibilities to perform an act which otherwise would not have been performed. sb 500 is over broad because it criminalizes adult with adult behavior when according to the author's website this appears to be primarily an issue in which minors are victimized. according to a 2016 us department of justice report, the department noted that sextortation, is that how you say it? that sex extortion is by far the most significantly growing threat to children in that sex extortion cases tend to have more minor victims per offender than all other child sexual exploitation offenses. what sb 500 seeks to do which should give us pause is criminalize emotional distress or embarrassment. under existing law, adults can seek restraining orders to prevent sexually explicit photos or videos of themselves from being distributed. they can file civil lawsuits seeking damages for intentional infliction of emotional distress, and other remedies. for those reasons, we are opposed to this measure.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mica Doctoroff: madame chair, members mica rachel doctoroff on behalf of the aclu of california here in respectful opposition to the bill. i would echo my colleague's comments, and we appreciate the amendments taken. but brought up today, it certainly addresses some of our concerns with lengthy sentences, however we still have remaining concerns. as my colleagues said, much of the conduct incorporated into this bill can already be penalized under existing law. we also understand that many of these acts are often committed against children. we also know that a lot of them are committed by children. and we're concerned that the prescriptions in this bill could end up criminalizing more youth, who engage in the prescribed behavior. and while their conduct may be misguided and inappropriate, it doesn't always rise to the level of being penalized as specified in this bill. and for these reasons, we respectfully oppose.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amanda Wilcox: Yeah, good morning, Amanda Wilcox, on behalf of the California Chapters of the Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence. We are in support of this bill. Obviously, we have strong interests and strong support in secure storage of firearms so that those guns are not stolen and later used in crime. But our main interest and personally, my strong interest in the bill is that it provides a way for family members to remove firearms when there is a risk of suicide by firearm. You know over half the gun deaths in our country are by suicide. I live in Nevada County, a rural county, our firearm violence problem is, thankfully, not by criminals but we do have a high rate of suicide by firearm. All the various stakeholders in our county, the mental health professionals, the crisis workers, our chopper, the National Alliance of the mentally ill, many of our contract providers, one of the things we all promoted every opportunity is getting the gun out of the home when there's a risk, a concern, and a risk of suicide. And this bill provides a responsible way to do that, to remove that gun quickly. We are therefore in support of the bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 79, 'end': 84, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Craig DeLuz: madam chairman, members of the committee. craig mica deluz on behalf of the firearms policy coalition. we appreciate the intent of the author with this particular measure. in order to provide some protection that was created by the measures passed by this legislature relating to the loans of firearms last year. the problem is that providing such exemptions that are as complicated and difficult to comply with as this one, is almost worse than providing no exemptions. first of all it requires the filing of a form of a department of justice form that may or may not be available to the department of justice because we know how good they are at keeping up on forms. it requires a safety hand guns certificate but at the same time why does it not allow for a ccw, or something that would be superior to that? in addition it requires for the firearm to be registered in order for it to be stored. if we're talking about removing a firearm from someone who's potentially a danger to themselves or others. why does it matter whether or not that firearm is registered? the fact is, is that this measure is so complicated. our biggest concern is that failing to properly meet the legal requirements in this exemption opens up an individual to a felony. and our goal, our concern is that providing this exemption the way in which this measure is written will not provide any protection to individuals. it will actually in fact put individuals in risk as they believe that they are in compliance with the law or they'll just find it so confusing that the won't seek to put this particular exemption to use. once again, we admire the intent, we just don't believe that this measure gets there. and once again this is after conversations with all of the other firearms advocacy groups. we're just finding it very difficult to believe that this measure is going to provide a reasonable answer to the concerns and to the issues created by the legislation passed by this body. it's for these measures we oppose this measure.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erwin Novick: yes, hi. novick. the reason the bill was written the way it was written is, is one, in order for anyone under current law to take possession of a gun, under any scenario, they have to have an fsc, unless they're exempt. what he, in essence, is asking is for us to re-write 15 code sections in committee, to accommodate listing the exemptions. we could have that discussion, but i don't think it's fair to the committee staff or the chair to rewrite the bill. that was rule one i learned. secondly, this is designed to meet the concerns raised last year when the bill was vetoed because they raised the long gun registration concerns, so we took that out. we try to work with the governor and we've had conversations downstairs and we're trying to get to a point where people raise these issues last year on storage, the bill was vetoed because of the complaints they raised last year with the governor. so, we're trying to respond to the governor, and the opponents and then we get sandbagged with this. and i just don't think it is respectful of a process.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Laross: I'm Investigator Mike Laross with the Orange County Sheriff's Department and I'm in support of this bill.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dawn Koepke: Thank you Madam Chair, Dawn Koepke on behalf of Crime Victims United, also in support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matthew Siverling: madame chair and members, matthew on behalf of the association for los angeles deputy sheriffs, the los angeles police protective league and the riverside sheriffs association, all in support. thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mica Doctoroff: Mica Doctoroff on behalf of the ACLU of California, proud co-sponsor in support of SB 10.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Bauters: john craig bauters, californians for safety and justice, co-sponsor, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tiffany Whiten : tiffany john whiten with the service employees international union, co-sponsors of the bill, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jessica Bartholow: jessica, western center on law and poverty, co-sponsors of the bill, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tom Hoffman: tom tiffany hoffman, retired deputy chief of police here in california, also state director of parole in california, absolutely in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Akil Ochoa: ochoa anti-recividism coalition, co-sponsor, and in strong support.
[]
Linda Warner: thank you. linda tom warner with the california catholic conference in support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Gonzales: Rebecca Gonzales, National Association of Social Workers, California Chapter, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rosanne Domingo: Rosanne Domingo from SEIU 2015 in strong support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alexander Ojingua: ojingua, service employees international union local 2015 in support.
[]
Zayna Mohammed: Zayna Mohammed from Oakland in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Kim: kim with the ella baker center, another co-sponsor in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Krista Brown: brown with the financial justice project of san francisco and strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Meryl Estic: meryl linda estic with bend the arc: a jewish partnership for justice in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Raj Shah: Raj Shah, Silicon Valley De-bug co-sponsor and strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jose Vi: Jose Vi, With Silicon Valley De-bug, co-sponsor and supporting to the fullest.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stephanie Flores-PeÃ±ada: stephanie meryl flores-peã±ada with co-sponsor silicon valley de-bug and in definite and complete 100% support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jenny Cogan: jenny stephanie cogan with bend the arc in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Allison Osorio: Allison Osorio with National Council La Rasa in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Scott Connor: Scott Connor with the Anti-Recividism Coalition in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maureen Washburn: Maureen Washburn with the Center on Juvenile and Criminal Justice in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tracy Bell: i'm tracy jenny bell with the ella baker center for human rights and i am in extreme support of the bill.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tess Schwinn: schwinn with the ella baker center for human rights in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jude Pond: Jude Pond on behalf of Lawyers Committee for Civil Rights of the San Francisco Bay Area in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Courtney Hamson: Courtney Hamson on behalf of the Ella Baker Center for Human Rights in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rudy Carilles: Rudy Carilles with Anti-Recidivism and I strongly support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Prezzy Hollow: Prezzy Hollow with Anti-Recidivism Coalition. I strongly support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Felix Miranda: Felix Miranda, Anti-Recidivism Coalition, strongly in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Mendoza: michael tracy mendoza with cut 50 in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jared Rudolph: rudolph with up trust in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Colin Minewrath: Colin Minewrath, I'm a student in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Lynch: good morning, danielle michael lynch on behalf of the california association of local conservation corps in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeff Clayton: madame chair, members of the committee. my name is jeff danielle clayton, i'm the executive director of the american bail coalition, which is a trade association of national insurance companies that underwrite criminal bail bonds throughout the country, including the great state of california. here today in opposition to this legislation. a couple of brief comments. i think the question of least restrictive conditions in this bill is problematic. i think it risks an as applied challenge. in this particular situation because all of the alternative restrictions on someone's liberty is free to the state. the last resort analysis risk and as-applied challenge because if somebody can post a bail which is typically a third-party benefit for a defendant. which is denied in favor of correctional technology that can be more restrictive under the eighth amendment and risk as applied challenges. certainly the maryland supreme court rejected this methodology for that reason. risk assessments mandatory on all defendants will slow down the process. everybody who gets out of jail today, can't. the other thing is, if you don't have a bail schedule you can't schedule o.r. releases. which means everybody is parked in jail at the front end of this process. and i think that's a problem. i do think risk assessments are good. candidly, i commend the authors of this bill for the restrictions they placed on the risk assessments to make sure they're race and gender neutral. that's progressive. i think it's good policy. i'm not sure anyone could operate a risk assessment under it, today but i commend them for going in that direction. to answer the sort of statistic that 62% of people are unconvicted in the country, that's true. the question is what is keeping them in? and the vast majority of the reason they're in is non monetary holds which this bill does nothing to correct. study the los angeles county jail found that only 12% of defendants could theoretically post a bail. and of course some of them were getting advice of counsel not to. and so we think the numbers are probably a lot lower, particularly in california. now in harris county, texas that's probably a whole different ballgame. where you have whole classes of misdemeanants on low level bails which really doesn't happen as much in california. the missing component in this bill that's not part of the national movement is the expansion of preventative detention. and the previous witness talked about how a risk assessment can serve to keep the dangerous in jail. but this bill doesn't expand preventative detention. there is no basis to deny bail under this bill. the constitution of the state of california is not being changed under this legislation, which means that there is no greater avenue under this bill to keep the dangerous in. and i like to think that before the 1984 bill reform act passed, that tip o'neill and ronald reagan were having a martini. and tip said, ronnie, we got all these people in here. they can't afford their bail. they're low level. let's get some of these people out of here. and reagan probably said, you know, tip, we got these rich gangsters who are getting out because they have money and we need to do something about it. but that whole deal, that whole package, is missing from this legislation. the implementation cost of this would be huge. state of new jersey is trying it. it took them three years to attempt to implement it. it started january 1st. candidly i think, and i estimate, maybe $500 million at the low level to roll this out state wide, and i don't think you would be able to this january 1st, even if you'd want to. the saving certainly haven't materialized yet, at least in the amount of savings to offset the cost and so i think this is certainly a big shift. we have come to the table here, we have come to this capital with suggestions on how to improve the bail system in california. and we certainly look forward to continuing to work with the sponsors of this legislation to try to find a way to make california's bail system more fair. and certainly our ideas were to get at the bail schedules, lower the bail schedules, have more process and that sort of thing. but ultimately i think, it's not my job to come down here and protect every dollar of market share of the bail industry. what it is my job to do is to try to help to figure out where commercial bail bondsman work the best and it's typically in high risk felonies where the judges don't want to release them anyway. and so i think we can arrive at a more fair bail system in california. we are a partner in that and we want to continue to be a partner in that. so i thank you all for your time this morning. thank you madame chair.
[{'start': 51, 'end': 72, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2887, 'end': 2898, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2903, 'end': 2916, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2944, 'end': 2947, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2954, 'end': 2960, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3092, 'end': 3098, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Corrine Rankin: good morning, my name is corrine jeff rankin, and i am chair of the board for the california bail agents association. i also operate a bail bond business of my own. that's located, i operate in redwood city and in fremont california. i'm here today because i want to remind or let you all know that in california more than 52% of the bail bond businesses here are owned by women, and minorities and people of color. and the way the bill is written today, it will put more than 1,600 minority and women business owners out of business and their employees. we look forward to working with the authors are going forward to find a middle ground and to find where bail can fit into the equation going forward because surely bail is important. it is a factor and it does need to be included going forward. thank you very much for your time.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nina Salarno: my name is nina corrine salarno besselman. i'm the president of crime victims united. the opposition the crime victims united has to this, is this bill does not consider the california constitution, section 28. which was the victim's bill of rights, the marsy's law that amended the constitution, specifically to the bail component, that the victim has a right to be heard. prior to any release either on bail, or or otherwise. there is nothing in this bill that addresses that. so therefore, it conflicts with the california constitution which should control that. that is a dangerous element because the personal safety of the victim is something that needs to be considered before any type of release. electronic monitoring has not proven to protect the citizens of the state of california. there is no real time monitoring that can be implemented and this bill does not provide for real time monitoring. it would be extremely costly to have that therefore you are jeopardizing the personal safety of the victim. also looking at the risk assessment, there are not valid risk assessment tools that can be relied on. the risk assessments currently in place do not even consider the inmates prior history. they do not look at the prior crimes, they do not allow for interviewing of the victim. there are different very dangerous components that are not considered when doing a risk assessment. lastly as i testified in front of the insurance commissioner about a month ago, i am asking from the victim perspective. i'm not saying things don't need to change but a valid study needs to be done. the number of 62% has been thrown around, of people being held in jail that cannot make bail. there's never been a valid study. it's actually lower than that because the majority of those people there are on other holds. the majority of those people are waiting sentencing, and a majority of them are being advised by their own council to stay in custody so you can get the two for one day credits. so therefore we need to get to the real number and i would also like to remind this board. i would like to remind all of you, the penal code does provide for a judge to consider whether or not somebody can make monetary bail when they are releasing them. so there is that protection still in place. but just to allow for a blanket release without concern for the personal safety of the victim. and in direct violation of their constitutional rights i believe is a dangerous path to go down for the state of california.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 41, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Lovell: John Lovell on behalf of the Association for Los Angeles Deputy Sheriffs. The Association of Deputy District Attorneys, California Association of Code Enforcement Officers, California College and University Police Chiefs. California Narcotic Officers, Los Angeles County Professional Peace Officers Association, LA Police Protective League and Riverside Sheriffs Association. Our opposition to this bill is procedural, not substantive at this point. The Chief Justice has created her own pretrial detention working group and has tasked the Judicial Council with looking at a global evaluation of the entire issue of bail. That report, we are told, will be returned to the Chief Justice on December 17th. We believe that this is a very, very serious issue and that in order to move forward and achieve the best possible outcomes. These bills should be deferred until we also have available that report. It is the public safety dimensions, the personal liberty dimensions of this bill are serious. And we have to get it right. I was here when Senator Steve Pearce did his utility reform and everyone thought they we're doing the right thing and everyone thought they were doing the right thing. And it turned out to be a disaster that no one intended and we believe that the prudent course of action Is to move forward only after we have the entire range of available information. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1049, 'end': 1061, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jerry Campana: Good morning. My name is Jerry Campana, I'm a bail agent. Business owner out of San Francisco, I'm in opposition of this, and I'd like to add that also, our industry pays a tremendous amount of tax. Sureties pay tax on the, goes to the general fund. As well as summary judgement that we lose if we can't recover an inmate that money also dollar for dollar goes to the general fund and therefore I'm in favor of the bail, thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Boyer: Good morning Madam Chair and members Paul Boyer on behalf of All-Pro bail bonds. In opposition to the bill today. We look forward to the opportunity to continue the conversation as the bills work their way through the process. Thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Arent: good morning. i'm brian nina arent. i'm with the aie family of companies. we're the oldest and longest standing underwriter of bail in the state, having done so since 1936. as written this legislation would have a profound impact on thousands of hard working californians. many of whom are working in multi-generational family businesses, female-minority owned. and provide a valuable service to the criminal justice system. i urge the committee to act prudently and take their time on this. this is a massive reform of criminal justice in this state, and the unintended consequences could be severe. so in that regard, i am opposed to the bill as currently written.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 32, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Leanne Curtis: leanne brian curtis, i'm in opposition to the bill and i'm an agent representing american surety company. i own alter creek bail bonds in lake tahoe and sierra monitoring services and i oppose the bill, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kim Magill: Kim Magill from the Youth Justice Coalition, representing thousands of families who have been impacted and bankrupted by the bail system. In strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Penarvis Harshaw: hello, my name is penarvis leanne harshaw. i represent policy link and i am in support of this bill.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vanessa De Leon: vanessa with the youth justice coalition in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Juan Pena: pena with the youth justice coalition, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathleen Tomasino: tomasino with youth justice group coalition, i strongly support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jayde Green: green, youth justice coalition, firmly support this bill.
[]
Justin Martinez: justin penarvis martinez with the anti-recidivism coalition, and i support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gail Noble: I'm Gail Noble from Silicon Valley De-Bug, Cosponsor, and I strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gabriel Ortiz: my name is ortiz from silicon valley de-bug, and i strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Catalina Palacios: catalina also with essie justice group, co-sponsor, strongly support this bill. our freedom should not be up for sale.
[]
Anita Wills: wills with essie justice group, co-sponsors of this bill. i strongly support the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Kruzan: Hello, my name is Sarah Kruzan. I'm the program coordinator with Healing Dialogue and Action and Restorative Justice, organizations to heal our communities from the inside out. And I strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Javier Stauring: good morning, javier with healing dialogue and action. we work with family members, survivors of homicide and family members who have loved ones incarcerated and we strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sandra Fluke: sandra justin fluke, in support on behalf of voices for progress, a coalition of business leaders, entrepreneurs, and philanthropists, in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tania Links: hello my name is links. i'm here representing one in two black american women who have an incarcerated loved one. i strongly support this bill from essie justice group.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeremy Hinson: Jeremy Hinson with the California Civil Liberties Advocacy and we support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shelby King: Shelby King with UCLA Law School and I strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : Old.>>I'm sorry.
[]
Matthew Allen: mister chair and members, allen, western growers association also in support.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dave Runsten: Dave Runsten, CAFF also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 14, 'end': 18, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jeannie Merrill: Yes, again, my name's Jeannie Merrill Policy Director for California Climate&Agriculture Network. We're a coalition of sustainable and organic act organizations and we're pleased to support SB 276 which makes an important fix to last years SB 859 by clarifying the Healthy Soils and SWEEP programs are not apart of the bills on rest reporting medication requirements. I'm going to speak very briefly to the Healthy Soils component of the fix. The Healthy Soils Program provides incentives and demonstration projects. Project funding for on farm projects that reduce green house gas admission and improve soil carbon sequestration. The program supports climate smart act practices like the garden of cover crops, the use of mulch, compost, the planting of trees and neutrals. All which provide multiple economic and benefits to our air and water and polity. And then, let's fix SB 859, requirements for the stymie, the development of Healthy Soils Program and new initiative as swell as SWEEP make it undesirable for farmers and ranchers to participate. Which is some of the opposite but we need to do right now. In terms of being able to meet our climate change goals. And we urge your support.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dave Runsten: Yes, I'm Dave Runsten. I'm the Policy Director for CAFF the Community Alliance with Family Farmers. And we support SB 276 which is a right forward but necessary fix to the SB 859 of last year. SWEEP is the states first program for providing senates for improving on farm water and energy use sufficiency. The programs funds projects like switching from diesel powered water pumps to solar pumps. So, a little moisture monitoring to improved your irrigation management going from flood to grip irrigation and more. Today, the program has funded over 500 irrigation improvement project reducing 28,000 metrics turns of CO2 equivalent or the equivalent taking nearly 6,000 cars off the road each year and saving 62,000 acre feet of water each year. Since SWEEP payment goes directly to farmers including small and minority farmers, and the environmental externalities from these projects are very minimal. It would not be feasible to implement the reviews called for in SB 859. We must keep successful programs like SWEEP going. SB 276 will allow farmers throughout the state to continue to access this important resource and save water and energy. All will happen to meet the state's climate goals. So, I ask for your support.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matthew Allen: Good morning Madam Chair and members of the community. Matthew Allen, Western Growers Association pleased to support the bill.
[{'start': 55, 'end': 68, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary-Ann Warmerdam: good morning madam chair and members mary-ann jonah warmerdam rural county association also in support.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Goulden: sarah mary-ann goulden on behalf of the carbon cycle institution and john wick in support, thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 69, 'end': 78, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kyle Jones: Good afternoon, Kyle Jones with Sierra Club California in strong support of this bill. The public and many of my members have lost faith with the Coastal Commission because of the insufficient disclosure practices that the Commission has. I think this bill does a great job of moving this forward in a smart direction using our technology to figure out whose lobbying the Commission and who they're working for. There was a lot of hurt, honestly, with my members with what happened, but I think this is going to start bridging that gap and make it so that people can again have faith in their Coastal Commission that it's doing what it needs to do for them. Thank you. I urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bruce Magnani: Madam Chair, member, Bruce Magnani with the Association of Plastic Recyclers. I want to commend Mr. Bloom as not being a material scientist or chemist, he did a rather excellent job of explaining the process.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 100, 'end': 105, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark Murray: mr. chair, madam chair, members. mark jonah murray with the environmental group, californians against waste. this particular piece of law is a quarter of a century old. the author of this legislation was former senator lucy clay, who recently passed away. this legislation was a compromise between environmentalists, the plastics industry, and the recycling industry to come up with a coherent system for the recycling of plastic containers.  we have a very successful pet recycling success story in the state of california, and it's somewhat ironic that materials that are not pet are jeopardizing that success story. so it's important that we amend this, what was originally an industry environmental compromise. industry environmentalists are coming together again, to ask you to make this simple modification, and urge an aye vote.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 219, 'end': 228, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tray Gender: hi good afternoon, chair garcia. tray, coalition for clean air here in support of ab 398. we're also looking forward to working with the author on a couple of additional amendments that we think can improve the bill even further. i'll just make a couple of points for our support for this bill. first, i want to state that this bill will bring greater transparency and accountability for california, the climate investments. otherwise known is greenhouse gas reduction fund or ggrf programs. as folks probably know ab1532 required that climate investments maximize benefits that are environmental, economic and public health co-benefits of these investments. that they foster job creation and provide opportunities for businesses and other public agencies to participate and benefits from statewide efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. the latest air resources board, department of finance, annual report on california climate investments does begin i believe to include co-benefits, description of co-benefits at the beginning of the annual report, as well as for each of the programs outlined in the report. however, the level of detail varies considerably from program to program, project to project, because there's still not yet a standard methodology for how the different agencies report on these co-benefits. arb is beginning that process and so we think that it's actually very timely that this bill provides some very clear instruction and directives on the specific pieces of data and information that should be counted and described here in the annual report and so to that end, providing greater transparency and accountability for the true impact that these climate investments have in california. one amendment we would like to see is that under the business data it should also include businesses indicating whether or not they are a disadvantaged business enterprise. such as a women or minority owned business enterprise. that, i think, is an important corollary to our focus here in the state on disadvantaged communities. secondly, this bill, i think, builds on the efforts to date to advance economic and social equity through our climate investment programs. one of the most important parts of the bill i believe is requiring that actions and the outcomes of those actions to connect disadvantage community residents with employment, business and training opportunities from these climate investment programs is really an exceptional part of this bill. it's important for transparency, but also i believe it will actually help incorporate some of those actions into the design of the programs on the front end. and hopefully we'll start to learn some best practices over time. sure i'll just end by saying we did note in the analysis that senate appropriations had outlined some of the cost. arb is already in the process of a contract with uc berkeley on developing methodologies. hopefully that can reduce the cost and we look forward to helping research that further.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 31, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 33, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: Good afternoon, Kyle Jones of Sierra Club California, in support of AB 1197. When it comes to oil spills being able to quickly and decisively start working on clean up, and mitigation is important. We've all seen the pictures of marine mammals, birds and other wildlife who get caught in the slick, and what this bill will do will make sure that we have qualified teams out there who are able to stop those worst and these horrible images from happening, and so we support the bill and urge your aye vote today, thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian White: Good Afternoon, Madam Chair and members. Brian White here on behalf of the Western States Petroleum Association. WISPA does not have a position on the bill, but we wanted to offer some thoughts and some general potential concerns that may or may not exist, depending on how the bill moves along in the process. We've met with Assembly member Limon and her staff, and we understand the objective of the bill. We know what she's trying to accomplish and we don't disagree with that, but the importance of the Incident Command System is to have scalability and flexibility, so that you can have an adequate response and a quick response to a potential spill if there is one. Of course, no one wants an oil spill to happen. No one actually wants that. We prepare for them, we prevent them, we train every three years with OSPR. We have a technical Advisory Committee that we participate with. There's federal, state, and local officials. They're all involved in these oil spill drills and we're graded every time we do a oil spill drill. You either get a passing grade or a failing grade. With respect to the spill management teams that the bill is trying to insert into the process, there are some companies that have spill management teams. Some contract with them, some are internal. We also use the OSRS, those are the actual equipment that actually go out and do the spill clean ups. So what we're trying to figure out, if this bill's not going to create any unnecessary duplications or conflicts between the roles, we don't know. The bill's granting a lot authority to OSPR to come up with regulations and we don't know if those regulations will spell out what criteria a spill management team will have to have. Will there be certain levels? Certain grades? Those are all things that need to be fleshed out as the bill moves forward and we're happy to work with OSPR in an offer on that. Again, we're not questioning the need for the bill, but it's important to recognize that some larger shippers actually have these internal strike teams too. So what they do is they actually go out, the spill management team will go out and do the initial assessment, then the internal companies will come in. The strike teams will come in and then take over and fill the role of the Incident Command System, depending on what that role might be. So, are the internal company strike teams going to be ready too? It's not clear in the bill, if that's going to be the case. Finally, we don't know what the criteria will be for the rating system and how many rating levels will be established and we're also not sure if the bill will require a certain size, SMT to respond to this bill. So, these are just some of the questions we would like to pose to OSPR. We'd like to work hand in hand with the member to address some of those and I know there are some suggested amendments that the Committee staffer has put into the bill, so we'd like to review those and then keep the discussion going. So, thank you.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 342, 'end': 347, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2740, 'end': 2744, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
P. Anthony Thomas: good afternoon, madam chair and members. p. anthony representing the california independent petroleum association. first, let me be very clear and thank the author for meeting with me last week. i'm sure it was out of the kindness of her heart or she had pity on me. so in either case, i want to thank you member lamone. there was a slight miscommunication that prevented us from submitting a letter on the bill, the letter for file. so again, i want to thank the member for meeting with us. we're seeking a slight clarification regarding the germaine plan that the smts will be required to operate under. a committee amendment was offered. we're accepting of that. we'd still like to see what that looks like in print before we step forward with an official release of opposition or support for the measure. we are not opposed to the bill. we want to be very clear about that and we also want to thank the community staff for their communication. we'd like to see the bill be held in committee and have this worked on first before we take a position one way or the other. again, i want to thank member limon for her patience, and of course her grace in meeting with us last week. thank you, members.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 313, 'end': 319, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 543, 'end': 551, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1103, 'end': 1108, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Danielle Lynch: Good afternoon, Madame Chair and members. My name is Danielle Lynch. I'm proud to be here on behalf of the California Association of Local Conservation Corps. We are a group of 13 state-certified, local, nonprofit organizations throughout the State of California. We, similarly to the CCC, provide education, employment opportunities for youth with extreme barriers to employment. So a lot of these youth are current or former foster care youth, previously incarcerated homeless, highly impoverished, a lot of youth who have really severe barriers to employment. So, we're able to provide them with really individualized services to help them move past these barriers and have successful outcomes. We currently are able to bring on youth who have been previously incarcerated including youth who are currently on probation. We found that this is really important because it really aligns directly with our mission. Not only do we provide natural resources conservation programs for the State of California but a really important part of our programming is exactly what this bill is intended to do. Providing opportunities for youth who have found themselves maybe in a little bit of trouble with the law, with an opportunity to really make a statement, decide they want to change their outcomes and really advance into a more positive role in their future. So, a lot of local Conservation Corps members they transition into the CCC which another opportunities for them to continue to refine their experience and their job training and move into positive employment. But it also does really align with the Conservation Corps mission of changing lives. So we're here to support this bill because it really does move forward this important mission of helping youth with our future. So, proud to support Assemblymember McCarty and this policy. Thank you.
[{'start': 53, 'end': 67, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1815, 'end': 1822, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Heidi Sanborn: thank you, good afternoon, madame chair and members. i'm heidi mark sanborn, the executive director of the national stewardship action council. we are a network of committed proponents comprised of governments, non-government organizations, business and consumers who advocate that producers share fairly as we strive for a circular economy. we support extended produce responsibility and product stewardship policies to achieve a fair sharing of responsibility and cost of managing products at end of life. the carpet stewardship program as a result of ab 2398 was necessary because carpet is one of the top 10 most prevalent materials in california's waste stream. almost 1.3 million tons per year. it's weight and bulk make it hard to handle and poses a significant cost on local governments. carpet is mostly plastic and has a large ghg footprint, which can be greatly reduced through increased recycling, and also create jobs inside and outside of california through recycling, and that is according to calrecycle study done in 2012. on march 10th, calrecycle filed an accusation of care for noncompliance for 2013 through 15, asking for $3.2 million in fines. while calrecycle is in the process of the fines and the plan reviews, we know that independent stakeholder advisory committees are critical to achieving successful producer designed and operated programs, the mattress stewardship program serving as an example. i'm a member of the mattress advisory council and i can say from first hand experienced that the process with the mattress industry was much better from the onset, due to the fact that california stakeholders were structurally part of the process of developing the program from the beginning. last year, the california council on corporate recycling was created under care too provide feedback and suggestions to the program, but the council's recommendations have not been implemented. ab 1158 formalizes the stakeholder consultation process for the carpet stewardship program and requires responsiveness from care to provide rationale for accepting or rejecting the california stakeholder recommendations. so this bill takes an important step forward to improve the carpet stewardship program for california, and we ask for your aye vote. thank you.
[{'start': 57, 'end': 75, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Emmel: good afternoon. melissa heidi emmel on behalf of mayor edwin lee and the city and county of san francisco here in support. this bill aligns with san francisco's long history of environmental leadership and support for apr policies. so for the reason stated by the author and sponsors, we too urge your support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 55, 'end': 64, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark Ray: mark melissa ray with californians against waste, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Gonzalez: Good afternoon, Madam Chair and Members of the Committee. Paul Gonzalez representing the City of Thousand Oaks, in support.
[{'start': 58, 'end': 71, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julia Kingsley: julia mark kingsley with eagle consult representing alameda county waste management authority, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gene Irwin: i'm gene julia irwin on behalf of shaw the world's largest carpet manufacturer i was directly and immediately involved in the negotiations with then speaker perez. there were certain things we refused to include in the bill at the outset, namely rates and dates, for the very reason just described by randy. it's impossible to meet artificial schedules. we're not going to make 13%, 14%, 15% on a scheduled basis largely because of commodity prices. i also want to dispel the suggestion that we haven't done anything. the assessment has gone up 500% since it was originally enacted. it was a nickel a square yard. as of january 1st, it was $0.25 a square yard. at some point, there's an exhaustion factor. we do not oppose the bill in print, however if some of the features that were rejected at the outset six years ago included i believe we would oppose. thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 157, 'end': 162, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 301, 'end': 306, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Susan Little: thank you, my name is susan gene little, i'm a senior advocate with the environmental working group. and i'm here today to let you know that the environmental working group supports ab 483, a bill which, among other things, requires the department of toxic substances control to test soil at many general aviation airports for the presence of hazardous waste, especially lead. a very worthwhile portion of this bill addresses air pollution around these airports. but i'm here today to address the potential contamination of soil by fallout from the airport's emissions. leaded fuel is still used to burn piston aircraft, the kind of the aircraft that fly in and out of general aviation airports. planes that burn leaded aviation gas, or avgas as it's called, are the transportation sector's primary contributors to leaded air pollution. avgas's lead not only pollutes the air, but it also pollutes all that it lands on. lead does not break down but instead accumulates in soil and water, and can be absorbed by plants. as we know, lead is a neurotoxin. exposure to large quantities of lead can cause kidney and brain damage. but exposure to even small amounts of lead such as that found in soil or household dust can also cause harm especially to children. the university of north carolina evaluated relationship between children's blood lead levels and their proximity to general aviation airports. the study found that children who lived within 500 meters of an airport had notably higher blood levels than children living farther away. ab 483's proposal to test the soil at general aviation airport is a good first step to identifying the presence of hazardous waste, such as lead at the airports, and then safeguarding the children and adults who lived in the surrounding communities. we'd like to thank assemblymember bocanegra for his leadership on this issue, and for introducing this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1823, 'end': 1832, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Diana Vazquez: Okay, Diana Vazquez. I'm here on behalf of the California Environmental Justice Alliance and also Pacoima Beautiful. We thank this Assemblymember for bringing this important issue. As he indicated, there's an airport in Pacoima, and we just want to know the impacts of them. Thank you.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shrayas Jatkar: jatkar, coalition for clean air, in support. thank you.
[]
Chris Mertens: Hi, Chris Mertens, from the California Tahoe Conservancy. We're in strong support of the bill, having local elected officials on our board is very important to us.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paula Frantz: Good afternoon, Paula Frantz, on behalf of El Dorado County. And I'd like to express that El Dorado County is also very strongly in support of this bill. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tom Davis: davis, this reminds me of speed dating. so i'll get real quick. i'm a city council member of 19 years. i'm one of the victims on the ctc. i was on the board, and i had to resign last month, in march because of this potential-
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Emmel: Good afternoon, Melissa Emmel, on behalf of the Placer County Board of Supervisors, here in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Leighann Moffitt: Thank you very much. I'm Leighann Moffitt, the Sacramento County Planning Director. To my right is Cathy Hack, our Environmental Coordinator. I'm here on behalf of Sacramento County strongly supporting this bill. This is something our Board of Supervisors specifically referenced this year in their legislative platform is something they were very interested in. Areas like the unincorporated portion of the county are very important in the region to implementing the overall regional blueprint done by the Sacog on behalf of the region. We've placed those principles in our general plan and we are trying to implement appropriate infill. So we appreciate the author bringing this forward and your Committee's support of this measure. As we think this would be very helpful in approving small infill projects within the unincorporated county.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 99, 'end': 109, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jolena Voorhis: Madam Chair members, Jolena Voorhis on behalf of the Urban Counties of California in support. We would just like a level playing field with the cities, in regards to the infill exemptions so we're in strong support of the bill, thank you.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: Good afternoon, Kyle Jones, at Sierra Coal California, we had a support if amended position, and some of the technical amendments address some of those issues. So I'll send it back to my Committee and figure out where we are, thanks.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Murphy: Madame Chair and members, Mark Murphy-
[{'start': 26, 'end': 38, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bruce Minioni: madame chair and members, minioni, association of plastics recyclers in support.
[]
Brian White: Thank you. Madame Chair, members, Brian White here on behalf of the California License Forester's Association, as California's registered professional foresters who are responsible for the sustained management of millions of California forest land, CLFA supports the bill. We think this bill will allow landowners who previously could not afford to conduct forest fuel treatments a feasible avenue for managing their lands. CLFA sees this bill as a win for the forested landscape while in urban interface, the California forest improvement program and RPFs registered professional foresters. By potentially bringing in more participants into the Cfit program, this could be a vital step forward toward improving our forest landscape management in California. And for these reasons, we gladly support the bill and ask for your aye vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Mason: good afternoon, paul with pacific forest trust. it's a very straightforward bill, and i just want to harken back, actually, to the oversight hearing that this committee had with the senate committee back in february and you may recall that one of the witnesses, danielle lindler from jefferson resource company, shared the example where some of her clients may have to reforest a few hundred acres after a fire, and they're using the cfit program. but that would require them writing checks out of pocket for tens of thousands of dollars or more, and for many people that's a real obstacle to being able to actually do the work that we all agree needs to be done. so this simply provides some additional flexibility where the department could make that money available up front rather than as a reimbursement with proper controls. so i urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 262, 'end': 278, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cristina Garcia: Okay good afternoon. We're going to get started. I see I have a good healthy amount of authors here today. We're going to start as a Subcommittee. All right, in the meantime, I have a couple of announcements first. We have four bills that had been pulled from today's hearing. AB 288, Obernolte. That's item 2. Item 6, AB 663, Bloom. Item 12, AB 1088, Eggman, and item number 13, AB 1132, Cristina Garcia and the second announcement is we have two bills on consent. That's number 8, AB 771, Cork, and item number 11, AB 1036 Mccarty. And let's welcome Assemblymember Levine, AB 79.
[{'start': 327, 'end': 332, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 352, 'end': 358, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 389, 'end': 404, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 567, 'end': 573, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Gil Topete: thank you madam chair and members. my name is gil susan topete. i am the director for energy for the california municipal utilities association and we currently do have an oppose position on the measure. cmua doesn't disagree that maybe it's time to update the emissions factor number. it's time to look into that matter. what we have issue with is the prescriptive issues, in whether or not it's even feasible, the way the language is currently written. but in having a good conversation with turn, and communicating with the author's office, i think we're not too far off, in coming together and figuring out what the language could be that resolves, seemingly, those issues, and achieves updating the default emissions number. thank you.
[{'start': 46, 'end': 62, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 494, 'end': 498, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Susan Bittick: mr. chairman, i'm susan, i'm with ryan. we're a tax services fund and we support ab 433. we think this addresses a gap that exists in the law out in california that can leave a customer really without a remedy if they have incorrectly paid the tax and then their vendor won't cooperate or no longer exists and can't assist them in getting that money back. the other thing that i would point out, and i think this is a good reason to put this in place, is that it should create an opportunity for some efficiencies at the boe. the way this currently works, if i identify a problem where i have paid tax incorrectly to my vendors on a particular item, i may have 20 vendors that i've paid that tax to. and when i go back to them, they're all going to file separate claims and those claims could be assigned to 20 different auditors. the way this should work i should be able to go to those 20 vendors, get their assignment, and file with the boe one claim that covers all those transactions and would only need the resources of one auditor to review it. so i think it presents not only an equity solution for taxpayers, but some efficiency for the department.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Therese Twomey: therese jonah twomey with the california taxpayers association, also in support of this bill. under current law, the board of equalization has indicated, in their support letter of last year, a similar measure that current processes do not afford taxpayers who have a rightfully owed refund the avenue to file a direct refund. if the taxpayer is working with a uncooperative vendor, they are left at the mercy of the vendor. if the vendor chooses not to file a refund, they have no incentive to file the refund on behalf of the taxpayer, this bill would fix that problem and for those reasons, for equity, and for ease of administration and streamlining tax compliance, caltax supports this measure.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Barrera: jennifer therese barrera of the california chamber of commerce in support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Micheli: Mr. Chair and members, Chris Micheli on behalf of the Computing Technology Industry Association in support of the bill.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ken DeVore: afternoon chair and members, ken jennifer devore on behalf of the national federation of independent businesses in support.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lori Kammerer: good morning, chair and members. lori with the national association of women business owners, sacramento valley, small business california, and i'm forgetting one, ed cameo, in support of the bill. thank you.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 164, 'end': 172, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mike Dylan: Thank you, Mr. Chair, members. Mike Dylan representing the California Veterinary Medical Association. Our Association is in support of AB 942. Most veterinarians will give you examples where animal only customers are faced with sudden emergencies. Dog is it by a car, the gets in a fight with another dog, and sometimes their unusual medical bills yet fewer than 10% of animal owners had insurance. And also it's pretty well known among the veterinary community that some people will never bring in their dogs or cats for veterinary services, sometimes never, sometimes five, six, seven years. And so AB 942 we feel would encourage proper veterinary care as well as helping those owners when they're confronted with a very severe medical bills, or large medical bills. Thank you.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eleanor Bloch: i'm eleanor. i'm from marin county. i want to thank mark for bringing this to you, and i'm in full support, and hope you will support us. i've been a member of csl over 12 years, and had the pleasure of having a proposal put in become legislation, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 52, 'end': 56, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
 : I'm Terry [UNKNOWN], I am here to bring you a little gift, this is the 1917 or the 2016 tax forms. They're from California.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 9, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Trent Smith: mr chair and members, trent ken smith on behalf of the california alarm association in support of the bill. as the author stated, studies have shown that alarms and security systems are a great deterrent for crime. just this past weekend my wife and i left town for the weekend. we have three teenage kids, and it gave us a peace of mind that having our alarm system would keep them safe. did not give us peace of mind that they wouldn't have a party in our absence, but that's a different story. exactly i'm not sure i have a system for that but any way the making alarms systems more affordable, more accessible to all is a good thing and we support the bill, thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marvin Mugallo: mr. chair and members, my name is marvin jonah mugallo. i'm a janitor in sacramento and a member of seiu usww. i'm here because workers have the right to know what's in the cleaning products they use on the job. sb 258 would make full disclosure a reality. one out of 10 cases of asthma on the job are from being around cleaning products. i have seen firsthand how chemicals have impacted my coworkers through breathing problems or exposure to the skin. myself, actually also. janitors and domestic workers have the highest burden when it comes to being around these chemicals. we are largely immigrants and our needs are often left unmet. we clean your homes and workplaces with pride. but we don't deserve to have health problems from doing that work. i would also like to say that having a full list of the ingredients on the label is crucial. i'm fortunate to be a member of a union. and my union can bargain to ban certain chemicals in the workplace, but this does me no good if the ingredients are not listed fully in the barrel. i can also say that as a consumer, i want to know what is in my cleaning products. and i'm concerned that only listing ingredients on a website will not protect all consumers in california. we should not make the mistake of assuming everyone has internet access at home, or a smartphone in their pocket at the store. i can tell you this is simply not the case. unlike consumers, we do not get to pick what product we use when we go to work. we don't choose asthma. we don't choose to have a higher risk of birth defects in our children. getting the basic information on product ingredients will go a long way to helping our community protect itself from chemical exposure. for these reasons, i ask you to support sb 258 by senator lara, which makes transparency the law in california, thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1767, 'end': 1771, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bill Allayaud: hi, i'm bill  for the environmental working group, and also representing women's voices for the earth. we're the other two co-sponsors on the bill. just quickly, a key issue in this bill, as it was in the bill, in the assembly and then senator smitty's bill 2010, is trade secrets. you need to ask the industry, is it not true or not that they all know what is in each other's products. a top patent attorney recently wrote, lest the gigs up we all can all go down to parts per trillion now. why don't we start patenting these things if you're that worried about it? if you're intel, we know you want to protect with how you make the chip from qualcomm for amd. but we aren't eating chips or rubbing it in our skin. so if we get these things on us, isn't it fair that we know what's in them? we don't care how they make it. keep that as a trade secret, but what's in it is what's the key here. thank you.
[{'start': 243, 'end': 249, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jenna Arkin: good morning, i'm jenna marvin arkin from earth friendly products, we're a primary california manufacturer of environmentally friendly cleaning products. we strongly support this bill. and as a chemist and a new mom, i can't stress enough how important it is that we have the right to know what's in our cleaning products, thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Young: mr. chair and members, michael jenna young at the california labor federation, and i'd like to align my comments with those usww. we think that this is important information for workers to have, and for consumers to have, as to better protect themselves both in the workplace and in the home. thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rene Bayardo: Rene Bayardo SEIU California, and as our member showed we're in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Katherine Alcantar: good morning, i'm katherine michael alcantar, on behalf of the center for environmental health, californians for a healthy and green economy, [foreign] and the california domestic worker coalition, all in strong support, thank you very much.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Aaron Lewis: morning, aaron katherine lewis for the consumer federation of california in strong support.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrea Ventura: andrea aaron ventura with clean water action. we have 50,000 members in california, and our members, overwhelmingly want this information on labels, so in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alicia Lewis: Alicia Lewis, on behalf of the American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lillian Erickson: Lillian Erickson, on behalf of the Honest Company, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Angie So: angie andrea so, on behalf of the california society of dermatology and dermatologic surgery, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nerbasi Flint: nerbasi angie flint, on behalf of black move alumnis, physicians for social responsibility los angeles, physicians for social responsiblity san francisco, and the california healthy nelson law collaborative, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Reid Addis: reid nerbasi addis, on behalf of seventh generation, not only is this a strong public health program, but it also provides clear market signals, we're in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicole Caniones: hello, senators. nicole reid caniones here on behalf of consumer specialty products association and the international fragrance association of north america. both organizations do have an oppose unless amended position. however, as the senator stated, we really appreciate his commitment and the sponsors commitment to work with us. and we have made the same commitment to working with them until we look forward to finding a solution that provides meaningful disclosure to consumers, and it's also something that businesses can implement. we do recognize that ingredient communication is valuable tool for consumers as well as the industry. and as it was also mentioned, there's a number of many factors in the industry that are already providing disclosure. we have also a voluntary program. and i just mentioned this to highlight that we're not starting from scratch today, that i think it's a good framework, and we'll be able to hopefully work something out this year with this vehicle. with that said, i do want to take the opportunity to just to highlight some of our main concerns which, again, we'll be working with the senator on finding a workable path forward. as was mentioned, confidential business information, protecting that is critical in our view to encourage innovation. companies make a very significant investment in research and development prior to bringing new products to market. so it's important that we find the balance that preserves the incentive to innovate. and also, again, gives consumers the information they need to inform their purchasing decisions. on fragrance, the sb 258 would require full fragrance disclosure, which does go further than any current regulatory labeling requirements. for example, under cosmetics, you are able to identify fragrance ingredient as a functional category that is, you can list on the label of ingredients that it contains fragrance. in food, you're able to provide, for example, lemon flavor but you don't list out the individual constituents of that lemon flavor. and again, i just used these as examples of where and currently labeling requirements, there are protections for proprietary information. and fragrance is one of the primary distinguishing factors in a number of these products that help stride purchasing decisions. for example, when we think about laundry detergent, most brands work about the same, but we tend to buy or make that purchase based on particular scent in the product. so again, it's just another thing that we think we can find balance to give consumers the information they find useful, but we're not providing the level of detail that only our competitors and our accounting vendors would find useful. and again, i'd be remised if i didn't mention that the market has responded in terms of fragrance as well. there are companies who are disclosing the fragrance ingredients, and then there are a number of variety of products that are fragrance free, so consumers do have a choice out there. and lastly, on finding a balance between providing information on the product label and on the product website, the way sb 258 is currently drafted, we could result in 50 to 100 different ingredients listed on a product label. for example, a typical laundry detergent, the fragrance ingredients are going to be about 50 ingredients alone. so as was mentioned, a lot of these ingredients are things that the typical consumer might need to seek out additional information about, in addition to what they might find on the label. so i won't list all of our other concerns, but i just mention that with some of the concerns more around implementation. there are significant cost impacts, that might be particularly hard on small and niche companies. but we do look forward to participating in the work group process, and hope to work these out.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 28, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Louinda Lacey: Good morning, Louinda Lacey for the California Chamber of Commerce, also opposed unless amended, for the same reasons stated. One additional reason is a concern regarding the labor code provision. Specific to the secondary container labeling, which we will raise in the labor Committee, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shana Brown: Good morning, I'm Shana Brown on behalf of the California Manufacturers and Technology Association, also opposed unless amended and happy to be working with the author.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Hewitt: Mr. Chair, Members of the Committee, John Hewitt on behalf of the Grocery Manufacturers Association. We also oppose unless amended for the reason stated previously, thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dawn Koepke: mr. chair and members, dawn nicole koepke and associates on behalf of the california council for environmental and economic balance. also in opposition for the reasons stated. we apologize for missing the committee's deadline for letters. we would appreciate the consideration and look forward to working with the author. thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dolores Duran-Flores: Hi, I'm sorry. I'm late support, Dolores Duran-Flores with the California School Employees' Association. I was in another Committee and I wanted to register our support. Thank you.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Towers: great, thank you, senator, and thank you, chair wieckowski and members of the committee. my name is paul dawn towers, i'm with pesticide action network and part of the bee smart california a coalition of conservation organizations of bee keepers, both hobbyist and commercial and farmers as well. we ask that you support sb 602, the pollinator protection act in part because of the tremendous role that bees play in supporting our agricultural economy, our food and farming system. everywhere from background gardens, where many of us grow tomatoes, to what we actually see in the almond orchards across the state. as you've already heard, bees are declining at an alarming rate across the state and across the entire country. we see neonicotinoids as a critical part of this equation as a class of insecticides. as the senator described, these are particularly unusual, and i think important to understand, because of their long life in plants, and in the soil. so again, many of these, as the chair described, are applied in various ways, but are taken up systematically, or systemically, rather, through the plants and persist for days, weeks, sometimes in the soil, years at a time. and so, this leads to not only ongoing exposures for target pests but also for beneficial insects like bees that visit these plants. so particularly effective at what they do. as we know that the science's growing incredibly strong in the case against this products and has been for years. the largest global body that looked it over 1,100 different studies concluded that they pose a serious threat to bees, aquatic organisms, birds, and other animals. but out of those recommendations, these 29 independent scientists, including those here in the us said, we must take immediate action to curb the use of these products. we know that they are a driving factor in the decline. we know they are not the only factor. and i think what's important to understand about these products, is that they can fundamentally disrupt communication, navigation, reproduction and so weaken immune systems of bees they leave them susceptible to other factors. whether they be disease, other pests like varroa mites, forage habitat, many other problems we see in agriculture. but the dramatic declines that we've seen in the past just less than 20 years have been coincided with the introduction of these products. so what's important about this bill is it does two things. one, it takes these product out of the hands of those that don't have training and background on using them. it puts them in the hands of certified applicators. we know that's particularly important for controlling the spread of diseases like huanglongbing that are a part of citrus greening rather. and it's important to find the best ways to control the spread of diseases like this. and so making sure that we have the best trained applicators with the tools to do that as effectively as possible is a critical piece of the first part of the bill. secondly, as we look at what's happening with what people use in their own backyards when they purchase plants, they intend to be beneficial for bees and other species. again, over 4,000 species of bees are native to california. many of them don't realize they're causing harm to the entire colony. and what we have seen is that even when neonicotinoids have been studied for their impacts on honeybees, we see they can have dramatic declines in the cases of other native bees species that again are supportive of agriculture. we can see those effects are even more pronounced based on a growing body of research. so all this to say that we should and must take action on restricting harmful neonicotinoids. and then we should put tools in the hands of consumers to make accurate choices. none of this precludes farmers and state agencies from dealing with pest outbreaks as they happen. again, certified applicators have the tools to deal with that. but this is a necessary step to curb unnecessary use, misuse, and overuse of products, and give the consumers the choice to make sure they are supporting pollinators as they can. thank you.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 58, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 100, 'end': 116, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Terry Oxford: Hello, my name is Terry Oxford from Urban Bee San Francisco. And let me just first say that I am much more comfortable within a cloud of thousands of stinging insects than I am right now. So forgive my, if I'm halting in any way or-
[{'start': 18, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Fearing: good morning, mr. chair and members. jennifer paul fearing, on behalf of the center for food safety and defenders of wildlife, in strong support.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nancy Buermeyer: buermeyer, on behalf of the breast cancer prevention partners, in strong support.
[]
Andrea Ventura: Andrea Ventura with Clean Water Action, very strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Avinash Kar: avinash jennifer kar with national resources defense council and also for ewj in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 74, 'end': 77, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jason Pfeifle: jason avinash pfeifle with california public interest research group in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Matthew Allen: Good morning, Mr. Chair and members. Matthew Allen with Western Growers Association, also opposed to the bill for the reasons stated by Mr. Brown.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 140, 'end': 145, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nicole Kenyanes: Nicole Kenyanes on behave of Consumer Specialty Products Association, also oppose.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Valerie Nera: Valerie Nera for the California Chamber of Commerce also in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Shestak: mr. chair and members, tim jason shestak with the american chemistry council, also opposed.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dennis Albion: Dennis Albion, on behalf of the Almond Alliance and the California Seed Association, opposed, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shreyas Jutkar: good morning, chair wieckowski and vice chair stone, and members of the committee, jutkar with the coalition for clean air, our group was heavily involved in the development of the sustainable freight action plan, and we remain involved now in the implementation of that action plan. we're also heavily involved at the california transportation commission, in a process that's somewhat parallel to this legislation to develop guidelines for california freight investment program, which in some ways is sort of a new name for the trade quarter improvement fund, but those guidelines really will direct the federal funding from the fast act. we're here in support of sb 4, and we're working with the author on amendments to address issues on the infrastructure side of this funding measure. and before going into some of the details of the bill, i just wanted to sort of clarify, if i could, some of the funding issues here, because there were some comments that came up when this bill was heard in senate transportation last week. and so i did want to try to address those questions about a lack of funding for infrastructure, and sort of a question from you, chair, about what the specified projects and the funding allocated, what could you really get with the money called for. so, i just want to point out that funding for infrastructure in this bill is about $800 million in one time funding, but through sb 1, or whatever that turns out to be, there's hundreds of millions more in annual investments for trade corridor infrastructure improvements. by contrast, this bill calls for $400 million in one time funding for cleaner trucks and freight equipment. there is additional money for those types of projects through the greenhouse gas reduction fund. however, it's important to note that the revenues to the greenhouse gas reduction fund are extremely volatile at the moment and so it's hard to sort of have clear forecast of the amount of funding available for cleaner trucks and freight equipment. so the point of all that is to say that there is more money for infrastructure than what it may seem here and also that there is more funding as a result of that, for projects like grade separations. which i know you had asked about, chair wieckowski, last week. so, couple of points on the bill that i want to make. first of all, that there's a particular need for the funding for cleaner trucks and freight equipment in order to help mitigate the severe impacts from goods movement on the environmental and human health in california. freight equipment accounts for about half of all emissions of cancer-causing diesel particulate matter and 45% of smog-forming nitrogen oxides. and this emissions profile gives a good illustration of how freight hubs and major freight facilities such as seaports, or warehousing and distribution centers are large stationary sources of air pollution in california, compared to what we may often think of as large stationary sources like factories or power plants. and just as one example, the ports of la and long beach emitted 14,000 tons of nitrogen oxide in 2013 compared to 68 tons from the hanes power plant in long beach. so these ports are about 200 power plants worth of pollution. and so addressing the impacts of the freight sector is vital for air quality as well as public health. it's also an environmental justice issue. and just to your point earlier, chair, we do all breathe air, but air quality is not the same in every part of the state. in the south coast and san joaquin valley places that are near freight facilities and near freight corridors are disproportionately impacted by the pollution from this sector. and as a result, these communities that are predominantly low income, communities of color, experience increased illness and death, emergency room visits, doctor visits, hospital missions, and missed school days. and to go back just a little bit, arb, between 2004 and 2008, conducted a series of health risk assessments to look at the risk levels in specific communities attributable to freight related diesel particulate matter emissions that are carcinogenic. and the researchers found maximum individual cancer risk ranging from 180 in 1 million to 1200 in 1 million, depending on the facility type and location. and so as a result arb estimates that there's a healthy return on investments in cleaner freight vehicles and technology. for every $1 invested in reducing emissions arb estimates about $3 to $8 in health benefits. so again, the funding for cleaner trucks and freight equipment are absolutely necessary. they're also really important pieces of how we're going to meet our 2030 climate change standard here in california, as well as the federal health based air quality standards for ozone and particulate matter. and the second point i want to make is that the funding particularly for cleaner trucks and equipment builds upon the successes we've had to date in california to improve the technology in the heavy duty sector. which still lags far behind the light duty sector in terms of advanced technologies that reduce emissions through fuel efficiency and switching to cleaner transportation fuels. and that's starting to change thanks to tens and millions of dollars from the greenhouse gas reduction fund. just a couple weeks ago we saw the first sort of handful of about 30 zero emission yard trucks that were delivered to a new freight transfer facility in fontana. and those clean trucks are made here in california, and they're supported with greenhouse gas reduction fund money. those money's are not enough and as i pointed out earlier the funding for those projects is very volatile at the moment.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 30, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 46, 'end': 51, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 83, 'end': 89, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2247, 'end': 2257, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jared Sanchez: hello, i'm jared tim sanchez from the california bicycle coalition. and we are in support of sb 4 here along with some of the amendments mentioned by coalition for clean air in their testimony. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Audrey Dare: Audrey Dare on behalf of the South Coast Air Quality Management District, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeremy Smith: jeremy on behalf of the state building and construction trades council, also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shane Gusman: shane jared gusman on behalf of the teamsters and the coast committee for the ilwu in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Jacob: Good morning, Mr. Chairman and members. Mike Jacob with the Pacific Merchant Shipping Association. We represent ocean carriers, marine terminal operators operating at California's public ports and we're unfortunately opposed to the measure. We would love to be supportive of it, we supported Proposition 1B. And we have significant amounts of equipment that would potentially be eligible for these funds and certainly are needs of transitioning to zero emissions.  We have mature technology that we can implement immediately and we'd like to do so with the assistance of the state. Unfortunately, the language that's in the bill right now precludes, ironically, the ports from actually taking advantage of this with respect to the infrastructure and equipment in TCIF. Because of proposed language in here which relates to our operational abilities to actually potentially have worker impacts from the introduction of new technology.  And unfortunately, that's a reality that needs to be addressed, both by the state and by our industry. When you upgrade technology, and you bring new equipment that has additional efficiencies and new types of operational requirements, sometimes you will have a displacement of workers.  It's a fact that's reflected in the industry collective bargaining agreement between the Pacific Maritime Association and ILWU. But the language in the bill right now precludes the actual operation of the agreement that's already been struck between the labor employers and labor employees in our industry. So that's a problem for us. We've worked and had discussions with Senator Mendoza on that issue. We've had discussions with Senator Beall in the pro temp with respect to the same issue in SB 1. We've been in front of this Committee and other committees on the same issue this year. It needs to be addressed, and whether it's addressed directly in this bill or in another vehicle, it's going to continue to be an issue that needs to be addressed both by the Legislator and regulators in this state. Thank you.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1601, 'end': 1608, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1659, 'end': 1664, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Guillermo Rodriguez: mr. chairman, committee members, my name is guillermo shane rodriguez. i'm the policy director for the san francisco department of the environment, and i'm here on behalf of the city and county of san francisco. i want to thank senator wiener for carrying this important legislation on behalf of the city and county of san francisco, and to the committee chairmen for the opportunity to present the item. as senator wiener mentioned, sb 458 has two goals. first, to create local flexibility within the state's beverage container recycling program, which will vastly improve redemption opportunities for the residents of san francisco. and second, more importantly, for the conversation around comprehensive reform. the sb 458 will serve as a pilot for the state, to illustrate how, with local flexibility, we can expand opportunities for redemption through innovation, technology, mobility, combined with traditional in-store redemption and recycling centers. sb 458 is a critical ingredient. for any successful comprehensive bottle bill solution. san francisco remains committed to the goals of the bottle bill, which has been very successful at incentivizing recycling across the state. and we are very much in support of comprehensive reform. san francisco considers itself a national leader when it comes to zero waste, and sending, our goal is to send nothing to the landfill. we think we've been able to do this with our great partnership with our curbside provider, recology, and all of our businesses in san francisco, all committed to sending nothing to the landfill. the bottle bill is a very important vehicle in order to accomplish that. however, as you've heard over the past 10 years, san francisco, like many cities, has seen a market decline in the number of state-certified redemption centers. the closures are due to a combination of factors. including the volatility of the recycling markets, limited physical space, expensive real estate in san francisco and other localities, limited parking to operate recycling programs. today, from a high of 30 plus san francisco recycling centers, we now only have seven. and they're all concentrated in one section of the city, which leaves nearly two-thirds of san franciscans with no opportunity to redeem their crv material. as a result, beverage dealers across the city must now either a, redeem in-store. or b, pay $100 every day to the state of california in in-lieu fees. there are approximately 40 supermarkets and beverage dealers in san francisco today, paying the $100 a day. which means that approximately $1.5 million from san francisco businesses are being paid annually to the state of california. in terms of in-lieu fees. for the past several years, san francisco has been working with calrecycle, in order to address this concern. however, as you heard, every time we come up with a different idea to try to bring new opportunities, we come up with the same dilemma, or obstacle. the bottle bill doesn't allow it. last year, senator leno sponsored budget language allowing calrecycle to create a pilot convenience program like sb 458. but again, in an effort to look at comprehensive reform, was withdrawn. sb 458 will allow san francisco to test solutions that are more suited to urban cities, like san francisco. as you heard, sb 458 will create mobile recycling configurations that are open partially for part of the day. close down at the end of the day, and move on to another location, to ensure that all geographic areas are served. as you may know, the bottle bill currently requires supermarkets, in their parking lots, to open a recycling center. the law says it must be open 6 days a week, for a minimum of 35 hours. it's a stationary location. we need new ways to provide convenience to residents. also, the legislation will allow reverse vending machines, which again create opportunities where you don't actually have to go to a location. and last, we think that new technology is available out there. oregon, maine, new york, have what they refer to as clynk systems, where an individual will put there bottles and cans into reverse vending machines. two days later, they're credited with that material. again, to make it very easy. and last, we think that sb 458 would allow for in-lieu fees to go back to local jurisdictions, to assist local jurisdictions in creating greater convenience. we think it's the right thing to do. if the resources are being raised locally, they should come back to help local governments be able to bring this forward. i'd also like to mention, it's not only the city local government working with small businesses who are in support of this effort. we've been working with a coalition of large supermarkets in san francisco, including whole foods, safeway, trader joe's, lucky, costco, and rainbow. who are all eager and ready to implement a local program, if given the opportunity. so it's not like we don't have an interest to move forward and fix things. we have local interests to do that. we just need change in state law. san francisco is committed to comprehensive reform. we've been participating in the administration's efforts, and we're equally interested in working with the legislature on comprehensive reform. and we hope that the ingredients and the architecture of what we have in sb 458 can be included in that effort. thank you for your consideration.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 69, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 236, 'end': 242, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 416, 'end': 422, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3011, 'end': 3015, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Marianne Zazuniss: Hi. My name is Marianne Zazuniss. I'm the third generation owner and operator of a San Francisco small business. We're a deli and corner market located in the south of market neighborhood. We received a packet from CalRecycle about 10 months ago, outlining our options in complying with the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act. Either pay $100 a day, or redeem cans and bottles. We posted the appropriate signage, sent in a signed agreement and began collecting. Four months after that, during our lunch rush, in which we don't even pick up phone calls, an individual came in with a large sack, and demanded that we count all the bottles and pay him out their value. Our clerk kindly asked if he could wait until the wine went down or comes back after our busy lunch hours. We were subsequently served with a notice and a violation of non-compliance from CalRecycle. So I emailed them and I called the designated contact CalRecycle to say the list they were very short and unhelpful and to say the obvious fact they have a very, absolutely no idea on how the Vacaville has manifested on a local industry level. I'm also a board member with the Arab American Grocers Association which represents 400 stores across the bay areas most of the corner markets in San Francisco. We have had members with similar experiences of sting operations and false non compliance. And many stores with limited space, we're talking under 1,000 square feet, are left unsure of how to dispose of additional recyclables as we have limited recycling bins. For a mixed food and grocery established like my families it is become a nuisance, not only a nuisance and a financial burden and public health hazard. We collect about 250 to 300 cans and bottles a week. It's a $20 minimum, out of pocket payment, and most of the time our clerks aren't going to have time to remove the bags that are collecting behind the counter so it's an additional risk on their safety. So to give you a sense we pay about $700 a month on a recycling bill which is partly credited by Recology, the recycling operating in San Francisco. However, its owner says it is that fee without adding an additional bin to compensate for the additional cans we're getting. It's my hope moving forward that this effort from Senator Wiener's office will continue to petition the governor's office, Legislature and CalRecycle. And I echo my colleague here from Department of Environment that there are qualifications and things that need to be done to make sure that this change happens, and a material change. To give you kind of a sense, the contacts of what small gross like ours are facing, we often get the brand of the public health and environmental bills and I had a chance to look at CalRecycle's proposed legislation and revisions. And it has a focus on the consumer and consumer convenience and I just want to have it be said that. That there is still a note of a sustained onus on the grocer in terms of redeeming bottles in the proposed CalRecycle legislation. And at beverage recyclers, small beverage recyclers also, hold licenses that are we have to be compliant with regulatory and state bodies and we often pay additional fees on street cleaning and such. In addition to regulations on how to sell a license which is for my dad, his retirement, his pension, is selling a license with a business. So we're facing many, many different things regarding health and environment and if we're doing this work with the intent of being equal brokers with small businesses moving forward I think it's important that we be aware of the disproportionate financial burden that these private businesses are paying, where state or third sponsored solutions are even low income workforce development kind of solutions for cleaning up the cigarette butts, instead of making us pay $60 a pack, which amounts to $6 million of the Department of Public Works budget. So there is other options for us. Thank you, Committee for listening to our testimony.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2302, 'end': 2308, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark Murray: Mr. Chairman, Members, Mark Murray with the environmental group Californian Against Waste. We're in support of this very common sense solution. I know this Committee has heard about this issue and is looking at it, wants to look at it in a comprehensive way. I hope this testimony has conveyed that there are two sets of issues facing the program. Some are urgently needed, common-sense consensus issues that can be done now. Then there's another set of issues that are much more complex, that there isn't a consensus on, that need to be dealt with in the normal legislative process. We would put this issue in that category of we can fix this now. We can fix it in the budget. We can fix it with an urgency piece of legislation. And so I hope that this Committee will be open to that kind of two-step process. Thanks.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debra Gore-Mann: Good morning, Committee. My name is Debra Gore-Mann. I'm with the San Francisco Conservation Conservation Corp. We're a 30 year non-profit environmental impact. We do recycling, we are the solution they seek, we run a charter school. We employ young people between the ages of 18 to 26 from disadvantaged communities, and we are doing recycling in the city now. We would love to be able to work with the Grocers to come and do their recycling on site. We do the recycling right now for over 300 special events. We do festivals and food fairs in the city already. So here's a solution that employs our young people, lets them finish high school and I want you to hear from them so I will bring up two of our young corp members.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christian Hernandez: good morning, my name is christian guillermo hernandez. and the corp, and essentially the conservation corp is important to me because it helped me get my high school diploma and it made me a hardworking student. so i want to like thank you for that. and they also help me get pursue or take one more step closer to my career goals. so i got a lot of things to do.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Drew: Good morning, Committee, I'm Kevin Drew. I'm with the Department of Environment, and I'm here with 30 years of experience in San Francisco, 15 of it running recycling centers before I came to work with the city's Department of Environment. I worked with Senator Wiener before he was a supervisor on this issue in San Francisco. And I certainly wanted to bring the message from the consortium, we had a meeting yesterday the consortium is Safeway, Lucky, Whole Foods, Trader Joe's, Costco and Rainbow Grocery in San Francisco who have been meeting consistently for almost a year now to try and bring those groups together to try to solve this problem. So you have another partner ready to go in terms of crafting a solution, along with folks, like the Conservation Corp who I have also worked with. Thank you.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 262, 'end': 268, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Aaron Brenna: Good morning Senators. My name is Aaron Brenna on behalf of the California Grocers Association, in strong support of this bill. As you know we've had bills before here dealing with this problem. We understand you're holding the bill as you're holding others, we just want to offer ourselves as a resource. We've been working closely with San Francisco, Mr. Drew, trying to craft solutions And like I said, if you need any help feel free to reach out to us, thank you so much.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 357, 'end': 361, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Danielle Inchon: good morning, danielle on behalf of the california association of local conservation corps. just wanted to log our support on behalf of all 13 of the local corps.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrea Ventura: hi, my name is ventura, i'm the toxics program manager for clean water action. this is a very important issue for us, and we are in very strong support, so thank you, senator.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Peter Calles: peter on behalf of the california hospice and palliative care association, principal co-sponsor for the bill briefly, hospice and palliative care are two different forms of treatment. hospice is a mandated service, under california statute that is designed to provide palliative care, physical, spiritual, emotional, and social care at the end of an individual's life. in order to receive hospice care, one must give up curative treatment. the median length of stay in hospice is about 17 days. palliative care is a permissive treatment. palliative care is to provide comfort for suffering. it's referred to within the industry as pre-hospice if you will and it is until recently been linked to giving up curative treatment as well. so if you could imagine whether it be a child, a teen, an elderly person, a loved one, you'd have to give up cured of treatment in order to receive comfort care at the end of your life and you're given about 17 days roughly in order to reconcile all that needs to be reconciled as well as just be given comfort for your ending days. what this bill does is it follows up on legislation that was passed previously to enable contracts to be given for plans to cover palliative care should there be mutual agreement to do so beyond simple curative care. so you could receive palliative care while still receiving curative care. the statute was a little bit stale in order to conform what that intent is to provide palliative care treatment to individuals continuing to receive curative care. the statute needs to be modified to provide for ongoing treatment. so we're pleased to be a cosponsor of this, happy to answer any technical questions anybody might have, and ask for your support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Automan Smith: smith with the american cancer society cancer action network, proud to support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Toe: michael jonah toe with providence st. joseph health and providence trinity care hospice in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Harms: jennifer michael harms with the national association of social work california chapter in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sandra Palacios: sandra jennifer palacios with the california catholic conference in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Phillip Batista: Phillip Batista, on the board of directors for the American Nurses Association, in support, and personally not able to be here, the President, who is a hospice and palliative care nurse, Corrine McKeagan, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 187, 'end': 203, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Yolisha Bonta: Yolisha Bonta, President of the Hard Knox College Student Nurses Association. Here as a nursing student in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rita Declog: Rita Declog soon to be a nursing graduate from Mount St. Mary's College, strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Bauters: thank you madame chair and members of the committee. john sandra bauters, policy director at californians for safety and justice and sponsor of the measure. like to thank the senator first for authoring this bill. this bill is a pretty straightforward measure moving in the direction that most states are moving in currently, within relation to more recent guidance from cms about medicaid eligibility for people who are incarcerated. current law, right now, we only keep people on actual medicaid for a one year period after they've become incarcerated and then we actually kick them off. and they have to find their way back to the enrollment process once they're released from custody. and what we're finding is that for people who are high-risk and highly vulnerable, people who are relying on prescription and in particular mental health services, while they're in custody. that gap in service and time between the time that they're discharged and the time that they find their way back to enrollment actually increases the likelihood that they recidivate. and so this is a very clean measure. it allows us to suspend people within the medi-cal program while they're incarcerated, but they're not actually removed from medi-cal and so that they retain their benefits once they're released provided that they are still eligible. we'd ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 53, 'end': 72, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Frank Mecca: Thank you Madame Chair. Frank Mecca, Executive Director of the County Welfare Directors Association. And our members among other things administer the Medi-Cal eligibility system. We're pleased to cosponsor the measure, we find that it's a much more efficient and less costly way to make sure that people leaving incarceration maintain the benefits that they need to re-enter successfully. For someone who leaves incarceration and then has to reapply it's a much more costly and burdensome process than just suspending their eligibility and then turning a back on upon their release. This doesn't make anybody eligible for anything more than kind of long, it doesn't expand the scope of benefits, it's just a more efficient way to make sure that people leaving incarceration can successfully re-enter society. And for those reasons we urge your support.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stanicia Boatner: Good afternoon Chair and members. Stanicia Boatner with the California State Association of Counties in support, thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Usha Mutschler: good afternoon members. mutschler with the california state sheriff's association also in support, thank you.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Chen: kimberly john chen with the california pan-ethnic health network in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Valdez: mary with health access in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Harms: harms with the national association of social work california chapter in support.
[]
Sandra Palacios: sandra kimberly palacios with the california catholic conference also in support
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mira Morton: thank you, mira sandra morton here on behalf of the california children's hospitals association. and, we were one of the stakeholders who is pleased, to work with the senator on sb 586 last year. the language of the bill it allows the department to go ahead and delay implementation of the whole-child model, however, at the time, there was no indication that that was going to be the case. and our intention in picking the specific date we did for the evaluation of january 1st, 2021, was that they would have three full years of implementation data to use in the evaluation, to make sure that it really did show how the program was working. and so this amendment will make sure that that happens, whether the program gets implemented now with a new deadline, or even a later one. so we encourage you to vote aye, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Nguy: Witness Linda Nguy with Western Center on Law and Poverty. We support the CCS a reporting delay as well as the ABX 11 changes. We've worked closely with the department and the evaluation of the ABX 11 reports and they have been very responsive in terms of changing it so that the data that is provided is a useful and so we support this bill.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kelly Hardy: Kelly Hardy, with Children Now, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Valdez: Mary Valdez with Health Access in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debra Miller: Thank you, Mr. Chair and Members. My name is Debra Miller. And I'm the CEO and founder of Cure Duchenne. I'm located in Orange County. In 2002, we received the most horrifying news that a parent can hear, your son has a terminal illness and he's not going to live past the age of 18. Shortly after that my husband and I founded Cure Duchenne with the mission of improving and extending the lives of all those affected with this terrible, heartbreaking disease. Our son Hawking is now 20 years old. He has had wonderful care in a truly multidisciplinary clinic where he regularly sees a neurologist, cardiologist, pulmonologist, endocrinologist, physical therapist, nutritionist, and rehab specialist. Because of his great medical team, he is doing well by Duchenne's standards. Here are Hawkin's words about his outlook on the future, I have Duchenne, which makes living a normal live hard, even impossible. I must learn challenges in college and manage challenges with my physical and mental health. Simple things like getting out of a chair, making my bed, getting dressed and driving have gotten harder and harder. I fall more frequently and that's one of the hardest part of the disease. It makes me feel helpless. We're so happy that many Duchenne boys are actually living to be young men. They have the hope impossibility of attending college, having jobs, and being productive members of society.  Unfortunately, as they transition into the adult world, they lose the good care that allowed them to get to that point in the first place. Instead of having a team of doctors that are knowledgeable about Duchenne, they are thrown into a world of cobbling together a medical care and team of specialists. The GHPP program and special care centers will help to ensure that our children see qualified providers when they age out of CCS. As parents we worry about our sons as they go into the adult world. How will they navigate their way to specialists that are spread out around the county? How many important Doctor's appointments will they miss because they can't get there? Will they have the energy to schedule their own appointments? We believe strongly that adding Duchenne to the GHPP program will increase the quality of life for these Duchenne patients that are blazing trails and so anxious to contribute to their communities. As a society, we reduce cost by providing better care and treatment and we improve the quality of life for these young men that have already had so many challenges in their lives. I speak for all Duchenne families when I ask you to consider how difficult this disease is while the kids are even young and ambulatory still.  Please think about these young men as they mature and they have very little use of their bodies, but they have brilliant minds. They deserve to have the best care possible, when they need it the most. For these reasons we ask you to support SB 643 in addition to GHP
[{'start': 45, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 469, 'end': 476, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 787, 'end': 793, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mira Morton: mira here on behalf of the california children's hospital association. pleased to support the measure. it will help ensure that the children and youth we treat today continue to receive the same quality of care as they become adults. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Evan Anderson: Evan Anderson on behalf of the Children Specialty Care Coalition in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Miclane Ober: miclane mira ober, social worker on behalf of stanford hospital and stanford children's hospital in support
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kurt Child: kurt, disability rights california, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Toby Ewing: mr. chair and members my name is toby miclane ewing. i'm the executive director of the mental health services oversight and accountability commission. thank you for the opportunity to be here today. although the commission does not have a formal position on the bill, it's very consistent with the work that we've done. it'll be finalized at the end of this month. earlier, actually last year, the commission was very concerned about reversion and fiscal transparency, in part because of work that the press had done, because of work that the little hoover commission had done and in part because of conversations we had with some of your offices about ensuring that these dollars were well spent and that there was a level of accountability and transparency that the public expected as part of the act and that you would have expected. so over the course of several months, the commission started to try to unpack what's happening in terms of the country reporting, what's happening in terms of reversion and where this process that's outlined fairly clearly in the law has fallen short. through that work, the commission, through a subcommittee, has adopted a set of recommendations. and in essence, what the commission has found is that, primarily because of the transition of responsibilities from the department of mental health to the department of health care services, around the same time that the legislature change the way that msh funds flow from a time when the state held on at the money, and then allocated to the counties through plant at the option and plant approval, to a system of almost direct deposit where the funds flow to the counties on a monthly basis based on revenues received. that the reversion policies that have been in place prior to that shift didn't apply to the financial arrangement after that shift. in response to that, the commission subcommittee has adopted a set of our recommendations that are very consistent with sb 192. in short, it calls for a resetting the rules around reversion to provide clarity to the counties. in our conversations with counties, they've highlighted that they have funds that they believe are subject to reversion, but they're not sure what to do with those dollars. and they can't spend them, but there's no provision for them to give them back. and so, what they're looking for clarity on the part of the rules that department of healthcare service puts in place. we're working with the counties, we're talking with healthcare services to try to figure that out. we've also recognized as it's outlined in the bill that for very small counties, they've received so little money, that it often is difficult for them to actually spend those dollars within the three year time frame. it's a combination of how small they are, and how small their staff are and the difficulty for them to find contractors who can do this work. plus the fact in some cases for innovation they might only receive $40,000 in a given year. and so, the commission has identified the option of giving very small counties, because of the challenges and the service delivery side, not because of the risk of reversion, but because they just face exceptional difficulties standing up new programs, that they be given the option of some additional time to spend those dollars. we also recommend in there, consistent with the bill, that counties be able to adjust some of their reporting. there's disagreement between the counties and healthcare services over the extent that they're allowed to revise their annual revenue and expenditure reports. and so the commission is suggesting that we need to clarify that, and the bill to do that. and lastly, the law says that unspent funds shall be made available to other counties in future years. that's what the law says, it's not clear how that is supposed to happen. the commission has the recommendation before it to do exactly what sb 192 would do be to create a reversion fund for three specific reasons. one is to highlight transparency in terms of these dollars. the second is to create an additional incentive to spend. the reversion policy is an incentive to use the money. and if it's surplus, if you can't use it or you haven't used it to make it available for other high priority need. and so, pooling those dollars would actually enhance that incentive and allow that to occur more readily. the third issue, as senator beall pointed out, at the best calculations we have, it's somewhere between one quarter and one-half of 1% is the money that is unspent. but when you take even that small percentage of a fund that generates a couple of $1 billion a year and you look at that accumulation of that small amount. it can add up to a sizable amount of money. and so, the intent is to use that money to focus on unmet needs in ways that would be prioritized on an annual basis, and the reason we suggest that is because these are very volatile funds. these are not sustainable funds because they are in essence surplus from the county's annual expenditure over those three years. so because the bill is so consistent with the work that we're doing, although we have not finalized our position, i wanted to let you know that we're doing this work, we're very supportive of the leadership of senator beall on this issue. and we continue to work with him as the bill moves through the process. thank you.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 550, 'end': 556, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4418, 'end': 4423, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5293, 'end': 5298, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kirsten Barlow: good afternoon, chair. firstly, i want to thank senator beall for always being such a committed and passionate champion and friend to the county behavioral health directors association, and really the full mental health community for so many years. my name is barlow, i'm the executive director of that association. but would note, that sometimes even friends disagree, and i think that this is one of those circumstances. for many years, the county behavioral health directors have been on record in support of clear reversion policy. we are not opposed to the time line that is in the act that requires counties to spend their funds in a timely way, or those funds revert back to a state-level fund for distribution back out to the 58 counties and two cities who use those for local services and because of that, we really appreciate that the commission and senator beall, are calling attention to this extremely long standing and frustrating lack of clear guidance on the part of the state to counties. however, the piece in really that we disagree with, is the creation of a state level grant program for those reverted funds. because from our perspective, what's really needed is a clear state policy to implement what is already existing law, rather than begin to tweak something that we haven't even had the experience to see how it works. the key reasons, really, that our members are opposed to the creation of that state level fund is that really, for the first time in california history, consumers, family members, teachers, law enforcement, and other local voices in your districts, really come to the table and decide what the priorities and unmet needs are for each of your communities. that's been a fundamental part of the value of the community mental health system, as reformed really by prop 63 and by creating a fund at the state level that favors the priorities that would be set by the state. this bill would effectively silence those voices, and disregard the consumer movements mantra, nothing about us, without us. additionally substantial sums of prop 63 funds have already been diverted to the state in the past from counties including over $860 million from proposition 63, to help balance the 2011-12 state budget. last year's establishment of the no place like home program, will also be creating 20 year mental health service obligations, for counties to fund, using mental health services act funds and to pay back the $2 billion debt payments for the housing bung that it creates. any further diversions of prop 63 funding from local priorities to state level priorities will be disruptive, we believe, to community providers, consumers, family members who we believe know best the unmet needs in each local community. lastly, we would note that we are opposed to having mhsa reverted funds spent on very specific programs or populations. we do note that the statute today is pretty absent on direction about that, and know that department of health care services has been developing a regulatory package. however, this bill specifically calls out prevention, early intervention, and innovation for youth and while we of course believe youth are important, there are some counties who would probably receive reverted funds, who might in fact have other populations in their local communities who are really at the most risk, and are most unserved today. this could include for example, veterans returning from current iraq and afghanistan wars, refugees to the u.s. who are seriously traumatized, adults reentering the community from jail or prisons, or adult males in the superior region, who tragically have the highest suicide rates in the entire state. additionally, we believe that by specifically focusing on pei and innovation is a bit ironic, given that the guidelines that have been promulgated for counties' expenditure in those two areas, have in fact, created barriers to them implementing services timely. so, the bottom line is really, we believe a reversion policy does need to be finalized and implemented by the state and that existing law should be held in tact with respect to the use of those dollars, thank you.
[{'start': 56, 'end': 61, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 260, 'end': 266, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 868, 'end': 873, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
 : good toby afternoon, toby mister toby chair toby and toby members, toby michelle toby obalcava toby with toby the toby los toby angeles toby county toby board toby of toby supervisors.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 20, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 21, 'end': 25, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 33, 'end': 37, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 44, 'end': 48, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 53, 'end': 57, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 67, 'end': 71, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 72, 'end': 80, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 81, 'end': 94, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 95, 'end': 99, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 105, 'end': 109, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 114, 'end': 118, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 159, 'end': 163, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 167, 'end': 171, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
 : daniela  warniso  and  i'm  a  mental  health  advocate,  and  i'm  also  a  child  who  experienced  mental  health  symptoms  from  a  very  young  age.  so  my  goal  today  for  all  of  you  in  this  short  time  is  to  take  you  through  a  journey  of  my  life.  the  journey  of  a  child  who  experienced  mental  health  symptoms  from  the  age  of  seven.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Daniel McLaughlin: Sure, good morning Chairman, Senator and Members of the Committee. My name is Daniel Mclaughlin, I'm the founder of the One Purpose School which is an elementary school in San Francisco's highest crime neighborhood, Bay View's Hunter Point. We are trauma central. Last year we had three lockdowns from gunshots directly across the street. We've had stabbings on our front steps. We call Child Protective Services all too frequently. 94% of our students are qualified for a free or reduced lunch. 55% are African American. 40% are Latino. Our students are not statistically supposed to succeed and they're certainly not supposed to do what we want them to do, which is to go to and graduate from college. And we get ahead of potential problems with our students with an integrated multi-tiered early invention approach that includes early socio-emotional assessments, comprehensive socio-emotional curriculum, and tight relationships among teachers, providers, and critically, on and off site mental health providers. The result of our work is that we didn't counsel out or expel one kid last year, and we haven't expelled or counseled out one kid this year. 80% of our kindergartners read at grade level last year, 80%. This is the sixth school that I've founded since 2001 serving low income kids of color. I'm absolutely positive that the multi-tiered approach that we use is what allowed us to get these amazing results for our kids. The challenge that we had was the huge amount of effort required to coordinate with various service providers and I think that the bill will make this substantially easier, allowing us to serve more kids more efficiently. So I want to thank you for your role in supporting the bill, and I'm happy to answer any questions the Committee might have.
[{'start': 78, 'end': 95, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erika Hoffman: erika  hoffman on behalf of the california school board's association. i just want to thank the author, his staff, we've worked very hard to be able to come in as a support on this measure. we believe that this will provide the impetus to get counties and school districts working together to ensure that services are provided to students. so thank you very much, and we urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Emily Higgs: Good afternoon, my name is Emily Higgs and I represent Seneca Family of Agencies, we're a provider of the kind of multi tiered integrated models that Daniel described and we are a cosponsor of this bill and strongly support it. Thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 150, 'end': 156, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kelly Hardy: hi kelly erika hardy with children now, proud to co-sponsor the bill, thank you.
[{'start': 3, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Mole: danielle kelly mole, california alliance of child and family services in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Longer: brian danielle longer on behalf of the national alliance of mental illness california in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lee Lowe: Lee Lowe with the south East Asia resource action center we are in support of SB 191.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rusty Selix: Rusty Selix, California Council of Community Behavioral Health Agencies another co-sponsor.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Judy Darnell: Judy Darnell on behalf of United Waste of California in strong support and I'm also speaking on behalf of the Children's Health Coverage Coalition which includes Children Now, one of the sponsors of the children's partnership, CCHI, and Children's Defense Fund, and we are all in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jen Flory: Thank you. Jen Flory on behalf of Western Center on Law and Poverty, in support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Ally: good afternoon, i'm jennifer with the california association of health plans. we worked with the author's office earlier this year and they've made some amendments to the bill and we'd like to thank them. we're still reviewing it but we have no formal opposition at this time.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrew Crown: thank you, mr. chairman. thank you, committee. crown, do you want me to spell, the name? crown, resident of porter ranch in northridge. members of the committee, we respectfully thank you for the opportunity to speak today. we've travelled hundreds of miles to represent our community on what we believe is a life and death matter. what you see before you is a small, but loud group of human beings including young children. these happen to be mine. the community who was forced to flee their homes for over five months are being inexplicably forced to sacrifice again. we speak for the thousands who can't take off work and make this trip, who can't drop everything to come to sacramento. we traveled here to speak about sb 57 that has just, but one purpose, to ensure that the worst methane disaster in history does not repeat itself, and that our community is no longer poisoned. it is a flagrant slap in the face to even consider opening aliso canyon with thousands of people sickened as recently as just two days ago by this decrepit, dangerous facility, and its incompetent and morally corrupt operator. make no mistake, aliso canyon even now still leaks uncontrollably. the argument of whether reopen aliso canyon has but two black and white sides. those against sb 57 are after money. paying off group after group to support reopening. those in support are literally fighting for their lives, fighting for their lives. you will hear the energy reliability argument is in favor to the opposition, it's biased. just proven by multiple studies, this argument is further dispel with the simplest of datasets. 17 months offline, zero blackouts, zero failed deliveries to local industry, but let me repeat please, more than 500 days offline, zero blackouts, and not one report of businesses without gas. i would like to remind the committee of the following government authorities that fully support sb 57. the la city council, the la county board of supervisors, the los angeles unified school district, the los angeles fire department, the county department of health, us senator feinstein, us representative sherman, state assemblymember dababneh. i apologize if i butchered that. ventura county supervisor, second district, reporter ranch neighborhood council, the northridge west neighborhood council. and i believe the northridge east neighborhood council, as well. the people standing in front of you today demand democracy, demand justice, and demand sb 57 be passed as is. thank you for your time.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 89, 'end': 94, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2084, 'end': 2093, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2113, 'end': 2120, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2143, 'end': 2151, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Crown: Hi, I am Jennifer Crown, my kids Ashley, Brayden, and Kaitlin all came up with us. I have two more kids at home ages 4 and 2 that did not travel with us, we came a long way to hear this, and we've been sick with all this that's happened. Just taking one day off of school for them is a big thing. We've fought this. We've asked our friends to fight this with us. A lot of people couldn't fight this fight, couldn't take off work, couldn't take off school, but it's very important to our family and we wanted to be here. That's how strong we felt about this, so it's very important and dear to our hearts, so that's why we came here, to be here and listen to our plea, to have this pass as is because it is our health. We live this everyday, we live with the thought of it happening again and being here tomorrow and the next and the next. So, please look at my children, it's their future. We're not going anywhere. So, thank you.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 33, 'end': 39, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 41, 'end': 48, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 54, 'end': 61, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Vickie Salmala: Thank you for hearing those of us that traveled hundred of miles without been paid and using our energy and time. My name is Vickie Salmala. I'm a resident and business owner in Porter Ranch. Although SoCalGas thinks Aliso is ready to open, my home where I live and conduct a business continues to be contaminated. I cannot lease out my home, nor operate my art studio, losing not only income, and destruction to the building and its contents, but most important, my health. It has become impossible to live or conduct business there. I drove here to emphasize what this blowout has done to me. I am not paid by anyone to speak, as many who testify to openly so are. I speak for answers to end the destruction of my health and our planet. If the root cause analysis is not determined, how can the present recurring leaks be prevented as well as knowing when or what will cause the next leak to explode? The pressure is low, yet last Friday, we got late notification of an outside pipe leaking I checked before going outside, the one monitor had spiked in the morning, but I still smelled what seemed to be burning rubber in the afternoon, yet no email or warning that I was breathing in anther leak until later, why? We are in a high earthquake and fire zone. With current leaks happening now, it is inexcusable to put businesses and residents in constant danger before knowing what caused this still occurring problem. Nothing is being done to figure out why leaks still occur on average two per day and how to prevent them. The root cause analysis will help give us those answers, more pressure and gas will not. What did the blowout do to our Earth and where are the chemicals draining to? Are they leaking into our soil and water? It is illogical to open a facility where no safety, fire or earthquake plan is intact, and people are still getting sick from spills and leaks with no answers. We need the root cause analysis completed before even thinking of opening Aliso, an action taken based on what is discovered. Otherwise, the people and the world environment will continue to be contaminated. I urge you to pass SB 57 with no amendments. Thank you for hearing me today.
[{'start': 125, 'end': 139, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Deirdre Palonya: Thank you, my name's Deirdre Palonya. I'm a resident of Porter Ranch, 17 years, and SB 57 was written to protect the safety of our communities and many, many communities affected by this. Sorry, by this blowout that are making so many people still sick. We have to exist with this toxic neighbor in our community watching what happens everyday. SoCalGas was allowed to write amendments for us telling everyone that they don't need a root cause analysis or to make any other safety measures. People are still sick. You could come to our community, get a couple nose bleeds. If they're allowed to reopen without knowing the root cause and putting needed safety measures into place so this never happens again. And others don't have to suffer, our communities will be at risk of developing more health issues, including many rare cancers that we have from SoCal Gas' mystery patent protected chemicals that we don't even know what we're breathing, and the children that are playing at the schools are inhaling at recess and in their rooms. Shame on you for putting fossil fuel profits before the health of people, of human beings.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Helen Natalia: I'm very upset, so I'm going to mess up. Bear with me, please. My name is Helen Natalia, I'm from Granada Hills. I'm in support of SB 57 passing without the gas company's amendment. This bill is about safety and we're no where close to Aliso Canyon being safe. The facility has been proven time after time that it's not safe. We just had another reportable leak and this is a reportable leak. According to the gas company themselves under oath, there's two leaks on average every day happening, and they're not reportable, but this was a reportable leak last Friday. And we had another methane spike yesterday morning and people are still sick in the community back there. I have family and friends in Europe, Middle East, even Australia, and they're telling me that people are following this environmental event since this was the largest methane release accident in the history of the United States. When I tell them that we still working to shut this facility down, they tell me they are very shocked why our government and specifically Governor Brown has not shut this unsafe facility down yet. I just want to let you and our government know that the world is watching you, it's not just us, the whole world is watching you. This is a big deal and the history is going to be judging you, so please be on the right side of history and do the right thing. We cannot live like this anymore. We are seeing different, rare kinds of cancer popping up in our community, and this is not right. I have had to rush my daughter to hospital twice, this is not right. You know what it's like, it's like someone is having heart attack and the Doctor is telling them we don't need to do angio on you, we know you're having heart attack. How can you fix the heart attack, how can you open the artery if you don't want to do angio? This is exactly what you guys are doing. We need to find out why this is happening so that it wouldn't happen again. Thank you for your time.
[{'start': 74, 'end': 87, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1049, 'end': 1054, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jane Fowler: hi, my name is jane, i live in granada hills and i have rows and rows of things to say. i wake up in the morning, sometimes i jolt out of bed, wake up upset because this is continuing for so long. it's physically crippling, it's emotionally crippling and psychologically, i feel like a crazy person now. every conversation i seem to have with anybody is about the gas leak because it's affecting me that deeply, my dog is dead. my husband all of a sudden has anemia, like severe anemia where the doctor was frantically calling him to tell him do not get on that plane because if you get on that plane, you may not get off. this is serious. there are many elderly people who are dying, dogs and cats are dead in our neighborhood. this is serious. this isn't about money, this is about us people, we want to live and it isn't just we call it porterer ranch, it isn't just a porter ranch, it goes to chatsworth, northridge, glendale, north hollywood, encino, the wind blows and it goes everywhere. we're polluting the world, so please find out what it is that caused it so that maybe it could be fixed. we need to know what it is. okay.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Matthews: I'm Richard Matthews and ask you to please support this bill without allowing any weakening amendments. I've been a resident of the area since 1964, currently in Chatsworth. I serve on the legislation Committee of the California Democratic Party. I am also a delegate to the Los Angeles County Democratic Party, which has voted unanimously to make this bill one of the top priorities for the county. This is not just a Porter Ranch issue, the gas has been smelled 10 miles away, 20 miles away, in places like Camarillo and Santa Corrida. In Portal ranch we get it everyday, in those areas they get it depending upon whether the wind is blowing in their direction or not. So the heavy gases flow down hill towards the Los Angels River those are the poisonous gases, those are affecting people all across Los Angels affecting millions of people, and the methane spreads everywhere, and that is causing a problem for billions of people around the world. Do not believe the blackout blackmail. My background is science and engineer and what I see are phony claims from SoCalGas that go against the standard industry practice that everybody in the natural gas industry knows and I can only conclude that their claims are fraudulent. They must know that the claims that they are making are false, because they do not follow standard practice. The PUC has made some wise recommendations for how to reallocate the natural gas that we have adequate natural gas center in all condition under peak usage we'd never used more than 4.5 billion cubic feet per day and without a leasehold we have capacity for 5.5 billion, so there is no problem with providing energy, the peak comes in winter. In summer it's even less than four and a half, there aren't going to be blackouts, please support this bill, thank you very much.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sherilyn Smith: thank you. good morning i'm sherilyn i'm climate energy chair for the tippity chapter this year club in fresno. i'm here to back everything that's been said by the board of house residents in those seated been most directly affected i strong empathize with them. i did find that those plumes of smoke of methane that had been referred to following the accident or during the accident affected me because i was terribly worried about my son who lives in englewood in la and it was obviously one of the areas affected, but it's even bigger than that. i'm here to tell you what i've been fighting for, the reversal of climate change and i'm sure we're all concerned with that. i want you to know that professor howarth of cornell university conducted a lengthy study, a very solid study that proved that methane is 86 times more heat trapping within the first 15 years of its release, so that's going on right now as a result of eliseo canyon than is co2 and we don't have 15 years. we need to really contain methane in every possible way from leaking out again. unfortunately, that accident probably offset a lot of the gains that we made in our efforts to reverse climate change. however, if you had a chance to prevent that accident, i'm sure every one of you sitting at this committee would have done something about it. now you have a chance with sb 57 to prevent any serious leakage from happening there again and determining the root cause is really critical. it's just basic problem solving. it's very important that it be done. professor howard, i'm quoting him following the paris climate agreement. the world and the united states in particular has one possible trick up its sleeve to keep the 1.5 centigrade target in reach, but it would mean containing methane. methane is a greenhouse gas, it has escaped notice in the official proceedings at the paris summit where the focus is overwhelmingly on carbon dioxide, but methane is actually a much more powerful trapper of heat than is carbon dioxide over the short term, which paradoxically means that reducing methane emission offers a much quicker way to reduce the total concentration of heat trapping gases in the atmosphere. now listen closely cause this goes along with our strategies in california. all right, he says that we can buy ourselves up to 25 to 35 years. by containing methane if for reaching the atmosphere, so that we have time i want to quote him to improve our political and social economic responses to climate change and decarbonized.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 708, 'end': 715, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1544, 'end': 1550, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Walker Fully: Thank you. Good afternoon. My name is Walker Fully I'm an organizer with food and water watch and we've been working with the community of the San Fernando valley for the last three or four years now, at least since 2013 I can personally attest to the residence claims of illness in their homes. I myself having attended meeting after meeting after meeting in this community, in public school and at home, in community space and parks, I can't spend more than an hour or two. I'm severe asthmatic and in all my life I've never experienced anything like being in a Porter Ranch home right now. We're actually in a good position, despite what the gas industry is saying. We're coming out of winter, and we're going into summer. Now they're threatening blackouts, but if you actually look at the numbers of pipeline capacity and what we are able to bring into Los Angeles in Southern California with existing storage and with existing pipelines we have more than enough gas. Even in a severe emergencies we are covered. It is a very rare circumstance that we would have to tap into Aliso Canyon based on the existing numbers. Richard spoke to them, but these numbers aren't controversial. They are listed in the CPUC reports. SoCal Gas lists them on their own website and Bill Powers of Powers Engineering has conducted at least two state scientist peer reviewed studies now of the real numbers of pipeline supply in Aliso Canyon. What we are saying is a lot of misleading, a lot of lies, from a company that has proved itself over the last few years to be completely dishonest when it comes to ensuring the public health, and the safety of residents, when really what they're here to consider is their own ability to make profits. The Aliso Canyon storage facility is a necessary piece of infrastructure in the Los Angeles loop for gas supply. It is a commodities trading facility. So a lot of people are making a lot of money off of being able to buy low and sell high and store and rent space at that facility, but we're public officials. We have to consider the health of the residents and their safety and I want to congratulate Senators Hertzberg and Stern for really standing up and leading the charge on this. It is phenomenal to see the response that you two have put into this to protect this community.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 44, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1123, 'end': 1130, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1269, 'end': 1280, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2140, 'end': 2149, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2154, 'end': 2159, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Todd: good morning, deputy fire chief, john jonah todd, county of los angeles fire department. just like to thank the committee for giving us a few minutes to speak this morning. again, the county of los angeles and the county of los angeles fire department, we were first responders to this gas leak and we are strongly supporting sb 57. we think going forward without having a root cause analysis or what caused the leak at ss 25 is not good practice. we also have other concerns about the facility primarily sizemech and the risk management plan, you know, the sam susano fault, bisecs all these wells going 9,000 feet. and i was just looking at a picture this morning of a well casing from a oil well in wilmington from a minor earthquake and what it did to that well casing 1,700 feet down. you can imagine if something happened on the santa susana fault, what it might do to several of these wells and cause uncontrollable leaks out of many of them. then finally, the risk management plan, as i said in the previous hearing, has a lot to be desired at this point, we have some expertise and risk management plans. we've dialogued with dogger and dogger has told us that they will make some adjustments to the final risk management plan. but we strongly feel that the risk management plan should have all facets included at this time, prior to allowing re-injection. again, we just thank you, and please support sb 57. thank you.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1135, 'end': 1141, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1146, 'end': 1152, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ted Light: my name is ted and i'm a consultant with ees consulting. ees provides a broad array of economic and engineering services to clients in the electric power and natural gas industries. the firm's been in business since 1996, and has offices in kirkland, washington and portland, oregon. i myself am an aerospace engineer and a certified energy manager with the association of energy engineers. i have nearly a decade of industry experience, including working with oregon's investor-owned natural gas and electric utilities on the integration of energy efficiency into their integrated resource plans. ees was asked by the county of los angeles to evaluate alternatives to largely mitigate or possibly eliminate the need to withdraw gas from aliso canyon. our work focused both on the near term summer and winter seasons as well as the longer term. my comments today will focus on the coming summer as that's the time most relevant to sb 57. ees consulting believes that there will be little likelihood for a need to withdraw gas from aliso canyon in the summer of 2017 and that even if such a need arises, the facility's existing supplies are sufficient, and no injections would be necessary. first and foremost, southern california gas and los angeles basin have already experienced a summer without the need to withdraw gas supplies from aliso canyon. this was accomplished in part due to the mitigation measures that were implemented in response to the situation at aliso canyon. the implementation of those measures has continued, further alleviating the need for withdrawals. second, looking at the risk assessment conducted by the california public utility commission, the california energy commission, the california independent system operator, the los angeles department of water and power, and the southern california gas company gives ees further confidence that withdrawals from aliso canyon will be unnecessary. as would be the need for further injections in that risk assessment, the authors considered four different scenarios of increasing severity. i'll walk through each scenario briefly in turn. the first scenario was just a simple imbalance between supply and demand and in reviewing that scenario, it turned out not to be a problem at all. begin to wrap up your comments, please. sure, i'll summarize. in three of the four scenarios, based on considering just 1 of the 31 mitigation measures, turned out that there'd be no risk of gas curtailments or any problem. in the fourth scenario, based on just the consideration of that one mitigation measure, the risk assessments own reports stated that there would not be a sufficient number of wells until the end of this year to pull the amount of gas necessary to mitigate gas contaminants in that scenario.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Issam Najm: thank you. good morning, my name's issam and i'm the board president of the porter ranch neighborhood council. i've traveled here to speak to you on behalf of the neighborhood council. you are put in a tough position. you are being asked to decide whether a risk is acceptable or not acceptable. it is not an easy position to be in. i want to clarify something that i'm not sure is in tune with everybody's perspective on this. aliso canyon is not closed. aliso canyon is open right now and has been open since february. it is not closed, we talk about reopening, it is open, it is open for emergency supplies. so, the idea that we are worried about blackouts is a bunch of hyperbole because the reality of it is, if theres a need, the gas company has the authority, right now, from the poc, to withdraw gas from aliso canyon to supply that emergency need. i hope that when you hear people talking about concern over blackouts because aliso canyon is not available, i hope you will tell them what about the fact that aliso canyon is available to address a blackout. we should not be talking about a blackout. this is merely a matter of whether aliso canyon is open for business on a daily withdrawal and injection, or is it set aside as an emergency facility? and that's what it is right now, and we need to remember that. there is no risk here because the supply is available as an emergency supply.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alex Nie: Hey, my name is Alex Nie, I'm the senior organizer with down at LA, came with all these wonderful folks up and I just have to say what Senator what you did yesterday pulling that bill is absolutely shameful. It's a mockery of our democracy, it's a mockery of California, where we're trying to go as a clean energy leader in California, We need to really trod a path to fix this community, make them whole. At the very minimum, have a conversation about making this facility safe. You went the complete opposite direction, you took that away, you took this vote away. We were making grounds yesterday. We think we could've passed this bill today, if you had heard it, but you pulled it and that is absolutely shameful. I want for everybody listening back at home to know that Senator Stern had nothing to do with this to assert that he was complicit in this is a lie and that is not okay and you need to know that we will be back in two weeks because he will reschedule this bill for hearing, we will pass it and we're going to take it all the way to Governor Brown. This is Governor Brown's ultimate decision on reopening this facility. We will not stop until this facility is closed permanently, but the very minimum, you can do your job and make sure this facility is safe. We have not even come close. The fire department is here as one example of the many county agencies, city agencies, that I support this bill, that's all I have to say. Thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 783, 'end': 788, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1059, 'end': 1064, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1083, 'end': 1088, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Tebo: Hello, my name if John Tebo, I'm a long time resident of Porter Ranch, I'd like to agree that it was dirty politics yesterday that happened, and quite shameful. So, thank you for letting us speak to I want to remind you guys that, thousands of people are still suffering symptoms. I for instance, if I have my windows open, or spend more that 30 minutes outside my house I get severe headaches and a chronic cough comes back. I'm now on high blood pressure medication because of the gas leak, because my Doctor thought I had suffered a heart attacked back in October, but let me just tell you real quickly about SB57 the first hearing. What I learned from that Jason Marshall, if you all don't know, he is the Deputy Director of that California conservation. It was quite interesting watching his testimony when he was talking that day. He, and he should know, because he oversees Dogger and he oversees EUC, and he told everyone in that meeting, and you can watch that meeting, that an amazing amount of methane is still trap in a soil around SS25. He even admitted that off gassing occurs. Off gassing is when the gas is release up to the soil perhaps through movement, perhaps through the rain, and thousands of people are getting sick. I think that could be the major cause and when Senator Allen asked him point blank, well how long will this off gassing occur. His quote was, I have no idea. Senator Allen then asked, perhaps 500 years? Silence. Perhaps two years? Silence. Perhaps two months? No answer, his colleague answered, we have no way of knowing that. Why is there still contaminated soil a half a mile from my house? I can no longer enjoy my house, I've gotta stay closed in with the windows closed. So I just hope people realize that, because I think that's one of the major causes. And if we don't find out what the root cause of this SS25 it could happen again and even have more soil that is contaminated. Thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 28, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 656, 'end': 675, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1295, 'end': 1300, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1406, 'end': 1411, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Adam Skagway: adam, california director of food and water. i want thank you to all those members who prepared and support this bill today and who were been well aware of the problems that the public utilities commission and on-going conflict of interest that we are very concerned about and we're concerned about the integrity of this process at the puc. in the words of our secretary of the state alex podium, our family was among the thousands of families relocated last year due to the aliso canyon gas leak. i know first hand, the anxiety that many are feeling about the potential restarting of the natural gas injections at the facility. i support senate bill 57, which will acquire a root cause analysis be completed before a reversal of the moratorium on natural gas injections is considered. sb57 is a common sense measure with bipartisan support. san fernando valley deserve nothing less than to know that the air we breathe is safe. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 384, 'end': 395, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Phyllis Marshall: Thank you. Good morning Chairman Hueso, Members of the Committee, my name is Phyllis Marshall. On behalf of the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors and supervisor Katherine Barger that represents the residents of Eliseo canyon. We support Senate bill 57. Considering the magnitude of the leak and the health effects that have been experienced by residents of that area, we urge this Committee to support SB57 and pass this out of the Committee, and we certainly commend the leadership of Senator Stern on this very important issue. Thank you.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 38, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 77, 'end': 93, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 167, 'end': 183, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 500, 'end': 505, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Christopher Castrie: Thank you Mr. Chair and members. Christopher Castrie on behalf of the City of Los Angeles and the office of Los Angeles, in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Rosenberger: Kimberly Rosenberger with Service Employees International Union. We are engaged on this issue. It's important to our members, especially those that live and reside in this area, and we will continue to engage on this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : just john [unknown] john the john comments john [unknown], john okay.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 9, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 20, 'end': 24, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 29, 'end': 33, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 43, 'end': 47, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 59, 'end': 63, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark Jasper: Thank you, Madam Chair and members, for allowing me to tell my story today. I am Mark Jasper and I am the grandson of Sophia McAllister. Sophia was the absolute epitome of the sweet, little loving grandmother. She was barely five feet tall and that was in her heels. Everybody who knew her absolutely loved her and what was so adorable about her is that she couldn't tell you why, she didn't know why they loved her, they just did. But we knew why. We all tend to love those who love us first, and that was my grandmother in a nutshell. As kids, my brothers and I and my sister, we'd just light up when mom would tell us it's time to go to Nana McAllister's house. We just loved being there looking for the candy dish, finding the stale marshmallows and enjoying our time with her. In 1989, somebody broke into her home through the kitchen window, robbed her, raped her, and murdered her. She was 80 years old. She was a victim of a crime that was almost impossible to even comprehend how somebody could do something like that, but do it to someone like her. We all became victims that night, our grandkids, our parents, our extended family, her neighbors who loved her, the Lutheran church where she attended and went for two, three, four days a week, and the kind man from Meals on Wheels who used to bring her meals, who was the one who notified police that there might be a problem because she hadn't picked up her meals for a couple of nights. The police were looking at quite a few people but nothing ever materialized from that. And this incident, it changes the way you look at the world around you. You wake up the next day, and things just are never quite the same. All of that changed for us, or began to change in 2004, with Prop 69. I'll never forget the day that the cold case investigator called me and told me that, because of Prop 69, that there was at least hope. Law enforcement had never let my grandmother's case go. They talked about it in conventions, in law enforcement conventions, things like that, and they always kept it alive. We knew that they hadn't abandoned us but when we got that call, we had some hope. And it was five years but finally, we did get that call from that cold case investigator and he told us they believed that they had a hit on the DNA. It would take a couple more months, they sent that to an independent lab so it could be further verified and make sure, absolutely, that they had the right person. Finally, that day came as well and I was told that it was conclusive that Donald Carter was the perpetrator and that they had already picked him up and had him in custody. I can't even describe, even 20 years later, what my family went through and felt that day. It was like a warm sedative on a wound that had been opened for way too long. And while it would never get her back to us, at least it allowed us an opportunity and hope for closure; that we could finish the story, close the book, put it on the shelf and move on. Donald Carter was subsequently convicted and sentenced for that crime. And I know that we're running long today, but if I can detour just for a moment to make an analogy that came to me a couple of days ago. I write business software for a manufacturing company. When I design systems, I write in a concept called exception management. What it does is it allows you to evaluate your processes not from the point of view that what's working, but what's not working. So you could focus your resources and time on fixing the things that are broken. Proposition 69, to me, was an exception management tool for law enforcement. It allowed only DNA to be collected from a small group of the public who found themselves involved in a certain subset of offenses. And to me, it was a classic example of exception management. My family and I all support Proposition 69. I personally support Proposition 47 as well, what I thought it was. What I came to believe later, and as thus my family, that there were some unintended consequences in Proposition 47, and specifically, that was with the reclassification of certain felonies that are now misdemeanors, and no longer qualify for DNA collection. If Donald Carter were picked up today instead of in 2009, his drug crime would've been classified as a misdemeanor. The DNA would not have been collected and we would've never had any resolution for my grandmother's case. I remember all, when I came into her house afterwards, and I did want to touch on this. When I came to her house afterwards, there was dust everywhere. I remember seeing the fingerprints and the palmprints around the kitchen window, dust on every piece of furniture in the house. And of course, lots of fingerprinting dust in the bedroom, and with all of that, not one single usable fingerprint was extracted from her home. I saw prints with my own eyes. I know they were not hers, yet there was not one usable print to identify who this was. Law enforcement had done a sweep of the area, I know they were looking at dozens, and dozens of people. Mr. Carter was one of the people that they looked at, but nothing ever came of that either. The one thing that was in that house that identified who the perpetrator was, and the dozens and dozens of suspects that couldn't have been in that house, was the DNA. It troubles me terribly to think that we have technology that doesn't discriminate based on race, or religion or gender, or gender identity, or political affiliation or any other group classification. All it does is say that body created this substance and there's no question about it. It identifies who left that material. And that was the one thing that was missing that Proposition 69 gave us. Everything I can ask for from California and from law enforcement was given to me. We can't get my grandmother back, but we know all of the details and we were able to close that book and put it up. But even earlier today in SB 610, I was watching the parents talking about their children that they had lost. And they said something that every family member that has victimized members in it say the same thing. It's not about us, our fate's sealed. It's about the people who have not yet been victimized. We all share an urgency that we do whatever we can do to prevent people from becoming victims because that never goes away. My feeling of victimization for my grandmother will die about an hour before I do, and that goes for everybody in my family. We'll carry it forever, but we have grave concerns. I just, in closing, want to say that one more time, is that the reason I'm here today, you guys have done everything you need to be done for me. It's because I have concern for the people who are not victims yet and we have the tools in front of us to determine who has committed these higher level crimes and who may commit more and victimize other people. So in closing, me and my family support SB 781 completely, and it's our sincere hope that you will, too. Thank you.
[{'start': 81, 'end': 92, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 118, 'end': 135, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 137, 'end': 143, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 640, 'end': 657, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2527, 'end': 2540, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2980, 'end': 2993, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4170, 'end': 4183, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5040, 'end': 5046, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nancy O'Malley: Nancy O'Malley, District Attorney of Alameda County. Senator Glazer indicated that in our own state through non-violent, non-serious offenses, there were more than 1,360 crimes linked through DNA. DNA is a tremendous forensic tool that with the integrity of DNA, particularly as a forensic tool, has improved 100%. And I will tell you that in my office, thank you to then Assemblymember but now Senator Skinner, that we were able to sponsor legislation that took those sexual assault kits out of the police evidence rooms and into crime labs. We further went to Washington, DC and were able to secure over $130 million for law enforcement to get those kits tested and what that did was that it put a DNA profile into a database. In my office, the first 100 kits that we tested that had been in the police evidence room, with the first 100 kits, we had 52 DNA profiles. Of those in the first weekend that they were put in the database, we had hits, 27 hits. So you can see what a tremendous tool DNA is in solving serious crimes. In California alone, of those 1,360 plus cases, there were over 197, almost 200 sexual assault crimes that were solved as a result of the DNA profiles being into the database. The bill that Senator Glazer is presenting to you today is a bill that helps to solve these serious crimes that are murder cases, sexual assault cases, and we have evidence from states that do collect DNA from misdemeanants to show the success of being able to solve very serious homicides or sexual assault crimes, or other serious crimes through DNA hits that are done based on someone's misdemeanor conducts. So there is more than adequate evidence to prove the effectiveness, there's overwhelming evidence to prove and to establish that DNA is a forensic tool that, as Mr. Jasper said, has no vision in terms of race, gender, orientation, anything else. So in that regard, we believe that this is a very appropriate bill that we're urging an aye vote from your Committee.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 61, 'end': 67, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 403, 'end': 410, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1227, 'end': 1233, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1782, 'end': 1788, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Usha Mutschler: usha jonah mutschler on behalf of the california state sheriffs association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jonathan Feldman: Chair and members, Jonathan Feldman with the California Police Chiefs Association in strong support. Thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Caliph Assagai: Hello again. Madame Chair, Members, Caliph Assagai on behalf of the California Public Defenders' Association, in respectful opposition to this measure. We've seen this bill three times now. And I think that it's informative that, or two times, I think that it is informative that both times this bill has failed passage because of the recent passage, still being recent passage, of Proposition 47 and the overwhelming support the public showed for that bill, I mean for that Proposition. Further this bill will add to the already disproportionate number of racial minorities whose DNA has been collected and added to the DNA database. Sure, while there is a color blind element to the idea of what DNA is, much more of it coming from low income communities of color is in the database, which leads disproportionate outcomes for those communities. As I believe you're aware, a number of studies have shown that despite the fact that people of color, and in particular African-Americans and Latinos do not commit crimes at any higher rate than white individuals, they are far more likely to be arrested and prosecuted for alleged criminal activity. Rates at which African-Americans were arrested for violent offenses and for drug offenses were each approximately 3.5 times the rate that whites were arrested for those categories of offenses. Latinos were incarcerated over 1.5 times the rate of whites. Because people of color are arrested and prosecuted at higher rates than whites, people of color are disproportionately included in the DNA database. Expanding the DNA database could likewise result in more communities of color being mistakenly identified as suspects of crime they did not commit, simply because they happened to leave their DNA at a place where a crime was committed, for instance on a cup or a napkin at a restaurant or neighborhood or at a bus stop. If this bill would place innocent undocumented individuals who are already concerned that they may deported from this country at an even greater risk. Also some believe if one is law abiding, there should be no real concern over having one's DNA in the DNA database. This is incorrect. Existing DNA technology permits laboratories to obtain DNA results from samples that contain as few as 10 cells and more importantly, from DNA that was left on items years before it was analyzed and collected. The type of crime in which DNA evidence is being collected is ever-expanding, and now includes property crimes such as auto burglaries, where DNA profile emanates from skin cells left on an item of evidence at an unknown point in time. In other words, DNA evidence is no longer collected only from items from which it can be clearly established that there is an association between the evidence and the crime being investigated. Increasingly, items of evidence are being collected and analyzed from property found at crime scenes, where the relationship between the evidence and the crime is not entirely clear. Additionally, it is no longer the case that only single sourced complete DNA profiles are uploaded and searched against the database. Today, law enforcement may request search of an inferred DNA profile which may be partially incomplete. Such a search may result in more than one hit or candidate which may potentially result in identification of an individual who is innocent of a crime being investigated or where a crime lab analyst may fill in gaps in evidence and submit for upload to the database. Consequently, when a DNA profile hits in the DNA database, it is far from certain that the DNA match will identify the perpetrator of the crime. Nevertheless, that person will come under the scrutiny of law enforcement, and will frequently be considered a suspect of a crime even when no crime has been committed. Because people of color are so disproportionately represented in the database, it is more often people of color who will be subjected to this type of criminal investigation whether or not they are responsible for having committed the crime being investigated. For those and other reasons, we are opposed to this measure.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mica Doctoroff: Thank you, Madam Chair. Mica Doctoroff on behalf of the ACLU of California, also in respectful opposition to the measure. I would echo my colleague's comments and add a few additional points and just start by saying that there's no doubt that keeping our community safe and bringing closure to the victims of crimes in their families is of the utmost importance. However, we do not think that expanding the DNA database in this way is the way to accomplish that. In California, being included in the database not only subjects a person to criminal investigation, but also potentially that person's family members as well. Law enforcement agencies in California have begun utilizing a controversial technique called familial searching, which extends the size and reach of the California database to include parents, children, and siblings of the people who are arrested and for whose DNA is collected. We have particular concerns about this practice right now and are fearful of giving law enforcement agencies additional tools to go into low income communities, communities of color, and particularly immigrant communities at this time to start investigating potentially innocent people. Knocking on people's doors, entering people's homes, at a time when California is taking significant steps to limit the reach of law enforcement, particularly again in immigrant communities. This bill is a discouraging and dangerous departure from that. California participates in the Combined DNA Index System, as well as the National DNA Index System, which are both managed by the Federal Bureau of Investigation. This means that when a person here in California has his or her DNA collected and uploaded into our database that becomes available to not just California law enforcement all over the state but to law enforcement in other states and as well as federal law enforcement. We worry about the privacy implications particularly at this time of expanded government intrusion. And lastly, I would just like to point out that the crimes at issue in this bill, the crimes that were reduced to misdemeanors under Prop 47. Many of them were wobbler offenses, which means that not everybody who was convicted of one of these offenses would have had DNA collected before Prop 47. So this is not returning us to the pre-Prop 47 state, this is expanding our DNA collection to beyond what it was before Prop 47, before the voters in California overwhelmingly decided that these crimes should not be treated like felonies. So for this reason, we respectfully oppose the bill.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Caliph Assagai: madame chair and members, caliph usha assagai on behalf of the california public defenders association. interesting discussion today about the semantics, the history of these definitions when this bill's really about circumventing the progress made in proposition 57. we know that the only outcome for this bill will be increased sentences, longer terms in prison, longer terms in county jail, and we have a choice to make every time we send somebody to prison, which is, how do we want them to return? and by providing longer sentences, what we offer is a disincentive. we take away an incentive to participate in the programs that would allow people to rehabilitate and to come out sooner. and so taking away the opportunity or the incentive for people to do so means that we'll be getting worse individuals returning to society after their incarceration, based on these offenses. many of these offenses are considered violent and serious, but that's really not the issue here. the issue is sentencing and whether we think that long sentences work. and i think it's been shown that longer sentences do not create better outcomes. longer sentences do not deter people from engaging in misconduct.  further, california has a 65% recidivism rate. we're putting them in and it's not working. so taking this bill, taking this proposition, undoing it by just changing the code section rather than really addressing the issue, and then i think complicating the issue by talking about a very narrow area of child sex trafficking. that's a great thing to try and work on with respect to services for those youth, counseling for those youth and treating them differently and providing them more resources, but that's not what this bill is about. this bill's about longer sentences for 20 different crimes, and we do not think that that advances public safety or improves the overcrowding conditions in our prisons and in our jails, and for that reason we are opposed to this measure.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mica Doctoroff: mica on behalf of the aclu of california here in respectful opposition to the bill. i would echo my colleague's comments and just add a couple additional arguments. one, california law already provides significant punishments for the crimes at issue in this bill. many of them are to be served in state prison now and the punishments for these offenses are often further enhanced by the many enhancements in the penal code. governor brown has criticized our state's criminal laws, particularly the number of sentencing enhancements, observing, and i quote. there are now 400 separate enhancements that can add up to 25 years, each one of them. and now you have over 5,000 separate criminal provisions. this bill is unnecessary given current california law, and it will only add to our existing overcrowding problems at the local and state level. for these reasons, we oppose.
[{'start': 433, 'end': 438, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jim Windberg: thank you, jim caliph windberg, on behalf of the friends committee on legislation in california, also in opposition. given the lack of evidence that longer sentences improve public safety or deter crime, nd given the fact that we are still under federal court order to put in place a durable solution to prison overcrowding, we think it would be ill-advised to start ratcheting up sentences. again, with regards to the parole piece, we think that we ought to trust the board of parole hearings to review each case and make the determination as to who's suitable based on the facts of each individual case. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Penarvis Harshaw: Good afternoon, Penarvis Harshaw on behalf of the Alliance for Boys and Men of Color. We stand in opposition of this bill.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Niccolo De Luca: Niccolo De Luca here on behalf of the Oakland City Council they're in the process of supporting the bill. I really want to thank the Senator and everyone in support for this. Last year, the Oakland Police Department arrested 162 Johns. Really hope this will help put a big dent in that number, so thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 229, 'end': 234, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Usha Mutschler: good afternoon, usha jim mutschler on behalf of the california state sheriffs association in support, thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mica Doctoroff: good afternoon, madam chair and member. mica on behalf of the aclu of california here in respectful opposition to the senator's bill. first, i'd like to say that while people of all races and economic backgrounds are purchasing sex, commercial sex. the people who are arrested for this activity are disproportionately drawn from low income communities, communities of color, and lgbtq communities. solicitation laws have been used to target people of color and to regulate the sexual activity of the gay community for decades. so given the biased enforcement of these laws, the negative consequences of sex offender registration, and dna collection and inclusion in the database will disproportionately burden these communities. under current california law, people who are on the sex offender registry are required to be on the registry for life. inclusion on the registry can make it more difficult for people to get a job, find housing, parent, and rehabilitate. it can also exacerbate existing mental health conditions and send people into depression. this does two things. one, it further disadvantages already disadvantaged communities. communities of color are already facing barriers to employment and housing. and there are significant mental health issues in the low income community as well. this will further exacerbate that given the disproportionate inclusion. second, to the extent that a person who has previously been convicted of a sex offense will recidivate. it is exactly this type of destabilization that will cause people to recidivate. so this inclusion on the sex offender registry will also make our communities less safe. communities of color are already disproportionately represented in the dna database as it is. and that means that all of the negative consequences that stem from the dna database including familiar searching. erroneous convictions will further impact those communities. and lastly, i would point out that penal code, 288.3 288 and attempted 288, are all already registrable offenses. and anybody who is required to register as a sex offender, also has to provide dna to the database. so, this bill is likewise unnecessary. for these reasons, we respectfully oppose the bill.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Caliph Assagai: Caliph Assagai on behalf of the California Public Defenders Associations. We're also in opposition for the reasons previously stated.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alicia Sanchez: good afternoon, i think, alicia with the california medical association appreciate the opportunity today to talk to you about why we think that this legislation is important, we agree that the database is a really important tool. prescription drug monitoring databases are now run in most states and are being viewed as tools in reduction for prescription drug abuse and diversion, and we agree that it's it serves that purpose and we, therefore, have been before you supporting an improved system, stable funding, and better integration with the physician workflow. and this stands to reason since there has been an increased emphasis on the use of the database for clinical purposes. so, but wasn't mentioned in the analysis that law does establish that cures assist as its first purpose, that carers assist health care providers in their efforts to ensure appropriate prescribing, ordering, administering, furnishing and dispensing of controlled substances. and the law establishes a clear construct for health care providers to enroll and what happens if the information is used inappropriately, but that doesn't exist for other folks who would be accessing the database, namely government entities. so, we think that it's really important to look at how law enforcement accesses the database and other states have done this, and we think that this bill helps clarify it in a way that aligns with how california treats medical information in other settings. this information if it was in a person's medical record would be subject to hipaa and cmia, and despite arguments of the contrary, patients believe that they have strong privacy protections of this information. so, the bill would align the way that privacy applies, generally, with how it is established in the confidentiality of medical information act, which generally requires a warrant to access the information. technological advancements have been the impetus for reviewing and refining privacy laws, including in here in california. take for example, the legislature's recent effort to determine the criteria necessary for accessing information in our electronic communications and that, then, the decision there was to establish a warrant requirement. the evolution of secures database this demands a similar consideration of its privacy protections and we urge your support today because this will align the information or the privacy protections with how california treats medical information in other instances. thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Megan Allred: thank you, madam chair and members. megan usha allred on behalf of the california dental association, here in support. our members have seen the growing and tragic trend of opioid abuse and we remain engaged in efforts to prevent the abuses, while still providing pain relief to those who have a genuine need. cda worked closely with cma and senator lara or last year's legislation regarding mandated system utilization, but expressed our concerns at the time regarding the lack of specific privacy protections in the bill and we are grateful to the author for addressing those this year in this bill. california is currently in the minority of states who don't specify in statute who is able to access the database and also in a small minority of states who house their prescription drug monitoring program within a law enforcement agency. this bill does not seek to propose or move the system or diminish its ability to serve its purpose. sb 641 simply seeks to establish the privacy protections in statute for the cures system that we already have in statute for the confidential medical information that the system contains. for these and the reasons stated by the sponsors, cda respectfully requests your support of sb 641
[{'start': 36, 'end': 46, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 350, 'end': 354, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Samantha Corbin: Samantha Corbin on behalf of the Electronic Frontier Foundation. We're currently a support if amended position on this bill, but strongly reflect and validate the sentiment shared by the sponsor. We're just looking for some clarification and strengthening amendments moving forward, but appreciate the work that's being done and look forward to supporting. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Autumn Ogden: Excuse me. Autumn Ogden-Smith on behalf of the American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network, we apologize for our late support, but we are in support, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 29, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
An-Chi Tsou: an-chi megan tsou on behalf of the california chapters of the america college of physicians in strong support.
[]
Dawn Koepke: Dawn Koepke, McCue, Koepke, and Associates on behalf of Crime Victims of California also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 13, 'end': 18, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 20, 'end': 26, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tal Klement: Good morning, Chairperson Skinner, Members of the Committee. Thank you for the opportunity to testify on behalf of Senate Bill 180. My name's Tal Klement, I'm a deputy public defender in San Francisco. I've been a deputy public defender for 13 years. And I'm here to voice my strong support for Senate Bill 180, which would repeal an ineffective and highly punitive three-year prison enhancement for those with prior convictions for drug sales. Based on my time as a public defender representing thousands of people charged with crimes, I can tell you that I've personally observed how this enhanced punishment has negatively impacted the most marginalized members of our society. While television and movies often stereotypically depict drug dealers as violent, sophisticated criminals driving fancy cars, living in mansions, and rolling in cash, that's not who I see prosecuted and subject to this punitive enhancement. The people I see who are charged with these drug crimes and enhancements on a daily basis are poor, often people of color, usually homeless, living in shelters or on the street. Most struggle with their own addictions to heroine, crack, pills, or meth. Addiction issues that are usually compounded by untreated mental illness or PTSD related to the trauma of living on the street or former service in the military. The problem with punishing people with prior convictions by adding three years for every prior is that the line between drug dealer and drug user is blurry. And can change from day to day, even hour to hour. Many of the people I see charged with these prior convictions sell small amounts of their own drugs in order to buy more drugs to address their addiction. A recent client is a typical example, thrown out of her home because she was transgender, she lived in a cardboard box in the Tenderloin. She had PTSD from being sexually assaulted on the street and became addicted to crack and meth. She was arrested and charged because she sold 0.2 grams of crack to an undercover officer who offered her triple the street value, $30 for a $10 rock of crack cocaine. We call it rocks of crack cocaine, but my colleagues and I laugh because we're really talking about crumbs. A gram of crack cocaine is equivalent to a Sweet'N Low packet. This person was charged and facing eight years because she sold a fifth of a gram, a fifth of a Sweet'N Low packet to an undercover officer. Faced with that prospect, she took a lesser prison sentence, even though I believed that she had been entrapped. This is not isolated. Others similar public defendant clients have gone to trial and have been punished with lengthy prison sentences. Michael, a 44-year-old schizophrenic with a crack addiction, is serving a 14-year sentence when he was convicted after trial of selling less than a gram of crack. Kenneth, a 52-year-old heroin addict who became addicted to opiates after being shot outside a nightclub, received an 11-year sentence after trial because he had two prior convictions that were 10 years old. Albert received 9 years and 4 months after trial for selling a single rock of crack cocaine. And this is not just a problem in San Francisco. A colleague from Santa Barbara texted me yesterday and said he has a client who's serving 23 years for selling a small amount of narcotics and having prior convictions. I don't see these sentences imposed for other crimes for which the harms are more tangible and real, like DUIs causing injury, assault likely to cause great bodily injury. There are no three-year enhancements for those kind of crimes. There's no reason to single out drug sales for this hefty punishment. Finally, another problem with this three-year prior is that it makes no distinction based on weight. You can get this three-year prior for having a conviction where you sold a gram or less or whether or not you sold a kilogram. It's just not right, the punishment is disproportionate. The punishments don't deter people, I see how this causes a vicious cycle. People plead guilty to their first crime usually to get out. They don't have access to treatment because of the nature of their conviction. And the next time they're slammed, and the revolving door to prison opens and closes for the rest of their lives. SB 180 is not going to end all the injustices of the war on drugs or the war on crumbs, but it's the right direction to curtail that vicious cycle. On behalf of the San Francisco Public Defenders Office, on behalf of the clients who are addicted and sell drugs to support their addictions, people like Michael, Kenneth, and Albert, I urge you to end this unfair punishment and vote aye on SB 180, thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 33, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 142, 'end': 153, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2662, 'end': 2669, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2825, 'end': 2832, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3033, 'end': 3039, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4565, 'end': 4572, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4574, 'end': 4581, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4587, 'end': 4593, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sandra Johnson: hi, i'm sandra an-chi johnson, i am the policy fellow for legal services for prisoners with children. and i'm also a proud member of all of us or none. but for years, i was in and out of prison and addicted to drugs. when my son was murdered, i entered a very dark time in my life. and the enhancements that i received for prior convictions led to many more years in prison then necessary, delaying the help that i really needed, drug programming grief and loss and counseling. i continue to use drugs, thinking that somehow this would take away the pain and the trauma of losing my son and other things that i had been through in my life. i was finally recommended to a program in san francisco, which provided me help with my addiction. that meant i was able to be present for my kids and grand kids. if treatment would have been an option, rather than imprisonment, i could have been free from the cycle of punishment. i completed the program that allowed me to get back on my feet, find housing, eventually attain college, and become the person that i am today before you, advocating for change. longer sentencing have not reduced crime, nor do it improve a person's chance of success. in fact, a longer sentence is counter-productive for many reasons. prison is a damaging place for many reasons. people come home old with physical, mental, and emotional issues which end up costing taxpayers far more money than restorative services and these extremely long sentences delay rehabilitation and treatment for a person. i am here today to put a face to the victim of this legal punishing system. i am here to remind you and inform you that we are human beings. sb 180 would be instrumental in challenging the destructions of our community. i urge you to consider passing this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Glenn Backes: Glenn Backes is for two organizations that cosponsored drug policy alliance and the Ella Baker Center for Human Rights, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mica Doctoroff: Mica Doctoroff on behalf of the ACLU of California also a proud cosponsor in here in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Endria Richardson: endria, legal services for prisoners with children, and all of us are none in strong support.
[]
Emily Harris: emily sandra harris with the ella baker center for human rights, co-sponsor, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christopher Sanchez : christopherwith chirla, the coalition for humane immigrant rights in strong support, and proud co-sponsor.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Coral Feigin: i'm feigin with the western regional advocacy project and i'm in support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Janetta Johnson: I'm Janetta Johnson with Transgender Gender Variant Intersex Justice Project and I am in strong support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Woods Ervin: i'm woods emily ervin, also with the transgender gender variant intersex justice project and also in support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 9, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 10, 'end': 21, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kelly Densmore: I'm Kelly Densmore, also with the Transgender Gender Variant Intersex Justice Project and I support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ash Lynette: Hi, Ash Lynette, with the Safe Alternatives to Violent Environments, Kehilla Synagogue, and the Kitchen, in strong support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bethlehem Desta: Bethlehem Desta, with Ella Baker Center for Human Rights, and I'm in strong support.
[]
Rebecca Gonzales: rebecca, national association of social workers, california chapter, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Leah Brendly: leah woods brendly on behalf of californians for safety and justice in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Emalie Huriaux: Emalie Huriaux from Project Inform, which works to end the HIV and hepatitis C epidemics in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shani Cogan: Shani Cogan I'm with Bend the Arc a Jewish partnership for justice and resource generation, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gina Clayton: Hi, Gina Clayton, with Essie Justice Group, a loving and powerful community of women with incarcerated loved ones in Oakland, California and Los Angeles, in strong support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anita Wills: Hi, Anita Wills with the Essie Justice Group, in strong support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Taina Vargas-Edmond: Taina Vargas-Edmond with the Essie Justice Group, strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ivette Ale: Ivette Ale, on behalf of Californians United for Responsible Budget, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Condovis Hartsong: Condovis Hartsong on behalf of the Alliance for Boys and Men of Color. I'm in strong support.
[]
Jonathan Feldman: chair and members, feldman with the california police chiefs association. this is a repeat from a bill last year that we posed, sb 966, and in talking with our chiefs about the issue of drug dealers and neighborhoods, i mean, we had anecdotal stories and the such. i don't know if we had state wide data that we had then, but it was part of our legislative committee, 20 chiefs on a phone call there were enough stories of drug dealers, and these enhancements being used that we thought were helpful to protect those communities, so we oppose it then. we have also engaged with the senator's office on some of the amendments, and other ideas that the da's have brought up, and we're going to continue to do that, and see if we can find a balance here, because we do understand that there probably is a room to find a happy compromise, we'll keep working towards that. but for now, we are opposed, thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Usha Mutschler: Usha Mutschler on behalf of the California State Sheriffs Association, respectfully oppose, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Isaac Alonso: my name is alonso, and yes, my daughter was missing for almost three years, but i still don't understand why for almost three months, yes, i still don't understand why is it so hard to improve a law, the law that is clearly saying that something is wrong with the law. i mean, because when they do this to someone that you love, when this happened, they didn't kill my daughter only, they killed the whole family. we are not living, our life is not living anymore. we are dead as well because somebody took the life of someone that we loved very much. she was in college. she was studying. she wanted to be someone. she had a future. and they said that it was an accidental death, but we know that it didn't happen like that. we know our daughter very well, that we are so sure that someone put ghb, or whatever they put, on her drinks. she wouldn't do something like that, she had no reason. she was a happy person, she loved us, and she had our loving too. so right now, i know that they just want to increase the time to find who did the dumping of the body, but we are still fighting, because we want it to be a felony, not just increasing the time, because that's not enough. somebody who is hiding and concealing and dumping a body like that is very conscious of what he is doing. he's avoiding the law. he's hiding a crime. he's just as guilty as the person who killed that person, assuming that he didn't kill that person, that he's just being paid or helping the other person to hide their body and dump it like that. he's just as guilty as the one who committed the crime. so he deserves a punishment that is as big as his crime, too. so we want this to change because i think it would be the right thing to do. and this is something that is happening like every week. he just went through that two months ago too. and i don't know you saw the news last night, right here in sacramento. if you saw the news, janet mahia, this happened to her last week too. i saw the news last night when i was in the hotel, and i mean, something has to be done. so i'm just asking you to help us. i know this time, it's not going to be what we want because i really think that what needs to be done is that it should be a felony. to be dumping a body like that, it should be a felony, okay? and i know you're not doing that right now because the government doesn't want anymore people in jails, but i mean, what's going to take so that you can understand we need to put bad people in jail? does it have to be one of your daughters who goes through that? does it have to be one of the daughters of the governors, so that he can understand that this law needs to be improved? what is it going to take? it's hard not to have someone that you love very much, not to be able to be a family in new years, in christmas, thanksgiving, just because one of the family member's not there anymore not to be able to celebrate those days that are very important for you. i know that whatever i do, it's not going to bring my daughter back, but we can save other people's lives, okay? that's why we are here. i'm not here just because of erica. she's just representing all the other women that are going through the same thing. we need to improve this. we need to make a change, and it is in your hands to do this. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1918, 'end': 1929, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3117, 'end': 3122, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Henry Garcia: Yes, my name is Henry Garcia, the father of Marcella Garcia. She was lost on January 12th and found dead on March 8th. They dumped her body with no clothes, So the animals can eat it. Dumping a body, I mean, extending the statute of limitations to six years is not enough. Just to think that for some reason, they find the person who did this 10 years from now is going to walk away? It's not fair. I think this SB 610 is giving the grounds for something stronger for these people, for these animals, because they dont have another name to do this to young girls.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 44, 'end': 59, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brian Lungren: Brian Lungren on behalf of the Orange County Board of Supervisors, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Usha Mutschler: usha leah mutschler, on behalf of the california state sheriffs association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Usha Mutschler: Good morning, Usha Mutschler on behalf of the California State Sheriffs Association. We support this legislation. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Greg Stuber: Greg Stuber, Legislative Vice President of the State Coalition of Probation Organizations in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amanda Wilcox: good morning again amanda usha wilcox here on behalf of the california chapters of the brady campaign to prevent gun violence. this bill helps further our core mission which is to keep weapons out of dangerous hands. specifically we'll help to disrupt the flow of illegal guns to criminals or other people deemed dangerous, are therefore prohibited from purchasing or possessing firearms. i'll be brief because most of my points were included in the analysis. also this bill was moved through the legislature last year. and the committee members here either already voted for the bill or against the bill. so this is familiar policy. but it stands to reason that someone who's buying large quantities of guns at one time, may likely be turned around and acting as a straw purchaser or channeling those guns into the legal market. in fact gun tracing studies have found that guns used in crime are very frequently acquired through these kinds of bulk purchasers. in particular that i want to talk about the issue of lower receivers. the frame of a gun that can be purchased, that's treated as a long gun right now.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 87, 'end': 92, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
 : And after the purchase, they can be build up into functioning firearms, very often and it's profitable to acquire lower receivers and build them up into either illegal assault weapons or high powered rifles with exchangeable magazines. These weapons are just as lethal, if not more so, than a handgun and I don't see any reason for them to be treated differently than a handgun in terms of bulk sales, or the bulk sales of lower receivers.
[]
Craig DeLuz: Mr. Chairman, and Members of the Committee, Craig DeLuz with the Fire Policy Coalition. Yeah, I noted that the author, during his presentation, noted that there's no need for any individual to be able to purchase more than one hand gun, or one long gun every 30 days. And when I look at the Bill of Rights and I realized something very, very important. It's called the Bill of Rights not the Bill of Needs. It's not about what you need, it's about what you have a right to do, and you have a right to defend yourself. You have a right to bear arms, and as enumerated in the Heller decision, with the firearm of your choice, as long as it is safe and in common use. My concern here is this, is that if we treated the second amendment, and if we treated any other civil right, like we do the second amendment. If we said well I don't see any reason why you need to go to church more than once a week. I don't see a need why you need to buy more than one book every 30 days. I don't see a reason why you need to email your Legislator more than, once a month. We would be livid. We would be outraged at the abuse, the control that this body has sought to put on a, once again, a constitutionally enumerated right. And I realize that some of you are looking at me now, like this is hyperbole, but at I watched discussions at the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals, nd I'm watching Justices ask these very same questions, and I can not help but look at this body and wonder, at what point is the California Legislature going to go in fact, too far. At what point are we going to say that we are now just going to accept the fact that the Second Amendment is not only not a constitutional right, or it may be a constitutional right, but it is now a second class right. We've seen time and time again where this body has decided that we will take away your free speech rights when it comes to second amendment issues. We will take away your due process rights when it comes to the second amendments. And now what we're saying is that now you're going to take away the right for an individual to purchase and own their own private property. To able to engage in a lawful, constitutionally protected activity, simple because you don't see a need for them to be able to engage in it. We believe that this is offensive. It is offensive to our constitutional rights and therefore we oppose this measure.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roy Griffith: Good morning Mr. Vice Chair and members thank you very much. Roy Griffith speaking on behalf of the California Rifle and Pistol Association. We are also opposed to this bill. In addition to the points my colleagues made, is we represent a huge number of recreational competitors, shooters, throughout California. Often times these folks do need to purchase more than one firearm a month, especially when they're newly entering the sport. I do commend that we, the exemptions for hunting, and for charitable organizations. I mean I hope that sales more hunting license in California, which would be a good thing, but for the reasons already stated, we are in strong opposition to this bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 61, 'end': 73, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alberto Flores: good morning, my name is alberto amanda flores. and i'm a graduated from a high school at the youth justice coalition. i'm here today to go ahead and ask y'all to support sb 304, which is builted on ab 2276. which is clarify existing law which requires an individualized transition plan for each youth in court schools more than 14 consecutive school days listed, which would include in each plan. i was first detained in eastlake juvenile hall in los angeles at the age of 16. the unit i was in was on lockdown most of the time. the only time we had out of our cells was for one hour of recreation. we ate dinner, lunch, and breakfast in our cells. we didn't really have anything to distract our minds. in school, all we had was just packets to go on ahead and give us for most of the time. we only had no paper, no pencil to write to our families. and when we did have pencil, they were tooken away from us. we had no books, nothing to distract our minds. nothing to go ahead, and no one to talk to all day long. just a five by seven room and a tiny window to look out of. when i was released from the juvenile halls, i was far behind school and no longer used to studying. and when i needed to get back into school as soon as possible, i was released without no connection to no school, no transcripts, no birth certificate. and still, not being able to enroll in school made me look bad in front of my judge. and also my judge and probation officer told me i had to enroll as fast, or i'll get violated and send back to camp. my judge and probation officer didn't give me no help to find a school, not even a list of options. i went to my home school, and they said that i couldn't enroll. i couldn't only enroll because i was expelled the year before and because i was coming back from the juvenile halls. i searched for a school for months and finally found a contention school that would take me. but by that time, it was already second semester. and they told me if i wanted to stay enrolled into school that i had to work twice as hard. and as well, that i had to go ahead and stay enrolled into the school. during the first month when i was in school, i was blamed for a graffiti inside the school. even though that i didn't do it, i was suspended. i was suspended because of the record that i had and because i was coming out the juvenile halls. i was suspended for two days. and i returned back to school and found out the school was being shut down for low enrollment. once again, the school and my probation officer gave me no connection to another school. and my probation officer told me that i was going to get violated if i didn't go into school again. i find out about the youth justice coalition by an intervention worker from the community. and ever since i've been at the youth justice coalition, i have found a school that understands me, and has helped me to pursue, and helped me in my education, and improve my skills. finding an education shouldn't be luck for young people, it should be a right. each individual transition plan should address the social, emotional, academic, behavior, and career needs for each youth. including a portfolio for youth in school that will go ahead and have transcripts, iep and related assessments, and analyzing the credits of completed and needed for youth. please pass sb 304 and protect the rights of all youth, whether we have been arrested or incarcerated to graduate and prepare for college and careers. education is hope, and education is the only hope that we have to escape the streets and prisons. thank you for your time.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Wanner: Linda Wanner with the California Catholic Conference, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Juan Pena: juan with the youth justice coalition, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pamela Gibbs: good morning madam chair and members, pamela alberto gibbs representing the los angeles county office of education. we in fact do not have a position on the bill right now. we have had the pleasure of being able to work with the senator and the sponsor of the bill on technical issues. and also some of the concerns we may have regarding implementing the bill. we've had very productive conversations, we look forward to continuing to work with the senator. so in light of that, we'd like the bill to move forward so we can continue these very productive conversations. thank you.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Cromarty: chair and members, cromarty on behalf of the league of california cities, in support of this measure. it addresses a concern that was raised during the campaign on prop 57, which pertains to the fact that the current violent felony statute is relatively finite. and there's a whole lot of conduct that the ordinary person would probably consider violent, that is by default nonviolent, and therefore eligible for enhanced parole opportunities. so we're in support of this measure.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dawn Koepke: mr. chair and members, koepke, mchugh koepke and associates, on behalf of crime victims united, also in support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 31, 'end': 44, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Caliph Assagai: Caliph Assagai on behalf of the California Public Defenders Association also in respectful opposition of this measure. This bill's essential effect will be longer sentences, more prison time for individuals who commit crimes. This sounds good, but it's been proven that longer sentences are not a greater deterrent. And in fact, increase recidivism in the State of California. We want a system where people actually come out of the prison system reformed, rehabilitated, and improved. And under this bill, extending the time that people are in prison is only going to reduce the incentive to take advantage of rehabilitation programs. And other programs that might address their issues and allow them to return to society as better people. We have a choice, clearly we've chosen to put people in jail. But we have a better choice and a more important choice to decide how they come out. And longer prison sentences, less incentive for rehabilitation is going to produce worse results for public safety when these individuals return to society. And for that reason, we are opposed to this measure.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrea Richardson: andrea, with legal services for prisoners with children, and we oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sandra Johnson: Sandra Johnson, with All of Us or None and I oppose the Bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alberto Flores: Alberto Flores from the Youth Justice Coalition, and I oppose the bill. And one thing I want to say is that my auntie served 13 years from the state prison at Chinchilla. And when she came out back to the society, she didn't come out like the way how everybody else, as this lady was saying, as they come out violent or anything. She came back with this community, and she has served her community and she came back to her children. And so there's many inmates that are coming out there with extreme sentencing, they want to come back to their families. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Yvette Alay: Yvette Alay, a Los Angeles Stakeholder, Neighborhood Council Board Member and budget advocate for South Los Angeles. One of the communities that are impoverished that would be greatly affected. I am in opposition to this.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Patrick Espinoza: Good morning, Madame Chair and Committee Members. My name is Patrick Espinoza, I'm the Deputy District Attorney in San Diego County District Attorney's Office, and have been a DA for 22 years, and our office is in support of SB 684. We've taken a number of significant amendments, and so it's the bill now is in a different form than what it was originally. And let me just start by explaining generally, what this measure is designed to do. It's designed to address the severely, mentally ill and most dangerous offenders in the criminal justice system. Those individuals who over a three year period have been mentally incompetent and cannot be restored to composite. So individuals who fall in that category have very limited options, they can not stay in custody, they can not stay in the state hospital. What this bill does is that it addresses a loop hole in the law, and the loop hole is this, is a Murphy conservatorship, is a conservatorship that is available for an individual who's charged with a felony offense, and a specific type of felony. A felony involving death, great bodily harm, or serious threat to others. That an individual to qualify for a Murphy conservatorship must not only be charged with that type of offense, but must also be deemed to be currently dangerous and must have been not been able to be restored to competency within three years. The quirk in the law, if you would call it that, the loophole, is that those individuals to be eligible for a Murphy Conservatorship have to have either been indicted by a grand jury, or have to have been already had a preliminary hearing, and been bound over, or are facing charges on a charging document called an information. An individual is not eligible for a Murphy Conservatorship if they were charged by those same crimes by felony complaint, but was declared incompetent early in the criminal proceedings before they went to a preliminary hearing and before that they could be bound over. What this legislation does, it closes that loophole, and identifies those offenders who are charged with the serious crimes, who are severely mentally ill and have not had a preliminary hearing. By allowing a judge to make a probable cause finding. And allow the prosecution and the court to order and place the individual on a Murphy Conservatorship. So long as there is a finding by a court, a probable cause, that's the fix in the law. There's a second thing that this legislation does as well. And the second thing that this does is it codifies. And puts into the statute the option of an LPS conservatorship, for this class of offenders. Previously, what we're seeing in practices that is done, if an individual otherwise qualifies, but what we're seeing is that oftentimes the LPS is currently not codified. And so this fixes that aspect of the law. There were other provisions in the initial legislation that are no longer in the bill. We've took substantial amendments and we've taken into account some of the concerns that the folks have. And so we're no longer seeking the codification of the credits that were in an original version of the bill. And we're not seeking the other issue which was what if an individual who can't be restored to mental competency and is not eligible for an LPS conservatorship nor a Murphy conservatorship. There was a provision previously to address the type of voluntary services that could be available for those individuals, that's no longer in the bill as well. And so our understanding currently is some of the folks that had opposed the bill for certain reasons, we've either addressed those concerns or we've focused the legislation to these two primary areas. And that is a probable cause hearing for folks to now be eligible for a Murphy Conservatorship and also to codify the LPS. And with that I'm happy to answer any questions the Committee may have. And in closing though I would ask the Committee to please, to vote aye in support of the now amended SB 684.
[{'start': 61, 'end': 77, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 906, 'end': 912, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1165, 'end': 1171, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1482, 'end': 1488, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1737, 'end': 1743, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2298, 'end': 2304, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3293, 'end': 3299, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3751, 'end': 3757, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Marty Veranacar: Thank you Mr. Chair and members. Marty Veranacar on behalf of the California District Attorneys Association. We are proud to be a co-sponsor of this measure with the San Diego District Attorney's Office. As indicated by my colleague, this bill both clarifies and establishes procedures for the trial court to follow when faced with a mentally incompetent defendant who has been committed for the maximum period of time allowed by law, that's three years, but who doesn't qualify for Murphy's Conservatiship. And we feel that this approach in the measure as stated, promotes both treatment while protecting public safety. We ask for your aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: thank you, mr. chair and members. ignacio pamela hernandez on behalf of the california attorneys for criminal justice, statewide association of criminal defense attorneys. i thank the author and sponsors for making the proposed changes to the bill, it does narrow it. because we don't have the opportunity to review the language yet, we just talked about the concept, talked about with one of the supporters. i cannot state whether we'll go neutral support or oppose, but it does signficantly narrow it. i've reached out to our expert who couldn't be here today and i think we've agreed to have conversations over the next few days to discuss the proposed amendments.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Margaret Johnson: margaret ignacio johnson with disability rights california. we too are opposed to this bill, and we will have to take a look at the amendments and see if they address our concerns. so we will do that as soon as we can.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mica Doctoroff: Good morning, Mica Doctoroff, on behalf of the ACLU of California, we had also opposed the bill unless amended. We will be looking at the amendments, and eager to speak more with the author's office. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Frederick Romero: my name is romero, i'm the state commander of the american g.i. forum, and the american g.i. forum supports senate bill 725, we need your support on this, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lorraine Plass: Lorraine Plass, Legislative Chair for American Legion today, and we're in support of this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Enrique Redino: Hello, my name is Enrique Redino, I'm the state commander for Ambit, we have over 8,000 members in our organization, and we are in support of this bill. The misdiagnosis of all this information, as far as veterans are concerned, is devastating that they're not getting the treatment, and because of this they're self-medicating, and that's a shame, that we need to support them, we need to look after them. We are a national organization, and we've been established since 1947, and we are in support of this bill in a great way. I served in the military for over 22 years, my wife served for over 38 years in the military and three years in Iraq, and it's a shame that we can't do more for our veterans, please support the bill, thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Margaret Johnson: margaret with disability rights california, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anna Hasselblad: Anna Hasselblad with the Steinberg Institute, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: ignacio margaret hernandez, on behalf of the california attorneys for criminal justice, in support. our attorneys have had clients go through this diversion, and it is working, we do believe it is existing law, and it's been phenomenally successful.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Caliph Assagai: Caliph Assagai, on behalf of the California Public Defenders' Association, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gale Stuart: gale ignacio stuart on behalf san diego county district attorney bonnie dumanis, we are opposed for the reasons stated.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 65, 'end': 79, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Anthony Trong: Good morning, and thank you Madam Chair and members of the Public Safety Committee. Thank you for giving me this opportunity this morning to speak on behalf of Senate Bill 586. My name is Anthony Trong, and I'm a member of the Federal Law Enforcement Officers Association, also known as FLEOA. For those members who are unaware of FLEOA, it is one of the largest nonprofit nonpartisan professional Association exclusively representing federal law enforcement officers. FLEOA represents more than 25,000 federal law enforcement officers from 65 different agencies. And I have been a member of FLEOA since 2008 and I have just over 11 years of experience combined working in New York and in California. I am here today to represent FLEOA and its members. FLEOA provides a legislative voice for the federal law enforcement community, and is in frequently contact with members of congressional members and the Committee. FLEOA monitors a lot of legislative issues that impact federal law enforcement officers. Just some statistics that I thought was pretty alarming. According to the Uniform Crime Reporting, provided by the FBI in 2014, there were 1,410 reported incidents of assault, or death of federal law enforcement. And then in 2015, there were 1,336. These are alarming statistics for federal law enforcement as we are constantly coming across harm and putting ourselves at risk every day when we do our jobs. And a story I just wanted to share with all of the Members of the Committee has to deal with my friend who in 2009 the incident occurred, he went out to go and arrest an individual for violating federal law. When he got to the scene, he encountered the girlfriend of the target and when he arrested that person, it seemed like as if she was very cooperative. Once he placed her in handcuffs and into the transportation vehicle, she immediately became irate, she blocked him, she interfered with his job. And essentially balled up her fist and struck him in the face and in the nose. She was subsequently arrested and charged under federal law. However, the charges were dismissed and in the comments section there was just dismiss in the interest of justice. To me, Madam Chair, there was no justice here. I'm here to respectfully request an aye. Your yes vote for Senate Bill 586. It's important to all federal law enforcement officers, not just to Homeland Security. We constantly place ourselves in harm's way everyday, protecting this nation, its citizens, and making California safe. The federal law enforcement officers protect elected officials, citizens and apprehend the most violent criminals. After working with the state local partners, federal peace officers also secured the transportation infrastructure, enforce conservation laws and prevent attacks vital to California landmarks. Just in closing, I'm just hoping that I can get a yes vote on Senate Bill 586 and I appreciate this opportunity to speak.
[{'start': 188, 'end': 201, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Usha Mutschler: Good morning, Usha Mutschler on behalf of the California State Sheriffs' Association in support, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Caliph Assagai: Madame Chair and members Caliph Assagai on behalf of the California Public Defenders Association and respectful opposition to this measure. We understand the dangers faced by federal law enforcement officers and federal peace officers in the course of conducting their duties. However, we believe that this bill, if expanded, will have negative consequences on individuals now who are trying to protect their rights against unreasonable search and seizure by ICE agents. As we know, there are many efforts to Deport individuals taking place now. ICE agents showing up in courthouses and these various places, and in some cases their search and seizure of these individuals is unjustified. By increasing the penalties, we're going to criminalize conduct that might be taken in an effort to protect an individuals constitutional rights. We know that aggressive actions are being taken today and we believe that this bill doesn't help the situation, and that it would undermine efforts to empower individuals not to submit to unlawful searches and arrests when confronted by ICE agents. And so, for those reasons, we are opposed to this measure.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: good morning madam chair members. hernandez on behalf of the california attorneys for criminal justice, a state wide association of criminal defense attorneys. we are opposed largely because this is something that is typically handled at the federal level and there may be some jurisdictional issues and we're trying to switch between state and federal courts. for those reasons, we're opposed.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : Good morning, my name's Eddie Flores.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 36, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lizzie Buko: lizzie with the aclu of california, we're also in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Garvis Herchelnet: Garvis Herchelnet, behalf of the Boys and Men of Color, looking to oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gerald Fineman: good morning, madame chair, members of the committee. gerald, chief deputy district attorney of riverside county. this bill simply reframes existing law. it's the same thing this legislature has done with our driving under the influence laws where we've separated out driving with alcohol and driving with drugs and driving with drugs and alcohol combined. and the same thing we've done with assault, separating assault with force likely to cause great bodily injury from assault with a dangerous or deadly weapon. so we're not creating a new crime. it's not designed to increase state prison populations, but it is designed to identify our most serious offenders. there is a clear connection between batterers who strangle their victims and homicide. a clear connection between batterers who strangle their victims and batterers who inflict violence upon law enforcement and upon the public at large. with less force than it takes to crack an egg, you can cut off the flow of blood to the brain. that can cause death within two minutes. not the four minutes you learned of when you may have gone to school, that two minute period is based on actual videos of the hangings that we've found that have been published on the internet and been studied by doctors. so it's an incredibly quick and effective tool for the batterer to use to control the victim. this leaves no visible injury in almost 50% of the cases. and it has long-term consequences, as well. we're seeing victims that suffer from a thyroid condition, from stroke, from the same brain trauma that we see on our nfl players. this is a violent form of injury, and those batterers that strangle their victims, strangle them not kill, but to prove they can kill. and what's more compelling, if you look at esteban santiago, the man charged in the miami airport shooting, he had a prior strangulation case out of the state of alaska. and the recent shooter in san bernardino school murder suicide, cedric anderson, also had a prior incident where he had suffocated his victim, which is another form of strangulation. because it is such a violent form, it deserves special recognition. therefore, i ask for your aye vote. thank you.
[{'start': 54, 'end': 60, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1765, 'end': 1781, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1956, 'end': 1971, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Usha Mutschler: Good morning, Madam Chair and members. Usha Mutschler, on behalf of the California State Sheriffs Association in support, thank you.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: Madam Chair and members, Ignacio Hernandez on behalf of the California Attorneys for Criminal Justice, and we do have an oppose. And I want to clarify our position, we recognize the seriousness of these types of offenses. We understand what the bill is trying to do, just kind of separate out in a subdivision. What our concern is is kind of with a larger problem that we've been seeing in prosecutor offices throughout the state, and that is that prosecutors are starting to stack charges. And so while a prosecutor will charge for this subdivision, we are concerned that some offices will also charge other offenses on top of it, so even though it's being separated out. And we've been seeing this kind of a growing pattern, and that's mainly our concern. I know it's not the intent of the bill, certainly not something that they contemplated. We are just trying to figure out how do we deal with it on the ground. We've been in conversations with a county last week, I won't name it but at some point we will, where they're starting to see the rate of convictions drop significantly in part because DA's now are starting to add on different charges. So, you may have a subdivision B, subdivision D, subdivision E and it's making it more difficult to settle cases and they're going to trial. So, we're just concerned on a larger scale not necessarily with what this bill's trying to do, but it's something that we want to identify some way to ensure the DAS won't take these subdivisions and stack other subdivisions or other code sections going forward. So it's more of a conceptual opposition and not necessarily posed to what the intent of the bill is. So I just wanted to make that statement and thank the author for trying to make the law a little bit more clear, especially on offenses that are as serious as this.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: Hi, Kyle Jones with Sierra Club, California and also on behalf of the California League of Conservation Voters in support, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Goulden: Sarah Goulden on behalf of Valley Clean Air now in support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Victoria Rome: Victoria Rome with the Natural Resources Defense Council in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sean Buffalo: good afternoon chair, committee members. my name's sean, i'm the policy director for the california coastkeeper alliance. on behalf of the alliance, we'd just like to thank assemblymember mullin for his leadership on this issue, and we strongly support ab 388. this bill could not come at a better time or a more critical time as we watch the trump administration threaten to cut funding for california. more specifically, we're seeing that his proposed budget looks to eliminate funding, $4.8 million of the epa's program, to help restore california's wetlands. ab 388 would allow california to leverage existing federal funding while we're getting other funding cuts statewide. there's an enormous need for sediment in california. in the bay area alone, 12.5 million cubic yards of dredged sediment is needed for current and ongoing wetland restoration projects, and statewide there's an estimate of 170 million cubic yards in the next four years. ab 388 will go a long way to helping california mitigate our greenhouse gas emissions from existing wetland restoration projects. we know that wetlands have among the most effective carbon sequestration of any type of habitat that there is, and the natural resource agencies that have been doing this wetland restoration, notice that restoration sites using dredged sediment, instead of natural sedimentation, have a much greater and quicker success rate of building that habitat value. finally, ab 388 would help provide california with multiple benefits, ab 388 not only allows us to leverage our federal funding, but it also provides an adaptation strategy for sea level rise through wetland buffers, and so, with that, we strongly support the bill and ask for your aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 51, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 188, 'end': 194, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ian Wren: Ian Wren, staff scientist for the San Francisco Baykeeper, just here to answer any questions you might have, and to support the comments from my colleague.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Juan Doe: Juan Doe on behalf of Audubon California in support, also on behalf of the California League of Conservation Voters in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Steve Evans: madam chair, committee members, my name's evans representing friends of the river. we're a statewide river conservation group here in california, and a sponsor of ab 975, which of course we strongly support. as the author noted, this is a pretty modest and simple bill. it brings the state wild and scenic river system in line with the federal system in terms of the area protected up to a quarter mile on each side of the river and adding additional values for protection. just a case in point in that last issue in terms of values, if you've ever been to the bridgeport covered bridge on the south yuba river. that's a historic bridge, it undoubtedly would be considered an extraordinary historic value. it's the longest remaining historic covered bridge in the united states. and yet, it's not officially protected in the state system because the state law doesn't mention historic value. so we're just adding those values that the federal law already recognizes. bill kerr, who's a well known biologist and helped write the 1972 law that established the california wild and scenic river system. which was authored by senator peter behr, a republican from marin county and signed by governor ronald reagan. he strongly supports this bill and notes that this bill will continue significantly to the health and recovery of fish and wildlife species in the river corridors in several of california's wild and scenic rivers. you can't find a biologist, ecologist, or a hydrologist anywhere who agrees that a river ends at the first line of riparian habitats. so expanding that corridor is very important, we urge your yes vote on this, thank you.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 967, 'end': 976, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1129, 'end': 1139, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1195, 'end': 1208, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark Smith: Madam Chair and members, Mark Smith on behalf of Cal Trout representing California's Trout and Steelhead fishermen and women. We were there in 1972 when the California Wild and Scenic Rivers Act was implemented. We're happy to be here in Committee today to support this bill. As has been previously mentioned, it brings us in a little bit better alignment with some of the federal standards and the acknowledgement that the habitat doesn't just stop right there at the first riparian line. For those reasons, we're happy to be in support of this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 49, 'end': 58, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Victoria Rome: Again, Victoria Rome with NRDC in support.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Juano Tomidano: juano with wildlife california in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: kyle jonah jones at sierra club california in support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Fearing: Jennifer Fearing, on behalf of Defenders of Wildlife in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vince Fong: I'm Assembly Vince Fong, Vice Chair of Transportation. Thank you Madam Chair and members. AB 278 will streamline needed repairs for existing roads and highways without sacrificing environmental safety. The recent storms that have wreaked havoc on our roads are a wake up call about the dire state of our transportation infrastructure. Now while the debate over road funding continues, It is equally important that we also discuss the importance of reducing the barriers to prevent or delay the needed improvements to our road system. Now CEQA is an important for the protections of our environment, but in this bill we'll maintain those protections for new road projects. But AB 278 is a common sense measure that only applies to existing projects that have already gone through the CEQA rigorous process. This is a proposal that has been offered by both Democrats and Republicans, I strongly urge the Committee its thoughtful consideration to do what is right for the Californians we represent. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicole Wordelman: nicole on behalf of the county of san bernardino in support. ab 278 balances the public's interest in repairing and maintaining existing transportation infrastructure against the need to protect california's natural resources. the bill will require that any project eligible for the exemption would still have to comply with regulatory requirements to protect water quality and endangered species, as well as permits required by any other state or federal law. the ceqa exemption would help to expedite projects to maintain existing transportation infrastructure within the existing right of way that do not require regulatory permits, reducing the funding short fall that local governments currently face.
[]
Louinda Lacey: thank you madam chair and committee, louinda kyle lacey on behalf of california chamber of commerce in support of ab 278. one of the main differences between a categorical exemption under ceqa and a statutory exemption is that a categorical exemption is still subject to various exception. and that raises the cost of compliance and it also opens it up to potentially frivolous lawsuits. so to evaluate those exceptions you are incurring cost you are also increasing the timeline in order to get those infrastructures done. so the statutory excretion proposed here provides more certainty and protection from lawsuits and a more streamlined process for a basic maintenance of our roads and highways which equates to effective repairs and faster completion times. and we believe that this is inline with the governor's fix it first proposed investments to repair our neighborhood roads state highways and bridges, and therefore the calchamber supports this effort to expedite ceqa review for important public work projects. thank you very much.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Audrey Durfor: hi durfor on behalf of the ventura county transportation commission and the san bernardino county transportation authority in support.
[{'start': 3, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Van Dyke: david louinda van dyke, in with the california transportation commission, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kurt Blackburn: kurt david blackburn on behalf of the western states trucking association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Charlie Ray: charlie kurt ray with the california construction industrial materials association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: Good afternoon, Chair and members. Kyle Jones with Sierra Club California. And also, on behalf of CLCB in opposition today. We are strong fans of the California Environmental Quality Act because it discloses environmental impacts to public so that they know what's happening around them, and requires polluters to mitigate those impacts. And so those impacts don't fall on the public at large. We don't feel that this bill is necessary at all, as we noted in our letter, and that's also noted in the analysis. There are numerous exemptions under CEQA already for maintenance of roadways, including repairs after certain kinds of disasters that have hit our transportation system from these storms. As a result, the analysis of SB1248 last year pointed out that Caltrans was able to use exemptions for 90% of their projects, 88% of those using categorical exemption successfully. So we really don't think that there's a need for this bill at all. Additionally, within right of ways, there could still be impacts. Particularly, this bill exempts work done on bridges and culverts, which can present particular challenges to our water quality issues. And I think that compliance with existing law is no excuse to waive SQA. SQA was supposed to be there in addition to existing law or else it wouldn't make sense to have it in the first place. The public has a right to know about what is happening around them, and polluters should have to pay for their damages. Thank you.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Victoria Rome: Thank you. Good afternoon, Victoria Rome, with the Natural Resource Defense Council. Also in opposition for the reasons stated by Mr. Jones. Thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 134, 'end': 139, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cesar Diaz: madam chairman, cesar charlie diaz on behalf of the state building and construction council. while we appreciate the author's efforts to look at road construction and expediting, we believe this is what goes way beyond that. there are other proposals, financing first. this also goes beyond fix it first. there's already numerous sqa exemptions for road construction, and i think we would look at those better and address some of these bigger projects in a more smart way when we're growing our roads. so thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Fearing: good afternoon, jennifer cesar fearing on behalf of defenders of wildlife in opposition.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 30, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Juan Altamirano: juan jennifer altamirano on behalf of audubon california in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Louis Blumberg: Thank you, Madam Chair, Members of the Committee for the opportunity to testify here today on behalf of the Nature Conservancy in support for AB 184. I want to thank Mr. Berman, the author of the bill for his leadership on this important issue. My name is Louis Blumberg. I'm the Director of the California Climate Change Program for the Nature Conservancy. The sea level rise database is an important tool in developing an effective response to the escalating impacts of climate change today as we have heard and will be so critical in the future, going forward. By eliminating the sunset clause through AB 184, the Legislature will ensure that decision makers, planners, and citizens, all have the latest information available to protect our coastal communities and the iconic natural shoreline that we all want to enjoy. Since the bill that established the database was passed in 2014, there have been several factors that have happened, changes and I just want to highlight a few developments in three key areas. The first is in science. First, 2015 and then 2016 were the hottest years on record. We've seen increased warming of the ocean, an accelerating ice melt at both poles, all of this contributing to sea level rise. Second, in the policy and planning arena, since this database was created, we've seen six bills passed by the Legislature addressing this topic in order to enhance the resilience of California to climate change. And they include sea level rise and other coastal hazards and many other provisions. And these bills are driving action right now by the Brown Administration and also by other state agencies, local government, and regional governments. And also the Coastal Commission has stepped in to continue to prioritize sea level rise as a serious threat with its new guidance on local coastal plans. And finally, I want to call attention to the federal threats that we're reading about in the paper this week. The federal administration in Washington, D.C. is proposing significant cuts to funding for climate change related scientific research, including sea level rising and cultural protection. These would be from the budgets from National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administrations and from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. So, maintaining California's climate data, including the sea level rise database, is more important today than ever given the current State of affairs at the federal level. So in conclusion, the sea level rise database is a critical component of the state's evolving and comprehensive response to climate change and it needs to be maintained. For these reasons, the Nature Conservancy supports 184 and urges your aye vote. Thank you for the opportunity.
[{'start': 170, 'end': 176, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 256, 'end': 270, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: Kyle Jones with Sierra Club in California in support, thank you
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julia Kingsley: julia with ecoconsult, representing hilda bay and the pacific coastal fish grower's association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Juan Altamirano: juan, on behalf of audubon california, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Steve Baker: Madame Chair, members, Steve Baker with Aaron Reed and Associates representing the Resources Legacy Fund. You as a body are familiar with the cost of housing throughout California and you're dealing with those problems. Those same issues occur on the coastline where people have a problem accessing accommodations. A recent study by UCLAs Institute of the Environment and Sustainability identified the rising cost of overnight stays as a significant barrier for all Californians to access the coast. We think that this a reasonable measure. It has the coastal conservancy work with state agencies and local governments that are willing to develop accommodations, to put together a plan so that folks throughout California can access the coastline. And for those reasons we support the measure.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 40, 'end': 50, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ben McCue: Good afternoon Chair Garcia and Members of the Committee. My name is Ben McCue, and I'm the Executive Director of Outdoor Outreach, a San Diego-based youth development nonprofit that uses the outdoors to inspire disadvantaged youth to see possibility and opportunity in their lives. I'm here to support Assembly Bill 250 on behalf of Outdoor Outreach as a member of the Parks Now Coalition, a diverse group of organizations from across the state, working to increase park and beach access for all. At Outdoor Outreach we run nature outreach we run nature based education, recreation and leadership programs for middle and high school youth. Outcomes include increased confidence and trust, connections to supportive peers, improved academic performance, job training and employment, and an increased ability and willingness to protect the places where they play. Some of the most powerful experiences we provide to our participants are overnight camping trips to the coast. Yet due to the lack of affordable and accessible coastal camp grounds nearby, we often travel more than 60 miles one way up to coast to camp. The proposed program would make it easier for groups like Outer Outreach to provide overnight coastal experiences to California youth and to inspire them to value and protect our ocean resources. It's for this reason that I strongly urge you to support AB 250, thank you.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 69, 'end': 78, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: good afternoon, kyle juan jones with cr club california in support and also on behalf of clcnv support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lewis Bloomberg: lewis kyle bloomberg with the nature conservancy, we're in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sean Botwon: sean lewis botwon on behalf of california coast keeper in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jason Ryan: Yes, sir, good evening. Jason Ryan, League of California Cities. We are actually very much in support of this measure. The League is here to support a housing bill that we feel very confidently that it'll actually move the ball. It's a very meaningful reform. Senator did an excellent job describing his measure, which we again think it's going to move the ball. I think what we're trying to do here is lay out all of the rules for development. And once those rules of development are laid out, the development community will know that. And then, we cannot change the rules. And then, we are going to do full CEQA, full public engagement. And then, we are going to issue those permits ministerially for a period of five years. We're trying to meet folks in the middle, and we think this is going to do that. And if you have any particular questions about the measure, I'd be happy to answer those. And again, we are in support of this measure.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Harmon: Richard Harmon on behalf of the cities of Pismo Beach and Hesperia in support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Jones: david jonah jones on behalf the city of miraiad and the cities of marin county, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Augusta: good evening, mr. chairman and members. brian on behalf of the california rural legal assistance foundation. in that tweener category, but i don't see anyone behind me that's in opposition if it's okay with you mister chairman. i just wanted to express that we're working with mister roth and with the sponsors. work through some of the details. i think our main concern here on this bill, which is one of several that are seeking to achieve the same policy, is that we get something at the end of the day that really does help move the ball forward in producing affordable housing. and we're working through some details with mr. roth and others to see if we can get there. so we're hoping the bill moves today, so we can continue that conversation.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 284, 'end': 288, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 631, 'end': 635, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Anya Lawler: Good evening, Anya Lawler of behalf of the Western Center on Law and Poverty. Again, echoing Mr. Augusta's comments. Appreciate the work done so far. We're going to continue working with the sponsor and the author, and hopefully come up with a bill that is workable for local governments, but also produces affordable units that our clients need. Thanks.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 97, 'end': 104, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Niccolo De Luca: Chair person Beall and members of the transportation and housing Committee. My name is Niccolo De Luca. I'm here on behalf of Oakland mayor Libby Schaaf. The City of Oakland is a co sponsor of SB 699. And we want to thank, Senator Galgiani for all of their leadership on this issue. She said very articulately, the purpose of SB 699 is to address a vehicular nuisance by using alternative penalties that limit the criminalization of the individual, while providing for peace and safety in our neighborhoods. A side shows first emerged in Oakland in the late 80's, and have since spread throughout the state impacting cities in the Bay Area. The central valley in Los Angeles, as the Senator said, they now have more of too highways, completely shutting them down. Back in 2009, then state Senator Don Kerata pass authored SB 67 which created the 30 day hold. However, due to the sheer magnitude of the numbers of participants. Greater enforcement is needed. Out of respect for your time, I will not talk about a 700 vehicle side show that happened in Oakland, back in November 2015. With that, we respectfully ask for your aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 18, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 87, 'end': 102, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 140, 'end': 152, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 231, 'end': 239, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 797, 'end': 807, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jonathan Feldman: Chairman members, Jonathan Feldman with the California Police Chief's Association co sponsor the bill, want to thank the Senator for her leadership and our co sponsor, the City of Oakland. Existing law requires an officer to fill out an affidavit establishing reasonable cause to impound a vehicle for a specific code violations. But the only evidence the officer can use is what they physically saw when they were present at the scene of an incident. What this bill does is expand vehicle code section 14602.7 to add evidence Including evidence developed by the officers, such as video and photographic evidence. However, the burden for establishing reasonable cause would still be on the peace officer authoring the affidavit and the magistrate with.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jonathan Feldman: Chair and members, Jonathan Feldman with the California Police Chief Association. I echo the comments from the Senator and from my colleague at the Legal Cities, local law enforcement are the ones that are called to these instances, and we need clear authority about how to handle them, what is our ability to address these issues. I've called the FA hotline to see what it's like trying to report one of these instances that the Senator brought up and if you can manage to get through the automated voice choices, you end up with an analyst, and it's thank you for your call, we'll get back to you. And that's not the kind of response that our communities want, it's not what they expect from law enforcement. So we are proud to be here in support of this measure because it gives us that clear authority, and we ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stnaisha Boatner: Stnaisha Boatner on behalf of the California State Association of Counties, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Doug Johnson: mr chairman, members of the committee, my name is doug david johnson and i represent the consumer technology association. we're a tech association with members across the spectrum of the consumer tech industry, including companies involved in drones and the drone echo system. 80% of our members are start ups and small businesses. we're opposed to sb 347 for two main reasons. one, it contains various provisions that needlessly address conduct that's already prohibited by california statutes. and second, it creates a new insurance requirement that's devoid of empirical support for the burdens that it presents. in our work with legislators around the united states we've urged the following. before considering new drone specific legislation, consider whether the conduct at issue is already addressed under existing laws. creating technology specific offenses and penalties is a reactionary approach to innovation. we recognize that the bill has a goal, to strike a balance and establish only those regulations that it says are essential. we do not believe that these provisions are essential and certainly do not support the drone industry, or the market that we are supporting at cta. a lot is happening at the federal level. in fact, since the last time i appeared before this committee on a similar bill last year, several things have happened. last summer the faa's first ever rules for commercial operations of drones took effect. last year, the faa stood up a drone advisory committee, which brings together stakeholders in the aviation, technology, and public sectors including state and local governments to collaborate on recommendations regarding, among other things, regulation and the roles of government at different levels. and just last week the faa announced a new advisory committee on remote identification, which is going to be crucial for law enforcement. and again, the ecosystem of drones and the management of them in the air space. it's crucial to our members, to our industry, and the growth of this exciting sector, to avoid conflicting and confusing state and local regulation. we are constructing, essentially, the rules and regs at the national level that cover this technology. at the same time, we're thinking about the role of state and local government in this collaboration under the drone advisory committee. in fact, mayor lee of san francisco in particular represents the views of municipal governments in this dialogue. out of the drone advisory committee will come a set of recommendations, which might be a rethink of the roles of government at different levels. and it might include recommendations with respect to enforcement. but i want to make clear that there are rules out there today, they are growing. we're creating a regulatory framework for the future for this technology, and it's crucial we do so in an organized way across the united states. i mean, we're competing, not only with respect to the technology in question, but with respect to the policy that surrounds it as well.  for these reasons and others, i respectfully request your no vote on senate bill 347.
[{'start': 50, 'end': 68, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2366, 'end': 2369, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Margaret Gladstein: margaret doug gladstein, here on behalf of the california chamber of commerce, california retailers association, and the american insurance association. i concur with the remarks made by miss bell and mr johnson. we are concerned that california is on the precipice of tremendous amount of growth and opportunity in this particular area. our members are using these for assessing property storm damage, agricultural uses to detect pesticides very early in a variety of other areas, and we don't want to stifle that innovation. also i would say we have particular concerns about the insurance mandate. currently there's not adequate underwriting information to provide for an insurance mandate and we would continue to oppose that mandate. i'll cede that discussion to mr. buckley as well, but for a number of reasons, we must continue to oppose this bill. we do appreciate the author's staff and the committee staff, and their thoughtful approach. and we know this is an issue she's been very dedicated to working on, but unfortunately we have to oppose today. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 192, 'end': 196, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 204, 'end': 211, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 772, 'end': 779, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ross Buckley: Mr Chair and members, my name is Ross Buckley with the Personal Insurance Federation of California. We appreciate the Senator's efforts on SB 347. Unfortunately, we must also take an opposed position on this measure. We have two main concerns with the bill. First, with the mandated insurance for commercial operations. And second, we agree with the previous speakers about the potential for a patchwork of laws created under this bill. SB 347 would prematurely mandate insurance on all commercial operations of drones in the state. We believe this mandate is unwise, as there is currently insufficient data to calculate the risks associated with drones. Liability insurance, as obtained and regulated today, is based on historical claims data and underwriting experience. Given that drones are relatively still a new technology, liability insurers are still in the process of collecting the necessary data to develop insurance coverages. We most also oppose the Department of Transportation establishing the amounts of actuary untested liability limits. Improper liability limits may artificially increase the cost of drone insurance, which could suppress innovation. Conversely, it also could provide a false sense of security if they're too low. For these reasons, we must oppose SB 347.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maria Garcia: mr chair, members, maria margaret garcia here with greenberg on behalf of state farm mutual insurance. for all the reasons previously stated, we also opposed.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 51, 'end': 60, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Chris McKaley: Mr Chair, members, Chris McKaley on behalf of the Computing Technology Industry Association in opposition to the bill.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Bennett: Laura Bennett with TechNet, and my apologies to Committee. For some reason our opposition was not reflected in the analysis. Although we were on the letter, we are in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Steve Carlson: mr. chair and members, steve jonah carlson for california government affairs council for ctia trade association for the wireless communications industry. wireless technology has revolutionized how we communicate as senator hueso has indicated, yet even as these new uses of wireless technology or innovate and adopted. there has been an unprecedented growth in mobile data usage which has grown over 2,300% since 2010. there are 1.5 million more wireless devices than there are people in california people love and depend on the networks. to commit these demand carriers have been investing billions of dollars since 2010, 177 billion in 2015 alone more than 32 billion nationally on their networks. however, the advancement can't come first enough for today's data driven consumers. so we're working to enhance infrastructure to maximize the performance of today's fourth generation wireless and prepare for the next generation of connectivity as senator hueso indicated 5g. small cells will strengthen, existing 4g networks while serving as the building blocks for 5g. they are as so much else in technology is, far faster, smaller and better than the technology that has preceded, the infrastructure that has preceded them, but for california to maintain it's position as the high tech leader of the nation, it is critically important that policy makers take action to remove unnecessarily obstruct barriers to innovation investment while balancing municipal interest, we believe 649 does that, and in finding that balance, we ask that you consider the compelling public benefit californians will receive from 5g, including improved public safety services, like next-generation 911, immersive education, traffic management systems, tele-medicine, just to name a few. we're also complete a comprehensive poll on the issue, and the data has been very clear that most californian's agree the vast majority want 5g, believe it is important to invest in 5g and support streamlining the process to improve wireless communications. the consulting firm accenture did a report this year and showed that 5g deployment will drive $500 billion of economic growth, create 3 million jobs and produce 160 billion in benefits and savings. through smart community solutions, lowered energy use, reduced traffic congestion, and fuel cost and improved public safety. specific to california communities, the economic benefits of 5g over the next several years will, in large cities like la, create nearly 37,000 jobs and an increase gdp of approximately 6 billion, but it doesn't only apply to large cities. it will also benefit small and rural areas of the state for example the economic benefit to sonoma county is projected be more than 4,600 jobs and gdp increase of $765 million.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 223, 'end': 228, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 956, 'end': 961, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rudy Reyes: Thank you Members of the Committee. Thank you, Chairman Hueso. My name is Rudy Reyes. I lead public policy for Verizon in California and the west. I appreciate the opportunity to testify before you today in strong support of Chairman Hueso's bill as we believe there is a real need for California to adopt to this pro broadband legislation, both to upgrade existing technologies and to support new ones. In every region of our state from the most rural counties to the major metropolitan areas and global technology epicenters. This issue, quite frankly, is too important for California not to work through, and to lead on. As Mr. Carlson, and Mr. Divine have testified, the wireless industry has had to innovate in order to keep pace with insatiable consumer demand. This is a good thing for California, but local government regulations governing the citing of wireless infrastructure have not kept pace with technology advancement. California needs a new regulatory framework for citing this modern wireless infrastructure in order to address consumer needs today and pave the way for 5G. We will continue to work in good faith as we have with the author and all stakeholders who are willing to work in good faith with us to achieve the share goal for California. Traditionally wireless has been delivered via large, a 150 foot tall macro towers and we had a pictures passed out to the Committee this morning on the second page you'll see there's a picture in front of the Chicago Police Department of the macro tower in the background and the foreground there's a small so. More and more particularly in the last few years, wireless providers are beginning to attached small antennas, and associated equipment, on existing poles and other structures that are being utilized to provide utility services in the right of way. We brought a small cell here. What this is in front of Mr. Carson and we can let you hold it and see how much it weighs, that is a remote radio head that delivers the 4G signal on top of the, on the pictures you'll see in addition to that which is placed on the pole. There is an antenna at the top that is the small cell. These small cells boost the capacity and performance of the existing Macro Tower network, thereby obviating the need to build new macro sites or place new poles in the right-of-way consistent with California's long standing policy and commitment. To incentivize broadband deployment, efficiently, effectively, and a way that preserves meaningful and reasonable local controls. But while the technology has innovated with few exceptions local regulations have not. Indeed, jurisdictions across California applied the old macro rules requiring individual public hearings and discretionary zoning review for every small cell that is deployed, but while it may have made sense to require a special zoning approval to erect a new 150-foot macro-tower on the hill in front of the Hollywood sign. It makes no sense to apply the same highly resource intensive requirement for small cells going on existing vertical infrastructure in the right of way. This failure to keep pace with technology development inhibits the growth of wireless infrastructure and harms California, its consumers, and our customers, and public safety, all of which depend on this vital infrastructure. By doing the work together to modernize the regulatory framework for advanced wireless infrastructure deployment, the goal is to model the typical cases, and on that basis make a policy decision as a state to have those cases go through an administrative process focused on compliance with state and local codes. Cases that fall outside this framework will go through the existing process. It's that simple, it's more efficient, it's more cost effective and will streamline the deployment of this necessary infrastructure While allowing local governments to preserve their more time consuming discretionary review processes for those atypical cases that really should go through the full zoning process.
[{'start': 56, 'end': 61, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 74, 'end': 84, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 234, 'end': 239, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 631, 'end': 638, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 648, 'end': 654, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1885, 'end': 1891, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Joel Cook: Joel Cook, Californian Manufacturers and Technology Association, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brenda Palomino: good morning, brenda steve palomino here with sprint, also in strong support, and thanks senator hueso for his leadership in this technology.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 97, 'end': 102, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dennis Albiani: Dennis Albiani for TracFone Wireless, in support. Take out three.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gloria Colasa: Gloria Colasa, I'm supporting the bill 649. Just that I'm a few organizations. Southern California Hispania Member of Commerce.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alexandra Render: hi, alexandra brenda render, at the downtown san diego partnership, in support of the bill.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ruben Franco: Ruben Franco with the Orange County Hispanic Chamber in support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Wolfson: Thank you. My name is Amy Wolfson. I'm the city planner for the City of Nevada City, and we are strongly opposed to this bill due to its implication on Nevada City's historical district, in particular, which was recently featured in Sunset Magazine and is listed on the National Register of Historic Places. And we want to preserve our discretionary authority on this.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tracy Ryan: Tracy Ryans on behalf of the Rural County Represents Californian. Also the Urban County SoCal of California in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Karen Martinson: karen alexandra martinson on behalf of the california state association of counties in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Graham: Mark Graham on behalf of excuse me, on behalf of Scientists for Wire Technology. I have some documents for the record. Two quick recommendations, extend the same protection that this bill gives to fire departments, to police departments, hospitals, schools and libraries. And second thing, because the federal government has done such a poor job of regulating to protect against health effects, this state should do its own environmental assessment and amend the health and safety code to set standards and regulations to prevent health effects. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Ryan: mr. chair, members, jason karen ryan, league california cities, also in opposition.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Taheri: Sarah Taheri with the Southern California Public Power Authority, also in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sylvia Saleesha: saleesha on behalf of the cities of santa monica and beverly hills and we apologize for the late opposition. thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Gonzalez: mr. chairman and members of the committee, gonzalez representing the cities of roseville, thousand oaks, indian wells, laguna hills, lakewood and norwalk in very respectful opposition.
[{'start': 43, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Connie Stewart: mr. chairman, connie jason stewart, with the california center for rural policy in opposition.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Duane Strauser: mr. chair, i am duane, mayor elect, nevada city, california. without an exemption included in this for historically designated cities and/or cities with historic districts being admitted, we strongly oppose this as written. thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eric Windheim: windheim, certified building biologist and an electromagnetic radiation specialist. when comcast hangs their wifi hotspot on the utility poles in san francisco, it means tens of thousands of dollars of lost income, and thousands of dollars for shielding, and hiring me, and ends up in lawsuits. putting these things on wires outside bedroom windows is a recipe for disaster. i urge you to vote no.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Caroline Macintyre: mr. chairman and members, caroline connie macintyre on behalf of the california cable and telecommunications association. we are not here in opposition today. we are here to express some concerns about the bill and to thank and acknowledge the author and his agreement to continue to work with us to make sure that the bill is, in fact, technology neutral. as it's currently written, we do not believe that the bill would allow the same type of permitting process for what we call microwireless facilities, which would be wi-fi antennas that we would want to attach to the same type of equipment and the same type of facilities that are described in the bill. in addition, we want the bill to be explicit as to what type of technology is not included. specifically, the back haul that these facilities will ultimately have to connect to in order to get to the actual internet. we do not believe that that has been, should be a part of this process. and then lastly we'd like to thank cyrus for making an argument for us today. our member companies have, in fact, invested billions of dollars over the years to build our infrastructure. we pay the right of way fees to local government in order to be in that right of way. we want to ensure that any permitting requirements under this bill do not require us to pay permits or franchises that we've already paid. to the contrary, we want to also make sure that the bill is not construed to relieve those new providers that now want to use this new infrastructure in the right of way to provide a service that would currently require a franchise or some other type of authorization. we look forward to working with the senator in resolving these issues. thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 984, 'end': 989, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
James Jack: Mr. Chairman, members, James Jack on behalf of Caltel. We too are noted in that third category listed in the analysis. We are very supportive of the Senator's goals to remove barriers to broadband deployment. We would just note that that broadband is being deployed over wireless and wire-lined facilities. Very appreciative of the Senator's commitment to work towards technological neutrality and appreciate your time today.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jackie Kinney: good afternoon, chairman and members. kinney with frontier communications, also not opposed, just with concerns. we appreciate the author's goal of not having delay in broadband deployment. we want to work with the author and staff to make sure that any expedited process for small cell technology would not lead to delay for wire line providers who need to get permits from the same agencies, especially providers like frontier who are bringing in hundreds of millions of dollars from the federal government for broadband deployment where we have strict construction deadlines, and don't want experience delay and jeopardize those funds. thank you to the author.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Reinette Senum: hello. thank you. my name is reinette caroline senum. and i'm a current city council member, former mayor of nevada city, california. and for the last 40 years, our community has been working around the clock to curate this community that as we said before, amy wolfson, our city planner, that it has made it onto the cover of sunset magazine. it was one of the most desirable places to live in the united states. that's because of the vision and leadership in nevada city. now beyond that, i would just like to speak to, we are not asking you to streamline this because of the regulations. we're asking you to actually keep those protections in place. the protections are there for a reason, and it's the first time any technology has ever been unleashed upon californians or americans without some sort of regulation. we're looking at rights to privacy. we're looking at property rights. we're looking at loss of local authority. and to be honest, most americans do not know what 5g really means.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 258, 'end': 269, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rose Sanchez: good morning. my name is rose reinette sanchez ulloa from city heights community community development corporation and it is truly an honor for me to come here today and bring you the true life experiences. that we have been able to collect from families that are impacted by the shut offs. i will be brief. i have brought three different experiences of how the shutoffs impact our children and our seniors. in my experience, it's the experience called candles, and a young girl who had two siblings had to supervise her mom. who was lighting the home with candles because her mom would fall asleep overnight. so it was her intention to keep her family from burning in a fire in case the candles tipped over and she knew she had to go to school the next day, but she knew she had to stay awake for the sake of preserving the life of her siblings and her mother because she would watch the door and see that her mother would doze off when those candles were burning. so, this child's unable to focus at school. how do these children get bathed? how do they do their homework? it's a huge impact for them. now this child is a senior and it's so impactful to her to share her story with me. and it's such an honor for me to bring it to you and you have to know that it really affects them emotionally. my second story is a little girl who was seven and her little sister. her big sister, eight and a half with special needs. their power was disconnected for two months and by the time they went to welfare, it would take a month to connect. they went over to saint rita's church, they were able to help them after about a month and a half to two months, how do they bathe and do their homework? i can only imagine other anecdotal stories that i've heard of when they're pulling their neighbor's electricity or the use a generator. this person is 60 now and she was 7 then and she was telling me her experience with tears in her eyes. not the first one, but this one did because she still remembers how she felt at that time when their power was disconnected and her mom couldn't afford to reconnect it. how horrible, that is just your human basic need taken away from you and my last experience is a medical baseline experience, where a person who is on life-sustaining electrical medical devices, like the leg braces for clots, the hydraulic lift bed was disconnected also. they didn't have the means, she was a triple stroke survivor, she's still alive, but her neighbors collected, between themselves, monies, when they saw that truck roll up and disconnect her services. so, we don't want to rely on our neighbors, we need support so we can have this bill go forward. we are happy that it is in existence and in the stages that it is, and it's an honor for me, again, i reiterate, to bring those true life experiences from working on the ground. thank you very much for that.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 52, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Matthew Marcus: Members, Matthew Marcus with the Office of Ratepayer Advocates. Ora has a longstanding history of helping to protect the most vulnerable customers and we want to thank the Chairman for bringing this bill forward. We're in support.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Aaron Lewis: sorry, aaron rose lewis for the consumer federation of california in support, thank you.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susanna Churchill: Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Committee Members. My name is Susanna Churchill, I'm California Director with Vote Solar, and I'm going to speak specifically to customer affordabilities part of this bill. I'll try to keep it relatively short, but building solar into new construction is a great way of getting rooftop solar built cheaply for customers. That's because when you install during the time of construction, you get economies of scale and you save a lot on things like customer acquisition, equipment, permitting, financing. There'll be a small increase in the building's cost from the solar but it will be much less than the tenant energy bill savings that flow from that solar. We did some quick calculations just to illustrate this and we estimate that if the solar was build at a cost of about $1.40 a watt, you assume that 3KW system that's $4,200 for the system. You wrap that into a 30-year mortgage at about 4% interest rate and the incremental monthly mortgage cost there is about $20. Then if you look at the bill savings, and you look at under current net metering structure, assuming time of use rates, which all net meter customers need to go on. A non-care residential customer in the Central Valley would save over $80 a month on their electricity bill from that solar. A low income care customer also on time of use rates of Central Valley would save over $50 a month and that's the time of use rates have a 4:00 to 9:00 PM peak, a late in the day peak. Definitely cost effective and as Senator Wiener said in the analysis, there's a note that the CEC has said even if we change the compensation structure to just wholesale value, it would still be cost effective. So a great way to build solar cheaply for customers, including low income customers. Passage of this bill is going to keep California leading with bold ideas on clean energy. I think that the country really needs our leadership on that, so I urge your aye vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 58, 'end': 75, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1517, 'end': 1523, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Richard Holliver: My name is Richard Holliver, I'm with the Consumer Federation of California. We have an official support if amended position, and I would like to explain the concerns we have with the bill, as well our appreciation of the Senator. We met with his staff, and believe that we will be able to work out these concerns. But our basic views, you've heard the merits of the bill, we agree it's a worthy objective, we support that objective. But when you mandate that consumers purchase a product, we believe the Legislature has a duty to protect consumers from the abuses that will otherwise occur. There are quite a few abuses in the industry. In several states, states attorney generals in the last few years, in Louisiana, Mississippi, Vermont, Arizona, Connecticut, and New Jersey, have issued consumer warning alerts about the scams that exist in the industry. In fact, the state contractors license board has had a four fold increased in complaints against solar installers in the past five years. Some of these complaints, I believe, can be readily addressed in the bill. The bill analysis suggests that you can use some of the financing arrangements that are used when solar is installed after the building is constructed for new solar construction on a new building. But these are very problematic financing arrangements, and we believe that this must be addressed in this legislation. Solar leases and solar liens place burdens on homeowners that often result in reducing the value of a home when it's time to sell. People are sold special solar liens that appear to be government backed but they're private liens that are paid for through property taxes.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mac Clopency: thank you. mac aaron clopency on behalf of california solar energy industries association, in support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Fihen Cho: fihen mac cho, on behalf of tesla and solar city, in support. eddie moreno, on behalf of sierra club of california, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 62, 'end': 74, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Justin Fasal: good morning. justin fihen fasal, on behalf of technet, in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Adam Scaff: Adam Scaff, Food and Water Watch, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Woody Hastings: woody, center for climate protection, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Romer: michael justin romer, for 350 bay area, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Sheran: David Sheran for Positions for Social Responsibility, strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Morgan Carbol: morgan michael carbol with the hernandez strategy group on behalf of the utility reform network. we've also been working with the senator's office and i have a support of amended position.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 31, 'end': 40, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Noemi Gallardo: hello, noemi morgan gallardo with sunrun, also in support.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eric Brooks: Eric Brooks, Californians for Energy Choice, in strong support of this expansion of the local distributed generation. And I would also strongly urge that you move this bill forward as requested by the author, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christine Hooks: hooks, i'm here representing 350 sonoma county. and i'm in strong support, and we are in strong support of this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Craig Lewis: Craig Lewis on behalf of two organizations, the Clean Coalition and the Dynamic Grid Council in very strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Suzanna Churchill: Suzanna Churchill with Vote Solar. And as Matt Friedman said, Cal ISO and FERC are increasingly important policy forums and very expensive places for nonprofits like ours to participate so strongly in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 42, 'end': 55, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Aaron Lewis: good morning. aaron noemi lewis for the consumer federation of california in very strong support. thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John White: Mr. Chairman, members. John White with the Clean Power Campaign. We conceptually see the need for additional public participation at the Cal ISO. We think that as the author and Mr. Friedman's pointed out there, the stakes are very high. We're still not sure how the best way to pay for this is. There are some issues raised in the analysis, we think, are worth considering. On the other hand, we think the need for doing something like this is worth working on. And we look forward to working with the Committee as we move forward. Thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 182, 'end': 190, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Gil Topete: Thank you Senator and Members, my name is Gil Topete. I am the Director for Energy for the California Municipal Utilities Association. The analysis points out very succinctly an issue that I want to clarify and expand on. Publicly owned electric utilities, we're nonprofits too. Our customers are the owners of our utilities. We have public forums before elective governing bodies where our local customers can come and talk about rates that might need to be affected. In context of the bill before you today, if we were extracted out of the bill, I'd have no further issue with some of the needs that were described by the proponents. But the proponent of this bill happens to be one of the beneficiaries of the existing program to provide reimbursements. He provided some very sound reasons on why this is an important aspect of prompting additional participation. But the bill does speak to some issues that are just not very clear to anybody. There are no dates when this is to take effect. In fact, the bill goes on for several pages speaking about the process of collections and the process of who would be an eligible participant. And then finally on page eight, there's one sentence that says, only upon approval by FERC can the independent system operator establish an innovator trust fund. And then it goes on again about all the important things that need to be done within this program. And then it's not finally, until the last page, does it say, if a federal agency or a court holds this to be invalid, then the CEC shall establish a process to require local publicly owned utilities and the other utilities within the transmission owning utility as defined to participate. Again, there's no dates there. There's a lot of issues that don't appear clear to my member organizations. And then the final piece where it's just unclear is, bottom of page four through five. It lists five proceedings, both formal and informal, that would be subject to reimbursement. And in those, many of them speak to you've gotta be a transmission only utility within the Cal ISO. But then there's a couple that don't mention that. And there is the CEC proceeding related to the integrated energy policy report. That's not an ISO exclusive participating report. So, conceivably, the groups, as its written now, conceivably the groups that are required to make payments into the trust fund, could very well be the same groups that are paying for perhaps other services provided by other utilities companies to be a stakeholder in that process. I understand what the author is trying to do in finding a solution to obtaining more individuals come and participate at these very important proceedings that appear to be dominated by certain groups. CMUA, we're non-profit. We go before FERC, we pay out of our pocket those expenses, we don't get any reimbursement. I'm not asking for reimbursement. I am asking to be stricken from the bill's provisions. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2738, 'end': 2742, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Amber Blixt: amber for the independent energy producers association, also opposed. this bill creates a maxim for intervenor comp at the ferc, the cal iso and the cec. in general, the california public utilities commission represents the interests of rate payers and is active in ferc proceedings. the attorney general is charged with the responsibility of protecting california law and policies, and is also active and relevant for proceedings. since 1975, the cec has operated without intervenor compensation. and the cec actually has a public adviser whose job it is to help participants in the cec processes. the cal iso has also operated for nearly 20 years without the need for intervenor compensation, has open stakeholder processes, tariff processes. and also has a board approval process where people can present their view. so from ip's perspective, it's not clear that the existing processes, any of the above entities are limiting participation or that participation is out of reach. and our perspective is, that users of the grid should not be forced to subsidize the intervention of others in public proceedings. and if we continue to allow certain groups to be subsidized and not others, then the question is, who's advocacy is more important? because we're limiting it to some and not others. and then finally, this is a major expansion of intervenor compensation to three additional agencies. one of which is a federal energy regulatory commission. so the costs of this are likely to be expansive. so, we were just urge your no vote.
[]
Sarah Taheri: Good morning, Sarah Taheri with the Southern California Public Power Authority here today in opposition. But would like to see the amendments to exclude municipal utilities. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Margrove: Amy Margrove on behalf of the California Chamber of Commerce in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jerrell Cook: Jerrell Cook, California Manufacturers and Technologies Association in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Phyllis Marshall: Good morning, Mr. Chair and Members of the Committee. My name is Phyllis Marshall and on behalf of the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors, we strongly support Senate Bill 57. We believe that Senate Bill 57 is needed to ensure the health and safety of the community of Porter Ranch and the surrounding areas. The Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors did file a lawsuit to require further safety and environmental review prior to allowing Southern California Gas to reopen its Aliso Canyon facility. The county's lawsuit seeks a court order requiring the California Division of Oil, gas, and geothermal resources to conduct a public environmental review process including preparation of an environmental impact report pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act before allowing the facility to reopen. The county also hired a consulting firm, an engineer consulting firm, EES Consulting, to do an analysis of alternatives to withdrawing gas from Aliso Canyon Natural Gas Storage Facility. And two of the conclusions by that firm were that approval of gas injections at Aliso Canyon now would have no material impact on gas reliability through June 2017 and that mitigation measures are proving to be successful in reducing the overall demand for gas. Gas withdrawals from Aliso Canyon should not be necessary during summer of 2017. Again, the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors Strongly supports Senate Bill 57. We certainly appreciate the leadership that Senator Stern has demonstrated and certainly appreciate this Committee's consideration of Senate Bill 57 and urge an aye vote. I have with me today Chief William Jones with the Los Angeles County Fire Department to also testify. Thank you.
[{'start': 65, 'end': 81, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1484, 'end': 1489, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1630, 'end': 1643, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Diana Vazquez: hi. good morning, chairman, committee members. i'll make it really quick. my name is vazquez, i'm policy advocate for the california environmental justice alliance. we represent 11 organizations across the state, specifically environmental justice organizations. and one of the reasons we're here and support for senate bill 57 is really what the individuals are already stated. we really need this root cause analysis to be conducted, but more than anything for the community to understand what happened and how we can actually prevent something like this from happening either in aliso canyon or any other natural gas plants. but with that said, for us specifically, my family and i grew up in the northeast san fernando valley, specially in the city pacoima, so when i'm hearing that this plan is going to be actually open, without having a root cause analysis, and my family's still there, it gets be a little bit worried, because i understand it happened in porter ranch but smogs are actually in the air, so that translates. so for me to really get a sense and really meet for myself and actually ask my community-based organizations this is acceptable, this is not acceptable. so i really appreciate the senator's efforts in really making this a, more of a priority for him and also i appreciate the committee for their considerations. so thank you.
[{'start': 85, 'end': 92, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andy Moreno: Andy Moreno on behalf of Sierra Club California, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Roemer: Michael Roemer on behalf of 350 Bay Area, San Diego 350 and Fossil Free California in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Shern: David Shern, Physicians for Social Responsibility, in strong support, because of the obvious health risks of these kinds of leaks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eric Brooks: eric aaron brooks californians for energy choice in very strong support because accidents and leaks like this from facilities like this make gas as bad as coal. we need to get beyond gas.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Catherine Garoupa-White: catherine with californians against fracking and dangerous drilling. i urge your strong support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Matthews: Richard Matthews, and I am representing multiple organizations. I am President of North Valley Democratic Club which supports this bill, a member of the board of Save Porter Ranch, a member of Los Angeles County Democratic Party which unanimously supported this bill, and Democratic clubs in Topanga and Glendale. Please support this, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Donna Sears: my name is donna eric sears, i'm a resident of porter ranch. my home is a mile from the blowout well, and i would very much in support of this bill. it's like putting the cart before the horse, if you want to have injection before you know a problem, you can't solve it until you know it. and this is such a major issue, that if we can't solve it, if we don't know that it's not going to happen again, and if it happens again, it's going to be a catastrophe, not just for porter ranch, but for all of california.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jane Fowler: Hi, my name is Jane Fowler, and I'm a resident of Granada Hills, and since I was here two weeks ago there have been approximately 30 more leaks and I am feeling it. When I arrived here yesterday, I was so dizzy and you know, could barely think. I went to meet with people, I couldn't really speak and it's interesting, a little bit like today, it's a little bit better so it definitely has affect and I please urge you to help us pass this bill because we need to know what happened.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Deirdre Bologna: deirdre donna bologna, resident of porter ranch, and i'm here to support this bill fully. thank you for all, listening to us we do appreciate and please when la county fire speaks, this is a community fire station that need to protect us, and they're saying they can't protect us.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrew Crown: Good morning, Committee. Andrew Crown, father of five, five months in two small hotel rooms, strongly in support. Please listen not only to the testimony here, but to every government agency in the city and County of Los Angeles, all of whom unanimously support this bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Craig Galanti: Good morning, Craig Galanti, 26-year resident of Porter Ranch, in very strong support of SB 57. For those of you who are still not feeling that this bill is important, I simply want to state this is a very common root cause analysis to help us understand what happened and to prevent it from ever happening again. 14 months ago this well was capped.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John White: Mr. Chairman, members, John White with Clean Power Campaign. We're in support of the bill.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
James Schwab: james deirdre schwab on behalf of secretary of state alex pedia, may i read a statement from the secretary?
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 53, 'end': 63, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Solomi Chaka: Solomi Chaka on behalf of the California nurse's Association requesting your support as a matter of public health and safety. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eric Bakke: eric james bakke with the los angeles unified school district in support as well as board member scott schmerelson. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 97, 'end': 114, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Walker Foley: walker of food and water watch. we strongly support this bill. the requirements of section 3217 of the public resources code do not affect or impair the authority of the governor to declare an emergency based on a sudden and severe energy shortage. that's section one of the bill. we've heard a lot of accusations that this bill if passed will lead to the deaths of people. you are looking at people who are already dying from chemical contamination.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maureen Carvajal: Maureen Carvajal with the Hernandez Strategy Group on behalf of the Utility Reform Network, also in support and appreciate the author working with us.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 26, 'end': 35, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Erica Adelson: Erica Adelson with the Berkeley Climate Action Coalition in support of this bill without the amendments. We're really counting on California to protect us. We know Washington DC has been captured by nihilists who don't care about us. We're counting on California.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carol Wade: Hello, I'm from Contra Costa County. My name is Dr. Carol Wade. I'm a physician, and I am particularly concerned that the health and safety studies be completed as well as the other studies so that I am definitely in favor of this bill, but I would prefer the stronger version without the amendments from SoCal Gas. Thank you.
[{'start': 52, 'end': 62, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barbara Stebbins: Barbara Stebbins with Local Clean Energy Alliance. I am here in support of the strongest version of this bill to protect the residents from the dangers of unsafe leaking storage facility. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Rosenberger: Kimberly Rosenberger with Service Employees International Union. This bill hits home as it directly affects our Local 721. We commend the author and strongly urge your aye vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bonnie Holmes-Gen: And Bonnie Holmes-Gen with the American Lung Association in California and American Lung Association strongly supports this bill because methane releases cause huge climate and public health concerns and we need to get to the bottom get to the root cause and make sure this disaster does not happen again.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Tovar: jessica eric tovar, east bay clean power alliance, strongly support without the gas amendments. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Al Weinrub: Al Weinrub, this time representing the Oakland Climate Action Coalition, a coalition of 30 grassroots organizations in Oakland, who not only oppose coal shipments out of the Port of Oakland and fracking, but also a dangerous gas storage facility. Strongly support this bill without any amendments.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Victoria Rome: Good morning, Victoria Rome with the Natural Resources Defense Council in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gustavo Camacho: Good morning, Gustavo Camacho, mayor of the City of Pico Rivera. I'm here in opposition of this bill. Aside from the fact that we feel some of these issues have been addressed, our job is to provide cost effective, reliable energy. And we feel that bringing this facility back online would do justice. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rodger Schwecke: thank you chairman and committee members for allowing me to talk with you today. i'm rodger jessica schwecke, senior vice president, gas transmission and storage for southern california gas company and san diego gas and electric. i'm here today to describe what we see as a situation. while we appreciate the concerns that senator stern has, we do not believe that the sp57 is necessary and our post to bill. the root cause analysis and the operation in the field are independent. some members of the community believe and some of the legislators believe and are concerned that we need to have the root cause analysis done. but the safety of the field and the results of the root cause are separate and independent. a federal agency task force has identified that the outer case of the well was the point of failure for the leaking well. as part of our safety enhancements what we have done, any well that will be used in operations, we've done a series of tests that were developed and in consultation with national labs. to ensure that integrity of not only the outer casing of those wells, but also the inner tubing of those wells. as most of you are aware, there's two layers of piping that is used in each of these wells. so to take it even a step farther, the root cause analysis will determine that the mode and mechanism for the failure of that casing. but what we have done now on a going forward basis, we are not going to use the casing for any type of operation. it will only serve as a secondary barrier in case the brand new inner tubing that we have installed in any of these wells were to fail. we do not expect it, they have been tested, they have integrity, they are brand new pipes. we're being committed to safety and the integrity of the system in our activities. we now have multiple safety mechanisms in place. not only the secondary barrier but we have you know, fence line monitoring. we do daily survey of each and every well with flare cameras, which are infrared cameras detecting the smallest amount of leaks on each of the wells. throughout the entire facility, whether they'll be in operation or not. we also continue to have our daily inspections four times a day. people will basically view and see every site every day, four times a day, as we work through those. we also have continuous pressure monitoring on the wells, including that outer casing, which should not be used, which was formed a basis with 24/7 alert to the operations group in the field, if there is a potential problem that could be developing. so, that's been in place now for some time. i'd also like to state in the last issue is the energy needs of the la area. the aliso canyon is a critical component of the energy infrastructure and is needed. there's been three state agency reports, consecutive state agency reports, that have said, we need aliso canyon in that energy mix to ensure the reliability of not only the gas system but the power system as well. the last one actually that was put together by the california public utilities commission in january stated that we needed to have at least 29.7 bcf in aliso canyon to ensure that reliability and more recently, in a response to our storage safety enhancement plan, what we're going to do, some activities at the other storage fields to enhance the safety, like we have done at aliso canyon. they are requiring us to maintain a certain amount of withdrawal capacity for all our fields, that without aliso canyon and injections aliso canyon we will probably stand a chance of not being able to meet that requirement. filling up the field will take several months. it's not something happens overnight. so to have an emergency order to require injections it will be too late if you get to a summer period or even the coming winter and the one thing about the coming winter, last year at this time we had almost full storage levels in our other fields. this year we're a lot less. so the situation is much worse than it was last year and we don't know what the weather's going to hold for us going forward. so with all of that, i would like to urge the committee and the committee members to vote no on the bill, we believe the field is safe. it's time to resume injections, the field has been available for withdrawals. so, again i request your no vote.
[{'start': 85, 'end': 108, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 331, 'end': 336, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lucy Labruzzo: thank you senator. thank you so much for the opportunity to speak with you today. my name is labruzzo. i'm a mechanical engineer and a certified energy manager with 26 years of experience working solely in the energy infrastructure industry and today, i'm here to respectfully oppose sb 57. this is based on my decades of working directly in the energy sector. my two reasons, the first reason is that the root cause analysis of why the casing failed is no longer implacable to the safe operation of aliso canyon, as has been previously explained. second is energy reliability in the state is still a very significant concern. there is enough technical information to cause a great deal of apprehension, multiple experts have stated that aliso canyon is necessary to meet the reliability of the energy in the state of california this summer. i want to bring forward just one technical point, is that we rely a great deal on renewable energy and hydropower generation that is produced outside the region that is dependent on long transmission lines. we have just come out of a season of a lot of rain. there is a number of issues including increased vegetation growth and we are at risk for increased wildfires this summer. if that happens and our transmission lines are jeopardized we will have issue in southern california. so thank you.
[{'start': 93, 'end': 101, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Shaw: assistant chairman and members of the committee, michael rodger shaw with california manufacturers and technology association we are opposed to sb 57.
[{'start': 49, 'end': 68, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Brubowski: bill michael brubowski, california retailers we're opposed sb 57.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Elizabeth Holley: elizabeth with the valley industry and commerce association or vico, we're right by the aliso canyon and the san fernando valley and we oppose sb 57, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tony Rice: Tony Rice, representing Los Angeles Area Chamber of Commerce in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Mokum: amy bill mokum on behalf of the california chamber of commerce in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4, 'end': 14, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Gary Passmore: passmore, congress of california seniors in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Fred Main: Fred Main, Chamber of Commerce Alliance of Ventura and Santa Barbara County in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Cheswick: Mr. Chair and members, Tim Cheswick with the American Chemistry Council also opposed.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jim Hodges: jim, the east los angeles community union, opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shane Gusman: shane amy gusman on behalf of the utility workers union, opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maura Taph: Maura Taph, on behalf of Orange County Business Council, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Larrea: john shane larrea with the california league of food processors. our industry is seasonal. any curtailments may result in tens of millions of dollars of losses associated with production of food but we are opposed to this, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Scott Wetch: Scott Wetch on behalf of the California Coalition of Utility Employees and Others. Our concern would be what the interpretation of incremental is, because it's not as if you can fill a gas field rapidly when you have a change in the weather, right? We have a heat wave, you may have a 10 days notice that you're going to have a exceedingly high temperatures. You can't just start injecting, and filling the field to meet the need. So what would then happen is you would have to crank up, Mr. Manning spoke to the LADWP natural gas plants, but all the peakers that Southern California Edison and LADWP operate, they are only supposed to be operating for short periods of time, would have to be put on full blown to help meet the need and still might not be enough. So I guess the devil's in the detail, which is what do you mean by incremental? Is that the PUC level that they set, or is it something much less than that? And so you're not going to solve the reliability issue with this language until you get to what incremental means.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 492, 'end': 499, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Craig Lewis: Mr. Chair, members, thank you. My name is Craig Lewis, I'm the Executive Director of the Clean Coalition. And I'd like to establish eight very important facts with respect to transmission access charges. First, transmission access charges are defined as volumetric usage fees of the transmission grid for energy that flows over the transmission grid. Second, transmission access charges are paid by utilities not rate payers. But all rate payers will benefit when transmission investments are minimized. Third, SB 692 has no effect on net metering, whatsoever. Four, CAISO applies transmission access charges inconsistently. There's a correct way which applies in the majority of utility service territories in California. And there is an incorrect way that applies to the participating transmission owning utilities, which obviously include the big three investor owned utilities. The correct way meters transmission access charges at the substations, where energy is transferred from the transmission grid to the distribution grid. The incorrect way meters transmission access charges at the customer meter and charges exactly the same amount whether energy was generated in the neighborhood or whether it was generated a thousand miles away. Five, transmission access charges are massive, averaging about 2 cents per kilowatt hour in California today, and increasing to 5 cents per kilowatt-hour over the next 20 years. Transmission access charges are the fastest growing component of the energy, of the price of electricity. Six, the incorrect transmission access charge treatment represents an existing cost shift that is grossly distorting market outcomes and leading to overbuild of central generation and associated transmission infrastructure. Seven, participating transmission owner utilities receive 10.5% guaranteed return on equity. And I think it is fair to suspect that these utilities suffer from a conflict of interest in terms of whether to invest in more transmission infrastructure or not. Number eight, and lastly, local renewable energy is quickly becoming the cheapest form of renewable energy that can be procured in California. And local renewable energy also maximizes the community economic benefits of renewable energy and provides renewables driven resilience to communities. So, please, I ask you to support SB 692 so that all Californians can enjoy consistent and transparent structures resulting from more local renewables, and deliver the trifecta of unparalleled economic, environmental and resilience benefits.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Daryl Michalik: yeah, i am daryl john michalik, associate executive director for the dynamic grid council, a trade group that works to modernize the grid.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Roemer: Good morning, Michael Roemer on behalf of 350 Bay Area, San Diego 350 and Fossil Free California in strong support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Churn: david daryl churn for bay area physicians for social responsibility urging you strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eric Brooks: Eric Brooks, Californians for Energy Choice, in strong support because local community choice programs depend on local distributed renewables to do what they do. Thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Diana Vazquez: Diana Vazquez on behalf of California Environmental Justice Alliance, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Adam Scaff: adam, food and water watch. we support this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Megan O'Neill: megan with the east bay shared solar collaborative and strongly in support of this bill.
[]
Jessica Tovar: hi i'm tovar with the east bay clean power alliance and we strongly support this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barbara Stevens: barbara david stevens with local clean energy alliance and we strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Collin Miller: Good morning everyone. My name is Collin Miller with Rooted in Resilience, and we strongly support this bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carol Weed: Good morning. My name is Dr. Carol Weed, and I'm with the Contra Costa Clean Energy Alliance, and I strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Scott Wetch: Mr. Chairman and members, Scott Wetch on behalf of the California Coalition of Utility Employees in strong opposition to this bill. This bill is a massive cost shift from roof top solar customers that tend to be wealthy, well to do home owners and commercial enterprises like Walmart and Target and Safeway. To non roof top solar customers. That include the working [UNKNOWN] of the City of California. This is a massive courtship to see paramount to something introducing a bill saying my constituents should not have of pay for the gas tax increase because they don't use transit and they rarely drive in highways. It's a piece of critical infrastructure that's important to everybody. Every rooftop solar customer uses the transmission system unless they just don't use power when the lights, when the sun goes down. Secondly when are we going to stop heaping massive subsidies on the solar industry? It's the most regressive tax policy in the State of California. If you're a working family of four, making $36,000 or more, you're paying into multiple different programs. They have the Federal Tax Credit Program, they get the full retail rate on net metering. They have the CSI subsidies. They have multiple multiple subsidies being paid for by working families in your communities who will never be able to afford to have rooftop solar. Lastly, this is a direct jobs impact on my members. The fees that all rate payers pay to maintain our transmission system is the lifeblood of the work that my members do. To reduce this and to cost shift will only lead to a reduction in the amount of money that is invested in transmission upgrades and maintenance, putting my members out of work. So for all of the above mentioned reasons we would urge a no vote, thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amber Blixt: good morning, amber barbara blixt with the independent energy producers association. we'd like to thank the committee for the analysis. unfortunately, we still remain opposed. we actually support a process going on at the cal iso to evaluate the transmission access charge, and we understand that the cal iso is actually kind of are you going underway with this process now and we support that. we think that the cal iso is the proper place to evaluate this. the transmission access charge is an integrated grid, so we are going to continue to have concerns with the sponsors' proposal to essentially change who pays for in an integrated grid because in the end it is an integrated grid that is operating as a connective system. so we're going to continue to have concerns there. regarding the committee's analysis, we actually still have concerns with sections c and d in section two. we think that kind of presupposes the outcome of the stakeholder process by requiring that the, the presumption is that the cai so will need to change their tack. we think that the stakeholder process is going to debate that and there may be something else that will come out of that. so we think that c and d should be struck from the analysis. and then also it sets a date certain which these are very complicated issues, as you can tell from the legislation itself, and setting a date certain doesn't really allow for the rigor and complexity of the timeline that may be needed to really sort these issues out. so unfortunately, we must remain opposed to the bill.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
DaVina Flemings: davina amber flemings with pacific gas and electric. we are also opposed to the bill. we thank the committee for their amendments. we do believe right now that those amendments are problematic. we feel that they are too prescriptive and do not allow iso to complete their process their full second process. we also disagree with the author and sponsors in their belief that distributed generation does not need the support of the transmission system. we believe very strongly that the transmission system is needed for use for energy flow on the distribution system. we will continue to analyze the amendments, but at this time we are still opposed to the bill. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alicia Priego: alicia davina priego with san diego gas and electric also still in opposition, but we think the amendments move in the right direction want to continue working with the author. we agree with iep that there may be some jurisdictional issues in section to of the amendments, and want to continue to see this moved through the [unknown] process.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ryan Pierini: Hi, Ryan Pierini with Southern California Edison. We're still analyzing the Committee amendments and look forward to working with the author as this bill moves forward, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jacob Moss: Jacob Moss with Pacific Ore. We like the direction of the amendments as well, but are still a little worried that it prescribes the scope of the stakeholder process, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erica Etelson: Erica Etelson with the Berkeley Climate Action Coalition and I think I'm a little bit late to speak in favor, but if I might just. (That's fine.) I got here too late, sorry. We're in favor of the bill. The City of Berkeley has a goal of meeting 50% of our electricity needs with locally generated solar. And it's going to be hard for us to do it without this kind of a fix. We feel like it's a very fair and common sense fix that's been a long time coming. And we're in support of the bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dan Charles: Sorry, also in support. Dan Charles with Tesla, formerly SolarCity. Thank you.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Rhine: Good afternoon, Madame Chair. Jason Rhine with the League of California Cities. It's moved to second, so I'll be very brief. It's not often that the League supports measures that's going to tell us what we need to do as far as the reporting requirements are concerned. But we feel that this information is actually very important. It's going to fill in some of those gaps. It's going to tell the full story. Local governments are often accused of denying projects. We feel that that doesn't happen as often as some think. With this additional information we will know if these applications are actually being denied. One last thing that's really important here too is we don't actually build homes. We set the stage for that development. We approve the application. The builders are under no obligation to actually build after we approve it. So it's really important to capture that information, tell the whole story. We're very much in support, thank you.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christine Dugger: good afternoon, madame chair, members of the committee. christine on behalf of the california association of realtors. we are strongly in support.
[{'start': 56, 'end': 65, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shawn Tabakian: Shawn Tabakian with the California Apartment Association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : madam jonah chair jonah and jonah members, jonah jason jonah gonzales jonah representing jonah the jonah city jonah of jonah palmdale.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 11, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 18, 'end': 23, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 28, 'end': 33, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 43, 'end': 48, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 49, 'end': 69, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 70, 'end': 75, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 89, 'end': 94, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 99, 'end': 104, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 110, 'end': 115, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 119, 'end': 133, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brandon Epp: good afternoon, brandon  epp with the county of los angeles, i'm sorry, the los angeles county sheriff's department, representing jim mcdonald in support, thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 129, 'end': 141, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brian Augusta: welcome. good afternoon, madam chair and members. augusta with the california rural legal assistance foundation. we're the co-sponsors. i want to touch on three points to build on what the author has mentioned. first of all, just want to note that in our strong opinion, this is the right policy. mr. bloom talked about the court decision which was centered on the costa-hawkins rent control act. costa-hawkins was never intended to apply to inclusionary zoning. there were an estimated 60 jurisdictions that had inclusionary policies on the books when costa-hawkins was enacted. and yet, in the reams of legislative history around the enactment of costa-hawkins, you will find not a single mention of inclusionary, as your analysis notes. you will find no mention of all these cities that had these policies on the books. it was strictly about strict rent control cities, and that's supported by the legislative history. and why would it mention inclusionary? if the legislature's intent in adopting costa-hawkins was to examine whether and how local governments should apply inclusionary policies. why would it only discuss, and why would it only aim itself at one aspect of inclusionary which is rental housing and not arguably the larger part of that policy which is its application to home ownership. it defines logic, and so we think the case was wrongly decided, it misapplied costs to hawkins and this bill would fix that. two other quick points. what is this bill not about, it's not about the validity of inclusionary. let's be clear that the courts have been clear on this point, inclsuionary zoning is within the local control by a local legislative body. this has been the message consistently from the courts and as recently as two years ago from the california supreme court. this is well within your police powers to enact this and i know many of you are former local government officials. and this has always been understood to be a local decision. now you may have different views about inclusionary, but i think you probably all share the notion that this is a local decision that should remain at the local level. and that's exactly what this bill does in my third and final point which is it takes the state back out of that question and leaves it with the locals. about 170 jurisdictions have adopted this policy, which means that the majority have not. and we want to continue to ensure that that is an option. nothing in this bill changes any of that. it simply restores the status quo which takes the state out of that and leaves it to the locals to decide what is the right policy. and i'll pause in my comments there because we have one of our joint authors here we'd love to hear from him as well. thank you.
[{'start': 50, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 301, 'end': 306, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1393, 'end': 1400, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jason Rhine: Yes, thank you, Madam Chair. Jason Rhine, League of California Cities. [INAUDIBLE] Makes an excellent local control argument. However, Mr. Gus is absolutely correct. I mean, this really is a valid local control and we have cities on both sides of this issue. But one thing that we can all agree upon is that we want to do what is best for our community. And we want our cities to be able to choose what is best for their community. And we do have well over 170 that already have such ordinances, but that leaves well over 300 or so that do not. So we want those cities to have that ability, and we strongly support this measure.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 139, 'end': 142, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Anya Lawler: Anya Lawler on behalf of the Western Center on Law&Poverty, one of the cosponsors of this measure. And in the interest of time, I'll just echo everything that's already been said, and ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Helyne Meshar: madam chair and members meshar on behalf of the city of west hollywood. the city of west hollywood has had an inclusonary ordinance since 1986 and currently we have 322 units that are in our inclusionary inventory. for units, we have 64 more under construction and 88 are entitled. definitely inclusionary housing works the ordinances and we support this bill.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ed Barrons: ed brandon barrons on behalf of los angeles board of supervisors in support. johann clays for leading edge california in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 77, 'end': 89, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Marina Wiant: wiant with the california housing contortion, proud cosponsors of this measure and i urge your aye vote.
[]
Karen Lange: karen on behalf of [inaudible] in the city and county of san francisco in support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tyrone Buckley: Tyrone Buckley on behalf of Housing California also please cosponsor this bill and we urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shawn Topaikin: Good afternoon. Madam Chair and members, Shawn Topaikin on behalf of the California Apartment Association. We are opposed unless amended. We've been working on this issue for a number of years now and we completely understand the need for affordable housing. We completely understand inclusionary zoning and frankly, our members who build the vast majority of rental housing in California are not opposed to the concept of inclusionary. We are comfortable with the city mandating us to build affordable units. That's a big step for us to come forward and do. We had never agreed to that in the past. What we do today. But all we ask for in return is the ability to be flexible in doing so and not mandate a one size fits all approach. Under this bill, it is possible for a city to say that the only method of providing affordable housing is rent controlled units. And there is no cap on that. The city can come in and say you have to give us 30, 40%. We have some cities in California today that require 25% affordable or inclusionary. I think the ultimate question for us is, will the project get built? If a city becomes too onerous in their requirements and they are not flexible, the project simply won't get built. And the city will not get the affordable units because the developer is simply going to walk away. And that's going to hurt all of us, the developer, it's going to hurt the city. So what we are asking for is some flexibility whether it be in LUFIs, whether it be on site, whether it be land dedication. There is more than one way to achieve inclusionary. And yes, cities can use all those options. But under this bill, they wouldn't have to use those options. But all that being said, we want to appreciate working with the assemblymember. We've been working on some amendments and I feel like we've gotten as close as ever over the last four years, where this bill has not been successful. So we just urge the Committee and the members to just consider our amendments which are pretty reasonable and just ask for flexibility.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Justin Paddock: Justin Paddock on behalf of the California Association Realtors asking for a no vote as the bill is currently drafted. Just to add to the California Apartment Association's comments, right now the Department of Housing and Community Development says we need 180,000 units a year, to make sure that we're meeting our housing crisis. We want to make sure that projects get built and they're not denied. When inclusionary zoning gets put on that negotiating table, we want to make sure that there are also other certain tools that are discussed in that negotiation such as in LUFIs or land set asides. With that, happy to answer any questions. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : jonathan ed arambel ed on ed behalf ed of ed the ed apartment ed association ed of ed greater ed los ed angeles ed and ed the ed santa ed barbara ed rental ed property ed association ed also ed in ed opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 26, 'end': 35, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 36, 'end': 41, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 42, 'end': 44, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 83, 'end': 85, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 94, 'end': 96, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 112, 'end': 114, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 119, 'end': 121, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 191, 'end': 193, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 197, 'end': 199, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dorothy Johnson : Good afternoon. Dorothy Johnson with the California State Association of Counties. We are pleased to be in support of this measure and would like to thank Assembly Member Mullin for his leadership on this issue. We'd also like to thank the Committee for their thoughtful amendments which we think will further help clarify the intent of this measure. And given that there is a motion of second, I will briefly just say that at a time when counties are facing immense cost pressures for both transportation and elections administration. We think this is a very helpful tool that will help reduce costs without limiting voter access to information. And so for those reasons, we respectfully ask for your aye vote today.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 31, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 171, 'end': 177, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Joanna Voris: Yes, Madam Chairman. Joanna Voris on behalf of the Urban Counties of California, in support.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dana Reed: Very quickly, Your Honor-Chairman, thank you very much. I'm Dana Reed. I'm Vice-Chairman of the Riverside County Transportation Commission. We would like very much to have the authority to go forward with another half-cent sales tax for use in transportation. We're the fourth largest county in California by population, soon to be number three as we pass Orange Country very shortly. And if you have any questions we'd be happy to try to answer them. But we would request an aye vote.
[{'start': 60, 'end': 69, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Keith Dunn: thank you, madame chair. keith  dunn on behalf of the suffolk county coalition, representing 24 counties throughout the state who have gone out and asked the voters to support on a two-thirds measure the ability to invest in their infrastructure. it's a critical program here in our state that invests close to $4 billion annually. that maintains our roads and infrastructure in transit and active transportation programs. and now we're debating the same thing here at the state. you know how hard it is to get to a two-thirds decision. it's something that i think even some of us that aren't as supportive of tax measures at some point may support some day. i'm hopeful that we will get them there, but we'll ask for your support. thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 35, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
David Wolfe: yes, madame chair, members. good afternoon. david again pulling back to back double duty here with the howard jarvis tax payers association. but in opposition to this bill here today. members, our issue with these tax authorization bills is kind of what it's always been. i mean, we understand that there is local voter approval that needs to be achieved here. majority vote for a general tax, two-thirds vote for a special tax. but we're still very concerned about regressive sales taxes increase and policies. even before this bill, california has the highest state sales tax in the nation. locally, riverside county's at 7.75%. statewide sales tax is the highest in the nation. and we are concerned. there are dozens of municipalities that have double-digit sales tax rates across the state of california. and again, just in light of sb 1 and obviously the ongoing transportation tax policy, we are concerned that general fund spending has increased by $36 billion. and yet, there's not a lot of that existing revenue that is going towards transportation. and i do think that needs to be a part of the equation and discussion that we're discussing here. so for all those reasons and even though it needs additional voter approval, we'd still ask for a no vote.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Wolfe: Absolutely. Madam Chair, members, good afternoon. David Wolfe with the Howard Jarvis Taxpayers Association in support and as the sponsor of the bill here today. Members, considering the bill already has a motion in the second, I think I'm just going to be quiet and ask for an aye vote.
[{'start': 50, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Chang: Madam Chair and Members of the Committee, Tim Chang with the Auto Club of Southern California in support of the bill.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matthew Siverling: Madam Chair and members Matthew Siverling on behalf of the California Public Parking Association. Again, I know the bill has been moved in second so I'll also be brief, but I want to communicate the concerns of my client. This already been legislated before. Several bills have been passed over the past few years to deal with parking at inoperable meters. What we would ask, and we're working with the author and the sponsors on, is for the some sort of two of our local governments to use to put a reasonable amount of time to be parked at an operable meter. We have meters in jurisdictions in Los Angeles, San Francisco and urban areas that have extended parking times, unlimited parking times. And our local governments will just want some sort of a tool to keep people moving, keep the traffic turning over and not having people park in the same place for days on end. To increase businesses, increase access, and again, just sort of put some kind of a cap on unlimited parking and the value of that parking spot. And this is related to whether or not that meter was broken when the person found it, or it became broken due to the person knowing that if they broke the meter they wouldn't have to pay for it until we fixed it. So with that, we're going to continue to work with the author and the sponsors, and would urge that our concerns are heard. Thank you.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Romero: good afternoon, chair and members. melissa keith romero with the environmental group californians against waste, in support.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Evan Goldberg: hi, madam chair and members. evan melissa goldberg with state controller betty yee, the sponsor of the bill. the assemblywoman described it very well. this is not a tool the controller envisions using a great deal, but one that she does believe would be helpful to her, thank you.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 73, 'end': 82, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Marc Aprea: Madam Chair, Members of the Committee, Marc Aprea. I'm here on behalf of the California Alliance of Taxpayer Advocates. We are a statewide trade Association representing property tax agents. And as such, we represent folks who are representing property owners and their tax disputes at local assessors. And we welcome the legislation being authored by Assemblywoman Garcia.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 366, 'end': 372, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dillon Gibbons: I do. Welcome. Chair, Members of the Committee. Dillon Gibbons with the California Special Districts Association. Here we're generally supportive of the bill, AB 804, that it'll provide the tool necessary for the controller's office to assist our special districts in identifying the potential for waste, fraud, abuse before it happens, that's the goal. Yes. Now, I understand that there are some concerns from some local agencies that other local agencies are talking with the Controller's office. And we hope those discussions continue. But generally, CSDA is in support of this bill and look forward to it moving forward.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 62, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christy Bouma: Welcome. Thank you, Madam Chair, Members of the Committee. Christy Bouma on behalf of the California Professional Firefighters. And also speaking for our local Alameda County firefighters. I spoke to Mr. Quirk about this issue. And I just would highlight, as the author has said, nearly two-thirds of the fire protection in California is provided by an agency that might not have been the planning agency that approved the permits for electric fences provided by fire districts or county fire departments. And so we believe this is an important communication so that firefighters can understand the risk when they approach a property. We urge your support.
[{'start': 59, 'end': 72, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 204, 'end': 209, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Afrack Vargas: Afrack Vargas with the California State Firefighters Association. Happy to support this good, smart bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cesar Diaz: madam chair and members, cesar evan diaz on behalf of the state building and construction trades council. proud to be working with assemblymember chiu on this important bill. this is an issue that's very important to all working families across the state. there are certain regions that are underperforming in terms of creating more housing stock. it's the type of housing stock that is actually underperforming in the low to moderate income range. and so our members are increasingly within those income levels as well and have to actually travel further to actually get to and from work in many instances. and so on average, a construction worker can travel about 100 miles, but that is also taking place with other workers in our economy as well. as housing becomes more scarce, and perhaps even more expensive in some of the more powerful economic regions, people are having to travel more. and so i think what we see here is the perfect balance of ensuring that when there's an opt-in, that there's going to be a streamline approval process for certain type of projects when a community so chooses to actually allow for this type of development in a very concentrated area. that increases density. that allows people to travel to and from work in shorter distances, but it also ensures that that investment in that local area will also benefit construction workers that also desperately need a higher income as well. so for those reasons, we urge your support.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 146, 'end': 150, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Johan Klehs: johan cesar klehs representing leadingage california, an organization over 600 senior affordable housing. owners, managers, and developers. so we support this measure because infill sites and near transportation are unique opportunities to expand senior housing in california, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debra Carlton: good afternoon. debra with the california apartment association, representing about 15,000 rental property owners and managers about 2 million units, and we very much appreciate this effort. thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anya Lawler: Good afternoon. Anya Lawler on behalf of the Western Center on Law and Poverty. We don't currently have a position on this bill, but we have been working closely with the author and his staff to get there. We very much appreciate all the amendments that have been taken thus far on the bill, and we're hoping to get there in the future, on a bill that works for local governments, balances competing interests, and actually produces affordable units for our clients. Thanks.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tiffany Phan: phan on behalf of bridge housing, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Markuson: good afternoon, madam chair and members. richard here on behalf of the western electrical contractors association, the associated builders and contractors, the independent roofing contractors of california, the plumbing heating cooling contractors of california. we're certainly not opposed and do support the creation of affordable housing and housing of any type in california. however, we think that there are some inconsistencies in the bill, which are pointed out in your analysis on page 4 at d and e. there's a provision in the bill that allows some construction workers to be short paid on these construction projects where they are actually paid less than what the prevailing wage would require for those particular crafts. in addition, another provision would deny those same construction workers the protection of the california labor commissioner. and it is baffling, quite frankly, to us that organization that traditionally support construction workers and want to protect construction workers would not only create provisions that would allow them to be short paid but deny them the valuable protection of the california labor commissioner. for those reasons, we are opposed. we have had a thoughtful conversation with the author's staff about our concerns and that we are certainly hopeful that as the bill progresses, these important employee safeguards can be restored.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alex Morris: Hi, Madam Chair. My name is Alex Morris. I'm the policy director with the California Energy Storage Alliance. We are a nonprofit based here in California, and we represent about 65 member companies, all engaged in trying to deploy energy storage and help that play a role in supporting our grid. We think this is a bill we support and one of the main reasons is that it helps local governments have more information about how to pursue and develop best practices for permitting in their areas, thank you.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Polly Shaw: Good afternoon, Madam Chair and Members of the Committee, and thank you for considering AB 546. I'm Polly Shaw, Vice President of Regulatory Affairs for STEM. We are the largest provider of software driven storage services to commercial, industrial, and institution of customers based in California. We support AB 546 and its effort to make energy storage permitting more consistent and efficient without sacrificing important safety considerations. We applaud the state's global leadership in setting policies that we expect will deploy thousands of behind the meter storage projects over the next few years. Behind the meter storage reduces the customer's demand charges, and therefore energy costs, while also providing other services, nearly simultaneously, such as backup capacity, aggregated demand response, or smoothing out the variability of the street's increasing renewable energy generation. With the policies you have adopted in California we believe storage will soon become a massive economic engine and jobs creator for the state. With over 600 projects contracted or in the pipeline at STEM, and the majority of those in California, we can attest that storage permitting practices and costs are wildly different across the state. For example, a small commercial project in one city can be over-the-counter and online, whereas a large city a few zip codes away may require four inspections from three different departments, and yet a different city may tack on additional code reviews. So this bill provides a tool for local jurisdictions to use them to guide in permitting storage, in a way that reduces their workload and reduces time and cost for the customer. We thank the Assembly Committee for considering a bill to create a guidebook to educate on best practices, and that can shift some of the work to faster online submissions, thank you.
[{'start': 100, 'end': 110, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Noemi Gallardo: Hello, my name is Noemi Gallardo, I'm with Sunrun, we're the largest dedicated home solar installer in the US. We have 4,000 employees nationwide, 2,000 of those in California. And we're currently rolling out storage, so we strongly urge support on this bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christina Lokke: thank you, madam chair. christina johan lokke with the california special districts association. local governments, including special districts, currently are able to participate in an eifd to help fund critical infrastructure and other projects. ab 733 explicitly allows eifds to finance projects that enable communities to adapt to the impacts of climate change. this ensures that special districts have an additional funding source to help address the diverse impacts of climate change. which can range from sea level rise to drought, to flooding, to extreme and more intense wildfires, all of which impact our communities, albeit in different ways. sb 733 simply provides local governments with a much needed revenue source, and i ask for your support, thank you.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jay Ziegler: madam chair, ziegler on behalf- i think this is working, thanks. on behalf of the nature conservancy's 100,000 members in california, we strongly support this bill, and thank assemblymember berman for bringing this before the committee. think it's vitally important to extend the opportunity to finance important climate adaptation projects to the realities of the difficulty that local government has in addressing resources. to combat flood threats, to combat rising crystal sea water threats, heat, island effect in out cities, and a number of other urgent public policy challenges that we have to find more creative funding solutions to address. i would call out a couple of important kinds of projects, the vouila bypass would be an example of a project that would be eligible for this kind of funding. levee setback projects in the delta that would provide enhanced flood protection. and also allow for additional groundwater recharge. so we think that this approach has strong benefits to enhance our environment for people and nature. and again, we thank assemblymember berman for bringing this forward, thank you.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 190, 'end': 196, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1078, 'end': 1084, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dorothy Johnson : good afternoon madam chair and members, dorothy christina johnson with the california state association of counties, pleased to offer support for the reasons already stated.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 65, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Frank Huntington: Yes, just so there's no confusion, I am Frank Huntington, this is Jerry Desmond. I'm sure you knew that, so folks, my name's Frank Huntington. I'm the Chairman of the Board of CALI, the California Association of Licensed Investigators, the largest licensed association of investigators in the world. We want to thank the Senator for his support on this measure, and we fully support it.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 66, 'end': 79, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 125, 'end': 141, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kieran McCarthy: Hello Chairman, hello members. Thank you very much for the opportunity to speak. My name is Kieran McCarthy, and I'm the Director of Sonoma Labworks. Sonoma Labworks is located in Santa Rosa, California and has a wide array of very specialized and dedicated instruments for cannabis analysis. Cannabis is a very complex and diverse plant, and there are many, many compounds of interest that we are looking at. In order to properly test those compounds, you have to have dedicated, very specialized equipment. Sonoma Labworks and its parent company, CannaCraft, are pleased to sponsor bill SB 311. The bill would authorize a licensed cannabis operator with in house testing laboratory like ours to provide testing for cannabis and cannabis products obtained from third party cannabis cultivators and manufacturers, who can't afford the ability to purchase this instrumentation, operate it, or provide the trained personnel to do so. You'll have to excuse me, I'm a little nervous. Testing the cannabis products before and during the production process to ensure those products are contaminant-free and suitable for consumption is already common best practice within the industry. And what we will see, as California is an agricultural powerhouse, is an automatic backlog of section eight or license eight facilities, which is what occurred in Oregon to disastrous consequences. This is especially important when you're trying to develop products with targeted dosage. Sometimes, you need to adjust up or down, and that needs to be done quite rapidly. And that is not something that can be facilitated if you're waiting a week to four weeks for your results. These are the laws that will provide the industry with an alternative to type A facilities for their production and internal quality controls. Helping to reduce the anticipated testing backlog that will likely occur when the mandatory type A testing requirement is triggered in January, 2018. Lastly, SB 311 will help incentivize testing throughout product development. Reducing the possibility of contamination and ensuring consistency before the product is sent to a Type A testing lab for final quality assurance and third-party verification. For these reasons, Sonoma Lab Works is pleased to support SB311 and respectfully ask for your support. And I'm available to answer any questions that you might have.
[{'start': 92, 'end': 107, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Jenkins: Chairman Hill and members, Amy Jenkins with Platinum Advisors on behalf of the California Cannabis Industry Association. I want to echo the comments made by Mr. McCarty, we think this is a great bill. It certainly perpetuates an existing best practice. There are a lot of labs out there that are performing very high quality testing, and we urge your support, thank you.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 13, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 27, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 161, 'end': 168, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
James Vinton: James Vinton, I have psoriatic arthritis, and I use this. And it's really important to have it tested to identify mold. You've got green and purple flowers with yellow hairs and hopefully lots of powdery crystals on there, that makes it very colorful. And a lot of times as a consumer, I don't even know what it would really look like so, I appreciate it you allowing the clubs to network their resources, to increase the amount of testing for transparency for patients like myself, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Durrell Cook: Durrell Cook, California Manufactures and Technologies Association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tara Carter: Hello, Tara Carter, with the California Growers Association, and we are in support.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Zuniga: Laura Zuniga with the Contractor's State License Board here in support. CSLB believes that creating this letter of admonishment will allow us to address more minor violations through a process that could potentially be quicker and result in cost savings.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Todd Bloomstine: thank you, thank you, mr. chair. todd jonah bloomstine for the southern california contractors' association, in support. there is a certain level of complexity when it comes to licensing contractors. they're not necessarily licensing an individual, but sometimes a limited liability company, a corporation, that creates some complexity, and sometimes errors occur. this would be a perfect example where they can use a letter of admonishment to help a contractor fix the mistakes. appreciate your support, thank you.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Smith: Chairman, members, Paul Smith with the Rural Counties Association in strong support. We have a long advocated for branding in appellations for a number of our members who want to engage into commercial cannabis industry. We believe this bill strengthens that process, strengthens brand building and making sure that those counties that want to engage truly can have a vibrant market. So we'd like to see this bill continue on.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Lang: Good afternoon. Karen Lang, on behalf of the Humboldt County Board of Supervisors, for all the reasons you can imagine in support of the bill today.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nate Bradley: I am Nate Bradley with the California Cannabis Industry Association. We are in strong. Strong support.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Betsy Hammer: good afternoon, hammer with the california state association of counties here in support. thank you.
[]
Russ Gokeyangyang: Good afternoon, Russ Gokeyangyang from the Green Party of California and Green Party of Solano County, strong support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
James Henton: Senator Mcguire, James Henton from the 707 Cannabis Coalition. Being from the Napa Valley, we really understand the value of the name. And this would be a blessing for the cultivators throughout California.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 15, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 17, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: good afternoon, jones with sierra county, california in support. thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Emmel: Afternoon. Melissa Emmell on behalf of Los Angeles mayor Eric Garcetti here in support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 57, 'end': 70, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alex Graves: good afternoon, graves of the california state university, we don't have a position at this time. however, i would note that this topic did come up as topic of conversation at the board of trustees meeting last week. as a system we recognize that our policies around assessment and course placement need to improve. which is why we are early in the process of undertaking an internal review about changes to our current policies. so, with that in mind we appreciate the members interest in this, we concur with the committee amendments that have been suggested, and we look forward to additional conversations as this bill moves forward. thank you.
[]
Mark McDonald: Thank you, Chair and members. Mark Mcdonald, McCallum Group on behalf of the sponsors of the measure. The Los Angeles, Los Rios, San Francisco, San Diego, and Peralta Community College Districts, as well as on behalf of the Los Angeles College Faculty Guild, in support. These districts are the sponsors of the measure. They came together early on in the fall and made this one of their priorities, actually, their top priority moving forward this year. I'd like to thank the authors for bringing this forward and their continued work on this. And I will cede the rest of my time to the chancellor of one of those districts, Francisco Rodriguez, Chancellor of the Los Angeles Community College District.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 625, 'end': 644, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ashley Walker: chair and members walker on behalf of the north orange community college district in support.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Howe: Brian Howe, California Federation of Teachers. We don't have a formal position yet but we are recommending in strong support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Austin Webster: austin jonah webster on behalf of the faculty association of california community colleges. we're very supportive of all of the proposals to increase access and decrease the cost for our students. and we're looking forward to continuing to work with all the stakeholders to work on a couple of minor things. but do urge to support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christopher Kastree: Thank you Mister Chair and members. Christopher Kastree on behalf of the California Faculty Association. We have an approved position on this legislation. We appreciate all the authors done with respect to college affordability. Thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Neben: good afternoon. david austin neben on behalf of long beach community college district and santa monica community college district. and we'd like to offer our support and thank the author for carrying this. thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joshua Golka: Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and members, Joshua Golka with the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees in support.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Szabo-Kubitz: Good afternoon, oops, good afternoon Chair Medina and Members of the Committee. My name is Laura Szabo-Kubitz and I'm here today on behalf of the Institute for College of Access and Success, an independent non-profit based on Oakland that works to make higher education more available and affordable for people of all backgrounds. I am here to voice our strong support for AB 370 by Assembly Member Rodriguez, which would ensure that all competitive Cal Grants are received by eligible applicants at the beginning of the academic year, when financial aid receipt has the greatest impact on needy students ability to attend and succeed in college. California college students who meet Cal Grant eligibility criteria are guaranteed an award of they are a recent high school graduates, but those who apply later have to compete for just 25,750 awards. To put that in context, every year more than 300,000 eligible needy applicants apply for these grants and half have family incomes below the federal poverty level for their family size. The California Student Aid Commission offers competitive awards to cohorts of students, starting at the beginning of the academic year, when some students do not claim their award, the Commission recycles them to a new cohort. CSAC has been doing it's due diligence to notify students who have been offered awards, but they intentionally do not make too many offers at once, to ensure they don't exceed the statutory cap, and create a liability they cannot fulfill, while almost all awards are eventually paid out, many are not until the end of the academic year. The more than 300,000 eligible competitive Cal Grant applicants are hard-working students with very low incomes, and many are not able to afford and attend college if they don't receive aid at the beginning of the school year. With AB 370, CSAC could exceed the maximum number of awards payable and not be held liable, provided that the number of offers made is based on sound historical information. We strongly urge you to vote in support of AB 370 to ensure that needy students receive the financial assistance they need at the beginning of the academic year, when it has the greatest impact, thank you for your time.
[{'start': 43, 'end': 49, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 91, 'end': 109, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 399, 'end': 408, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brandon Biegert: thank you, chair, members of the committee, i'm brandon david biegert, i'm with the student aid commission, and this year the commission adopted early a set of principles and a policy platform to pursue, and gaining some administrative flexibility to close that final gap between the 96% of competitive awards that we're currently able to pay, and that last 4% to get it so that all of the awards are paid, is one of our main focuses this year, and this bill allows us to do that. and so while the commission has not yet had an opportunity to take positions on bills, we are working closely with the author's office on this particular piece of legislation, and we will, hopefully, have a position on this on april 13th, coming up. what i'd like to do is walk you through the process of how we pay the competitive awards, and kind of provide some context so that you understand how this bill will help us get that final 4%. so every year there's about 350,000 eligible students in the competitive pool, we're authorized to pay $25,750, and similar to how an airline books flights on a plane, they sell just a little bit more tickets than they have seats for, and if more people show up than they have seats for, they'll bump someone from a flight and provide them an incentive. if we do that with the competitive cal grant, we are left in a position of having to rescind a grant that's been provided a student, or commissioners and staff are personally liable for that overage. so we have to be very, very cautious when we're offering the awards to make sure that if more students than we anticipate accept the awards, we don't go over that 100%. what this bill does is provide us the administrative flexibility so that based on historical performance, if there's one or two additional awards paid, there's no personal liability to our staff, and that allows us to creep even closer to that 100%, and hopefully someday actually hit it. so i'm here to answer any technical questions that you may have, and i'll leave the rest to you to take us out.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 69, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Patricia Lopez: Hi, thank you, chair. Thank you, members. Again, my name is Patricia Lopez, I'm Assistant Professor, the College of Education at San Jose State. Our campus is located in Assemblymember Culver's district. I'm here today on behalf of the members of the California Faculty Association and many undocumented students, faculty and staff who fear coming forward, because of the troubling actions that have been taking place on the federal level in regards to immigration and deportation. I myself am a first generation college student. I was born and raised in the Central Valley. I grew up visibly witnessing many of the offensive and unnecessary anti-immigrant sentiments that I sadly see threatening my campus today. As a Professor of education, I have the honor of teaching K12 teachers and administrators and since the 2016 election, my cores on legal and fiscal leaderships have been fraught with stories of anti-immigration epithets and racial intimidation, sadly occurring in K12 settings. And my students who are graduate students at San Jose State, they write about these fears and  these threats of deportation that are expressed to the youths that they teach and in some cases, their own fears as DACA recipients and, or children of immigrant parents. So my daily task to prepare educators to navigate today's anti-immigrant climate is an important reminder that the leadership, I believe that we model for University students on our campus, can potentially extend beyond our own campus. Outside of my classroom, many college students on my campus are similarly struggling with fear of deportation and discrimination. Take for example, the story of Ezra Altune a 19-year old sophomore psychology student who following the presidential election. Ezra grabbed from behind by her hijab and yanked backwards, and left gasping for breath in a violent struggle. This occurred on my campus in the middle of the day. More recently anti-immigrant flyers were posted in and around my building advertising quote reward, rewards pay for information leading to the arrest of illegal immigrants. Calling for students to quote, exercise their civic duty to report any and all illegal aliens. By advocating threats of deportation and actually I brought a couple of them today, I am happy to pass them around for you all to see. Again these are flyers posted in the College of Education on my campus. You know by advocating threats of deportation and promoting ICE, these hateful and targeted messages create a climate of violence and hostility that is detrimental to the well being of students, faculty and staff. Furthermore, these bully tactics against undocumented people are the antithesis of the CSU's mission to quote, prepare students for an international, multicultural society. I want to underscore what Assemblymember Kalra mentioned about why we need your support as a faculty member, as a mentor to students, whose doors open and who hears these stories of fear. First, AB 1 ensures that all students regardless of their immigration status may continue to take advantage of the education to which they are entitled, free from intimidation or risk of a loss of access to resources and programs that other students have the privilege to enjoy. So, legislative action is really needed. This bill puts in place important protections for students, faculty, my colleagues and staff, as well, that will mitigate the impact of potential federal changes to immigration enforcement policies, including deferred action for childhood arrivals or DACA program to ensure that these students have access to financial aid and legal representation and their constitutional right to due process. This bill also, again, the importance of this bill protecting information related to immigration status. The bill helps us to ensure clear policies for campuses should ICE enter or plan to enter a campus. And provide availability of legal resources for students, faculty and staff, ensure that our DACA students continue to receive the benefits afforded to them under current law in the event that DACA is altered. So again, I thank you for the opportunity to come and speak before you today, as a teacher, as a citizen, as a voter of this state. I respectfully urge you to vote in favor, to vote aye, on this very important piece of legislation. And again, I thank you for your time.
[{'start': 60, 'end': 74, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 185, 'end': 191, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1654, 'end': 1665, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1750, 'end': 1754, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2817, 'end': 2822, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
 : Thank you Mister Chair and Members. So my name is Enise Fernandez, I'm a recent graduate from Sacramento State. I graduated back in December. And I'm here on behalf of undocumented students, DACA students, and the CC system.
[{'start': 50, 'end': 65, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brian Howard: Brian Howard, California Federation of Teachers. We're in strong support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Rosenberger: kimberly brandon rosenberger with service employees international union in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Margarita Berta-Avila: Dr. Margarita Berta-Avila, Sacramento State, California Faculty Association, in strong support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christopher Sanchez : christopherwith ... the coalition for humane immigrant rights, and also with our project, the california dream act, which is affiliated out of 33 different campuses across california.
[]
Austin Webster: austin on behalf of the faculty association of california community colleges. we don't have a formal position. we're very supportive in concept, and look forward to continue to work with the author.
[]
Mia Ingram: mia of the aclu of california. we didn't get a letter in yet, but we're working with the author's office and like the direction of the bill. thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erica Romero: erica kimberly romero on behalf of the association of independent california colleges and universities, representing the ... credited private not-for-profit institutions. while we don't have a position at this time, we remain committed to serving all of our students. we just held two symposiums on undocumented student issues, and we will continue to work with the author's office. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicole Munez-Murillo: Good afternoon, Nicole Munez-Murillo with the CSU Chancellor's Office. Want to say thank you to the amendments that have already been taken to the bill and we are absolutely committed to making sure our students, all of our students feel safe and welcome on our campuses. And we look forward to working with the author as the bill moves forward. Thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rose Santiago: good afternoon. rose erica santiago with the community college chancellors' office. while we currently do not have a position on ab 21, our chancellor and our board of governors have expressed publicly, a strong desire to support and protect community college undocumented students and of course, our daca students. we look forward to working with the author and his staff as the bill moves through the process on issues related to cost and capacity. thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Holober: Good afternoon, Richard Holober with the Consumer Federation of California, and we are the sponsor of Senate Bill 313. People ask me what I'm working on, and I tell them, we have a bill that would make it easy to cancel automatic renewal after you signed up for a free sample. And universally, everybody says, that is wonderful because I have gotten shafted, I've signed up for something, and the process to unsign up is removed in time. It's made obscure. It's made impossible. This is something that I think everybody understands is just one of those everyday ripoffs that just bothers us and drives us nuts. We did put on our website asking for people, last week, to tell us about their own experiences. I'll just give you a few examples, I'll be generic, give you the type of product but not the company name. One of the large. Come on. Well, I can give you. You already named a couple of them. One of the large credit reporting agencies says, I signed up for a free offer from this credit reporting agency. Unbeknownst to me, by doing so, I had agreed to their credit monitoring service priced at 9.95 a month. I didn't know about this till I got the first automatic withdrawal from their bank account. Another person signed up for a free contest entry and found that they had subscribed to a very major well-known magazine with an automatic renewal on the subscription. Again, they were not able to cancel until after they had been charged at every turn, to cancel the subscription, and its auto-renewal, you had to confirm that you had to cancel both. Someone else told us they signed up for a well-known antivirus, one year reduced price initial subscription. Well, that product was incompatible with their computer. After 11 and a half months, they received a notice email, confirmation of auto-renewal. They didn't want to auto-renew. They went to the website, used the email address, which they were told was their login. It didn't exist, they were unable to login. There was no account with their email address, there was no way to contact the company by any means on their website. No phone number, fax, email or physical address. They had to cancel their Visa account in order to get out of this. Would you like me to wrap up?
[{'start': 16, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Emily Rusch: got it. emily jonah rusch with california public interest research group. we're in support.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Noe Paramo: noe emily paramo, representing california rural legal assistance foundation in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joe Ridout: Joe Ridout, representing Consumer Action, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Margaret Gladstein: Good afternoon, Madam Chair. Margaret Gladstein here by the California Chamber and as well for the California Retailers Association. We are opposing this bill, Senator Hertzberg, particularly. My testimony is going to say the sky is falling, but apparently, it has not fallen yet, so I'm not going to say that. As the analysis notes, California already has some of the toughest laws in the nation regarding free trials and these ongoing automatic renewal offers. In fact, the California law and Federal law can be enforced by the Attorney General and by a private right of action. We oppose this measure because we believe current law provides consumers with proper disclosure and provides them with plenty of knowledge about the offer that they're accepting. For example, when you accept a free trial or a free gift, concurrent with that, you typically enter in a credit card or a bank account number authorizing the continuation of that. We believe, inherent in you entering that credit card number is the fact that you know you are signing up for an ongoing service. And in fact, these are two-part standards that this bill will require of, opting in for the free trial and then opting in for the subsequent service. We believe, it will create an unwieldy and confusing process for people who do want to be able to take advantage of a continuing service. And ultimately, this may lead to fewer free trials and gifts being offered to California residents. In terms of the cancellation requirements, we believe this bill mandates a one size fits all motto. We are sympathetic to the fact that there are customers who may have difficulty cancelling, and we certainly don't condone that. But we do recognize that there are times when a cancellation process that involves talking to a customer service representative provides consumers with some of the options that they may find attractive rather than cancelling. For example, if a customer has signed up for a bundled service, and they only want to cancel one part of that service, it may lead to a price increase for the other services that they're providing. And we feel like that talking to a customer service representative may educate them about that. If they've been disappointed with the service, there may be an opportunity for them to get credit for a couple months of magazines they didn't get, or things, the reason that they're frustrated. Maybe they did want the product, but they didn't receive it on a timely basis or something like that. So that gives the company an opportunity to provide a credit for service they did want to receive and didn't get or weren't satisfied with. Or if they did have some financial issue, or aren't satisfied with the price they're paying, there may be some lower cost alternatives that are better for the consumer. So for all these reasons, we oppose the bill and respectfully request a no vote.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 168, 'end': 177, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Robert Callahan: Thank you, Senator. Robert Callahan with the Internet Association also respectfully in opposition. I appreciate our conversations with the Senator thus far on the bill. I just have a bit of a disagreement over some of the provisions. We do agree the current law is quite strong, so look at these provisions as unnecessary at this time. But despite that, we don't disagree that a informed consumer, at the time they're making a decision, is important. Not only under the law, but also because angry consumers are not good for business. And so our companies, Internet companies, thrive in some of the most fiercely competitive environment that you can imagine where an angry consumer, and a new service is two clicks away, two presses of a button on their mobile device. So we're sensitive to those things. I think part of the challenge is the notion of understanding of a consumer, that knowledge, that understanding isn't necessarily achieved and we've seen this in other areas of the law by an additional click through, an additional opt in check the box button. It doesn't necessarily lead to that sort of a greater understanding that we're all sort of hoping for here. I would also say we provide great products and services. Our customers, it's not a gotcha capitalism for us. It's continuing services that people are looking for. Oftentimes they have a period of free use of it so you can check it out and see if you like it. And then you're on board with the service. And so we will comply with the law, we comply with the current law, and if this bill were to pass, we would comply with it as well. But the question of whether it would ultimately achieve the consumer protection goals that the bill intends to, which is that greater informed consumer at the time they're deciding to take the introductory offer, free gift or etc. We don't necessarily believe that it's achieving that. And so that doesn't outweigh the burden you would have on administrative compliance for the smaller startups and those types. So for those reasons respectfully in opposition.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jim Newark: madame chair, jim, with the california and newspaper publisher's association. our subscribers just never seem to have a problem finding us when they want to cancel, especially after a story that is fairly unpopular. so, that doesn't seem to be a problem for us. but subscriptions really are the life blood in a marketplace that is extremely competitive for us right now and this just makes it that much harder.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Delilah Clay: Delilah Clay on behalf on the Association of magazine media, also in opposition. Thank you. (Thank you very much.)
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eddi Kurtz: Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. On behalf of Courage Campaign, the largest progressive organization in California and our 1.3 million members, my name is Eddi Kurtz the President and Executive Director. I appreciate the opportunity to share our strong support for SB 149, the presidential tax and transparency and accountability act. For more than 40 years every major nominee for President, Republicans, Democrats alike, has released their tax returns. These tax returns provide American voters with essential information on the individual's business dealings, their financial status, their charitable donations and any other critical potential conflicts of interest. They did this not necessarily because they wanted to, but because they put the nation's interest before their own. It was about being honest with the American people. It was about transparency for the greater good and that greater good is America security, and prosperity of our people. These disclosures spark dialogue, sometimes debate. They help voters gain insight into a candidate's values by examining their finances and because presidents are exempt from conflict of interest laws, they ensure that voters would be able to check any candidate that might act from personal self-interest rather than national interest. This tradition, as we know, was broken by President Donald Trump. Today, our highest office is occupied by an individual who's finances we do not know. We do not know if actions taken by his administration may benefit him personally. We do not know if institutions that have done business with him are now reaping a reward. We do not know if tax code changes he's proposed to make would disproportionately benefit himself. We simply don't know if his actions are for the benefit of the voters he swore an oath to serve, or for his bottom line. Without access to his tax returns, there's no way to find out. So, members, this should not be a partisan issue. This is about standing for America's constitutional values. This is a good government measure, the recent election exposed a flaw in our system and we are obliged to fix it. Beyond Democrats, many Republicans support this policy. US Senators Lindsey Graham, Joni Ernst, former Governor Mitt Romney, several members of the House of Representatives, including California's own Steve Knight, Jason Chaffetz, Mark Sanford, and Walter Jones, and there are more. Thank you for your consideration.
[{'start': 151, 'end': 161, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1342, 'end': 1354, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2189, 'end': 2203, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2205, 'end': 2215, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2233, 'end': 2244, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2322, 'end': 2334, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2336, 'end': 2350, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2352, 'end': 2364, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2370, 'end': 2382, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Gowri Ramachandran: sure, madam chairwoman, and members, thank you for having me here. i'm gowri noe ramachandran and i'm a professor at southwestern law school. i'm not speaking on behalf of the law school though, just myself. i teach constitutional law and employment discrimination, and i supervise the ninth circuit appellate litigation clinic. thank you so much for the opportunity to testify today, as to the constitutionality of sb 149. i believe the bill is constitutional and would very likely withstand any legal challenge. states have brought authority to promulgate reasonable regulations of ballot access to candidates, but they may not add to the qualifications listed in the constitution for federal office. first, the bill is a reasonable regulation of ballot access because it promotes a state and voter interest that is not only legitimate, but compelling. it does so without creating any onerous obligations for compliance. the interest, of course, is information for voters, and that is promoted without requiring candidates to file extremely early, gather large numbers of petition signatures, move their residence, or the like. it's very easy for candidates to comply with the bill. second, the bill is, in fact, a ballot access provision rather than an added qualification for office because the underlying democratic principle behind that distinction is that voters must be free to choose the candidates of their choice. unlike a law that imposes a term limit, which would prevent voters, for instance, from choosing an incumbent with a powerful committee chair position, sb 149 does not restrict voter's choice. there's no person who cannot comply with the provision. while some voters may be uninterested in the tax return information, there's no legitimate voter interest in keeping that information from other voters who are interested. there's no voter interest in a candidate not disclosing, in the way that there is a voter interest in a powerful incumbent or someone who's a non-resident of the state at the time of filing. finally, because the bill only applies to primary elections, there's no concern that california's ballot would undermine national popular vote counts, which may someday, if the national popular vote movement succeeds, determine who the majority of presidential electors select. for instance, if mr. trump fails to comply with sb 149 in 2020 and does not appear on the primary ballot in california, as long as the republican party nominates him, he will appear on the ballot in california in the general election. so the national interest in being able to assess the popular vote and will of the people, consistency across the 50 states in the general election ballots, that's not undermined at all. so in some, i believe this bill would be very likely upheld in the courts because it promotes rather than undermining the constitutional interests of voters in our democratic system. thank you so much for your time.
[{'start': 71, 'end': 93, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2335, 'end': 2340, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dan Wohl: Hello, my name is Dan Wohl of Palo Alto. I strongly support this legislation and want to say a few brief words about it. Very brief, please. Well, as we struggle with how to respond to an agenda from our national leadership, which undermines our democratic norms and institutions, it is not only important that we defend our common values in such areas as immigration, healthcare, climate change, and so forth, but it's truly imperative that we also pause each and every day to reflect on what we can do, legislatively and otherwise, to support the very underpinnings of our democracy. We cannot afford to stand idly by, taking the durability of our democracy for granted. It is more fragile than we would like to believe and can crumble quickly. To that end, SB149 is something real and tangible that we can and must enact.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tristan Brown: thank you, madam chair and members, brown of the california federation of teachers. our official position will be ratified this weekend at convention, but we're recommending a support, thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrew Anzalone: hello, my name is andrew gowri anzalone, on behalf of indivisible sacramento, the local citizens action group, we strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Haru Saki: hi, my name is haru, also with sacramento indivisible, in strong support.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Dawson: my name is sarah on behalf of sacramento indivisible. we are in strong support and would also encourage you to add 10 years of returns instead of just five.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Gunning: My name is Bill Gunning and my affiliation is simply a resident and citizen of this great state.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pamela Gruber: pamela andrew gruber, i'm a resident and a citizen of the state, a member of roseville resistance. i strongly support this bill, and i will also encourage the expansion to 10 years return, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melanie Herman: Hi, I'm Melanie Herman with Tax March Sacramento. There are going to be 120 tax marches taking place across the country on April 15th, around this topic. We need Trump to release his tax returns. Thank you very much, next witness.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 162, 'end': 167, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Scarlett Bustos: hello, my name is scarlett pamela bustos, and i am also with tax march sacramento. on behalf of the 20,000 people in california who are confirmed to march on april 15th to demand trump's tax returns, we strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 179, 'end': 184, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kim Dennon: i'm kim scarlett dennon, i'm an american citizen, and i vote. i support this bill. thank you very much.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ana Fena: i'm fena, i'm a resident of sacramento, and i support this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
James Kimball: Hi, my name is James Kimball, I'm a resident of Petaluma, California. I strongly support the bill.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shep Harper: Hello, my name is Shep Harper. I'm a resident of Winters, California, and I strongly support the bill.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Margie Tamako: Margie Tamako, I'm an American and resident of California. I very strongly support this bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Young: Michael Young on behalf of the California Labor Federation, also here in strong support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Steven Ruderman: Steven Ruderman, resident of Sacramento, in strong support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Monica Bowman: Monica Bowman, resident and citizen, in support of the bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Harding-Squalle: Melissa Harding-Squalle, resident of Roseville, California. I strongly support the bill, also, Placer Women Democrats. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barbara Smith: hi, barbara kim smith from placer women democrats, we strongly support this bill. thank you very much.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dan Mullen: dan barbara mullen, resident of sacramento, i strongly support this bill thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Thomas Flock: flock, resident of sacramento, and i strongly support this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ellen Chapman: ellen dan chapman, resident of sacramento, strong support of the bill. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Ramos: Karen Ramos from Moms on the Left, and we support this bill. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sandra Emmett: sandra from the group democracy winters, in strong support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Abraham Mendoza: good afternoon. thank you madam chair, and members, it's a pleasure to be here with all of you. my name is abraham ellen mendoza and i'm a senior at csu sacramento. and i'm currently right around $30,000 in debt. i come from a low income family in the central valley. college was always something that was stressed to me. but the ways and means of achieving a degree, of financing it, was something that i was never told. we just knew that getting a degree was the first step to getting a job and being successful. i've personally been fortunate enough to never have to take out private student loans, but i've come very close on numerous occasions. i know many of my peers that have. and for many students who are just like me who are looking for a means to finance their dreams, they are turning to private student loans not as a first choice but as a necessity. we live in a state with one of the highest costs of living in the nation, as i'm sure many of us know. we have students packing into living rooms, doubling or tripling up just to afford their rent. many students across the csu system which i'm a part of face longer times to degree due to factors outside of their control like impaction. and each semester brings additional debt. i feel like some may be inclined to say that students are aware of the terms that they're signing up for, of the up to 25% of their pay checks that can be garnished for private loan repayment. i however feel like this overlooks all of the aforementioned factors that lead up to the decision. sb 16 will help many young professionals facing garnishment by leveling the playing field to the 15% that federal loans abide by. i'd like to thank you all for your time and i'd like to thank senator wieckowski for his work on this legislation.
[{'start': 107, 'end': 128, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1737, 'end': 1747, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jared Giarrusso: jared with the california state student association, in support of the bill.
[]
Aaron Lewis: good afternoon, aaron for the consumer federation of california, in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Fearing: good afternoon, jennifer abraham fearing on behalf of the california association of nonprofits, in strong support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 32, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cynthia Castillo: cynthia jennifer castillo with the faculty association of california community colleges, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ken Sullivan: ken cynthia sullivan for the associated students incorporated of california state university of sacramento, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alex Alanis: Good afternoon, Madam Chair and members. Alex Alanis with the California Bankers Association. Just a few things to clarify. The private field loan market is actually a very small component of the overall student debt that's always discussed during these debates. Private students loans make up roughly about 6% of the student loan market or 94% is actually where the federal government does their lending through the direct lending program. The privacy to lenders, that should do a very good job of assessing borrowers prior to offering loans to students. They do an upfront assessment and an ability to pay standard. Unlike the federal government, they wanted to make sure that since the only collateral they have is the future earnings of the borrower. They want to make sure they actually get paid on a loan. The federal government does not do this up front assessment, which probably contributes to why private student lenders only have a 2%. Actually, it's less than 2% default rate on its loans. The federal government student loan program has over 11% default rate as part of its program. Now they're probably trying to do other attempts in order to reduce it, but everything they've done so far actually has not been all that successful, and so, Senator Wieckowski mentioned earlier about some of the additional programs that are used in order to at least keep the student up to date on their loans. The income program that they have actually has been somewhat of a problem. The Congressional Budget Office, I believe it was that did a report on this in showing that a lot of these loans are still, people are defaulting on them. So there's still a lot of work to be done in that area, but there is a big difference when it comes to collecting on these loans. As was mentioned earlier, our folks do actually do many attempts in order to keep the student up to date on their loans by offering different payment programs, but in the end, eventually you may have to go through a collection process. Private student lenders have to essentially file a lawsuit and accept a court order in order to do a wage garnishment and wage garnishments as we all know are actually court supervised programs. The federal government does not have that kind of restriction, whatsoever. It has a very heavy hand in how it does the collection for students. It can garnish their wages without a court order. It can seize your tax returns. They can take out some of your Social Security benefits and disability benefits and this is all without a court order. They can just go right in and take it. So, there are less restrictions for federal government on the collecting of their student loans. I think we do a very good job in borrowing to folks. As was mentioned earlier, a lot of these folks don't receive private student loans, because the program we have with respect to grants and the federal student loan market covers most of the tuition, but there are those instance in which you've got to fill the gap. With increasing tuition, there is probably going to be more and more need. We don't want to find ourselves in a situation where you make it more difficult for private student lenders to collect on loans. Because eventually the result is you're going to have less student loans or you'll have higher priced loans in this area, because the ability to collect is going to impact the price of the loan. So, we would hope that the bill would not move forward. With that, we oppose the measure.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1262, 'end': 1272, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cliff Berg: thank you, madam chair. berg here on behalf of the california association of collectors. i would first start off by saying, we are sympathetic to the problem in america today of student loans. however, this bill is about wage garnishments and in effect this problem was solved last year in a bill that this committee approved, which mr. wieckowski authored. sb 501, which was approved by the legislature which was a negotiated agreement between the bankers, the collection industry and the author. limited wage garnishments, california law up until sb 501 capped wage garnishments at 25%, under the provisions of sb 501, which applies to all consumer loans. we lowered the 25% cap and we lowered it below 15% for low income people. the major difference and the major thing that this bill accomplishes is it breaks the tie end between an income test and the garnishment. so by in essence, establishing a 15% cap across the board with no connection at all to income, you're in essence while trying to protect ex-students and let me mention the fact that again, wage garnishments are not brought against students. they are brought against people who have graduated and are in jobs and we'll talk about wage garnishments in a minute, but sb 501 was an agreement between industry and the author to cap wage garnishment on consumer debt including student loans tying it to income. this bill establishes a new cap for student loans only sets the precedent of starting to regulate wage garnishments by the type of debt not by the income of the debtor. that's why this bill is a problem. we have suggested to the author that he simply clarifying sb 501 that sb 501 apply to student debts, which we believe it is clear that it does. so why do we need this new bill other than because well the feds cap at 15%, so we ought to cap at 15%. 501 lowers the cap nearly to 8% for low income people, but 15% here applies to people who will make $1 million a year. there's no income limit or means test. that's why this is a bad public policy to both carve out wage garnishment laws on the type of debt creating problems for employers and sheriffs in servicing, and executing the wage garnishment. we're more than open to working with the author on a bill that limits wage garnishments based upon income, but you just create an arbitrary cap for people of any income level makes absolutely no sense. it's a bad public policy and for that reason, we are opposed to the bill.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 337, 'end': 347, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michelle Castro: Madame Chair, Michelle Castro of the Service Employees' International Union, not in opposition, nor in support. When this bill was first introduced, we had some concerns about the bill, but Senator Roth graciously reached out to us to come to a compromise on some of the amendments. We were concerned about the judgeships, or suspending judgeships from Santa Clara and Alameda. We were concerned about the associated funding with them and funding for staff going along with them because Alameda and Santa Clara may be over judged, but they're severely understaffed. So we just want to thank Senator Roth for working with us and at this point we have no position but we will be moving to a position of support in the next Committee. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 198, 'end': 202, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 599, 'end': 603, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Grisel Ruiz: Thank you for your attention Committee. My name is Grisel Ruiz, I'm a Staff Attorney at the Immigrant Legal Resource Center. We are proud cosponsors of SB 29 along with civic, SB 29 could not come at a more crucial time. The immigrant community has been threatened, singled out with mass detention deportation by the federal administration. SB 29 responds by protecting the most vulnerable, those who have been detained during civil immigration deportation proceedings. This population is diverse including green card holders, asylum seekers, refugees, individuals without status who are simply fighting for the opportunity to remain in the United States with their families. Incidence of prolonged medical abuse, sexual abuse, and many other human rights abuses, have long been documented in the immigration detention system. And the same goes for facilities here in California. Dominated by private prison corporations, immigration detention conditions have become even worse by financial incentives that often pit people against profit. SB29 pushes back by creating enforceable standards of human care. It requires that facilities adhere to federal ICE detention standards which facilities are already contracted to follow. Unfortunately, there is currently no reliable enforcement mechanism in facilities, and many do fall below the standards. As happens frequently here in California. Additionally, SB 29 gets our local governments out of the business of private immigration detention. As detailed by Jude's touching testimony, detention conditions continue to be out of touch with our values of responsible treatment of Californians. Where SB29 law when Jude was detained, Jude would not have been subjected to the same abuses to start. The government standard cited an SP29 insure that, all detainees shall be provided nutritionally balanced diets, that are reviewed at least quarterly by food service personnel, and at least annually by a qualified nutritionist or dietician. This is not what happened in Contra Costa where the food made Jude and other detainees sick. The standards further state that detainees have access to a continum of healthcare services, including screening, prevention, health education, diagnosis and treatment. This also did not happen in Jude's case, as he was routinely denied effective medical care. Finally, the standard states that, detainees shall have access to at least four hours a day of outdoor recreation for certain facilities. This also did not happen where Jude was often given an hour or sometimes no time of recreational time. For all of those reasons, and all of the abuses and the issues that SB 29 would address, we urge the Committee to pass SB 29 with strong support. Thank you.
[{'start': 51, 'end': 62, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1506, 'end': 1510, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1679, 'end': 1683, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2046, 'end': 2050, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2274, 'end': 2278, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2507, 'end': 2511, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Lovell: lovell representing the association for los angeles deputy sheriffs, california association of code enforcement officers, california college and university police chiefs association, california narcotic officers association. la county probation officers union asme local 685, la county professional peace officers association, the la police protective league, and the riverside sheriffs association. we are in support of this bill, we have had a long standing position. opposing private incarceration services, it's axiomatic that they cannot provide the same care that is appropriate. because they are accountable to shareholders, not to the public. not to the people who are incarcerated, who are mere income units for them. we support this bill strongly.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ronald Coleman: Madam Chair and members, Ronald Coleman, Director of Government Affairs. In behalf of the California Immigrant Policies Center here in very strong support of SB 29, thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tristan Brown: thank you madam chair members. brown with the foundation of teachers also in support. thank you very much.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Armour: richard on behalf of the county of imperial, i'd like to apologize to the committee and to the author for the late notice of opposition. if there's anything to be said about of imperial county, it's that we are rich in heart, but poor in jobs, and our opposition to this is the potential for job loss in the county. high unemployment rate, given our proximity to the border, you can imagine there's a large federal presence with border patrol, with immigration.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : We also have two large state prisons in Imperial County, so the local University, San Jose State University, and the local community college, have a very big emphasis on criminal justice, provides a great career path for local residents, where there's very few outside of agriculture and some other industries. So our position is that the county itself stands to lose potentially up to 230 jobs, which is substantial for a county our size, so we respect the author's intent with this bill, but I just have concerns with the potential for job loss.
[]
 : and ken so ken since ken then, ken we ken know ken the ken new ken administration ken has ken actually ken reversed ken the ken phase-out ken of ken private ken prisons. ken and ken has ken stopped ken the ken consideration ken of ken phasing ken out ken private ken detention ken facilities. ken additionally, ken we ken know ken that ken mr. ken trump ken has ken promised ken to ken deport ken millions ken of ken individuals, ken and ken detained ken millions ken more, ken giving ken this, ken really, ken a ken new ken context. ken and ken so ken i ken think ken given ken the ken new ken environment ken in ken which ken we ken are ken in, ken i ken think ken the ken governor ken will ken take ken a ken second ken look ken at ken this ken legislation.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 7, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 11, 'end': 14, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 21, 'end': 24, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 31, 'end': 34, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 38, 'end': 41, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 47, 'end': 50, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 55, 'end': 58, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 63, 'end': 66, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 82, 'end': 85, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 90, 'end': 93, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 116, 'end': 119, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 124, 'end': 127, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 138, 'end': 141, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 145, 'end': 148, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 157, 'end': 160, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 170, 'end': 173, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 178, 'end': 181, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 186, 'end': 189, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 198, 'end': 201, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 206, 'end': 209, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 224, 'end': 227, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 231, 'end': 234, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 243, 'end': 246, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 251, 'end': 254, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 263, 'end': 266, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 277, 'end': 280, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 293, 'end': 296, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 311, 'end': 314, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 318, 'end': 321, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 327, 'end': 330, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 336, 'end': 339, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 344, 'end': 353, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 354, 'end': 357, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 362, 'end': 365, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 375, 'end': 378, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 382, 'end': 385, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 393, 'end': 396, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 406, 'end': 409, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 413, 'end': 416, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 430, 'end': 433, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 438, 'end': 441, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 451, 'end': 454, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 464, 'end': 467, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 474, 'end': 477, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 485, 'end': 488, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 495, 'end': 498, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 507, 'end': 510, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 513, 'end': 516, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 521, 'end': 524, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 534, 'end': 537, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 542, 'end': 545, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 549, 'end': 552, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 565, 'end': 568, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 575, 'end': 578, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 583, 'end': 586, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 591, 'end': 594, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 607, 'end': 610, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 614, 'end': 617, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 624, 'end': 627, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 639, 'end': 642, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 647, 'end': 650, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 653, 'end': 656, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 663, 'end': 666, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 671, 'end': 674, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 684, 'end': 687, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 693, 'end': 696, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 702, 'end': 705, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 708, 'end': 711, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 719, 'end': 722, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 728, 'end': 731, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 735, 'end': 738, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 744, 'end': 747, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Esther Divaggia: Thank you. Hello, everyone. Hello, my name is Esther Divaggia and I'm the lead teacher, and also a science teacher, and a medical teacher at the STEM Academy of Hollywood. We have two career pathways. One in engineering and one in medicine. What that means is all our students take the regular A through G courses when they come to any high school, but they also take one additional course in their chosen career pathway. And these courses are CTE, or career technical education courses. We serve about 560 students and 96% of them are qualifying for free, and reduced lunch. Finding teachers for these CTE courses has been challenging as you might have guessed. Primarily, because teaching these CTE STEM courses relies heavily on current STEM knowledge from professional careers. We were fortunate to find two teachers that come from professional backgrounds for our medical sector. They were previously, one was a paramedic, and one was a biomedical researcher. Both of these instructors spent three years getting their teaching credential. But the reality is that for most STEM professionals, that path is far too long, and very uncertain. And what Encore has helped our school do is engage with STEM professionals directly. They come on campus, they observe our classes, interact with our students, and most importantly, they try teaching before they commit. And these interactions has lead to two engineering teachers that we hired, one teaches Civil Engineering and Architecture, and the second teaches Aerospace Engineering. And the Encore teachers are amazing, they engage students by bringing to life these students dream careers, and they have contacts within the industry that they engage in a variety of ways for mentors, for internships, field trips. They bring them into the classroom to judge student projects. All of the STEM professionals that our school employs help us deliver very authentic, and relevant education to our students. Students who enter high school wanting to pursue STEM careers, but don't always leave that way. And it's, because of these very inspiring educators that students maintain engagement, they work hard, and they can truly envision acquiring those goals in the ever growing STEM fields. Thank you.
[{'start': 46, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Latiera Haynes: hello everyone. thank you for allowing me to speak to you today. my name is doctor latiera jonah haynes and as he said, i teach at mervyn m dymally high school is located in south los angeles. i currently teach about 260 students, i have six classes. i teach three courses and each class has around 40 students. i teach biology, i teach forensic science, and i also teach biomedical science as she does as well. i have a credential in biology physics, and i have a cte credential in health science, and medical technology. before teaching, i was in graduate school, getting my doctorate degree as ucsd. i studied, i was in the biomedical sciences program, and i studied immune cells. and while i was in that program, and just as i was experiencing the science community, i realized that there are very few students, or phd students like me, or scientists like myself who did not have parents who went to college. i'm a first generation college student, and i would have not made it to the doctoral program if i did not have teachers throughout my life, investing in me, and making sure that i experience things that my parents had no idea about. the encore program was really very helpful in helping me get into the teaching profession. i was writing my dissertation and preparing to defend. and they make sure that i found the right teaching credential program for me. they made sure i had guest teaching opportunities and they offer scholarships for me to continue professional development even now as i am a teacher. and so i would like to say encore is an amazing program, and i really believe that we need more stem professionals because my students really have no idea what it means to be a stem professional. and i am, i think, the only one that my students have met in their lifetime. so i just want you guys to take that into account, and just thank you for letting me speak today.
[{'start': 83, 'end': 103, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dave Gordon: thank you. my name is gordon, i work as the county superintendent of schools for sacramento. we have 13 school districts and approximately 240,000 students in the county. we run a school of education which trains administrators and we have a teacher intern program. and we've been proud to have a partnership with encore for about the last two years. and i'm here to tell you it's been extremely successful. we have 40 candidates in training right now in math and science, many of whom who would not have been there if not for encore. their model is terrific. it can be delivered through a county office, through a school district and sometimes we cast about for new approaches to do something differently for the sake of doing it differently. but i'm here to tell you, think the encore model is truly worth supporting as something we can implement statewide through this bill. so we're in strong support of it. thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Sarkissian: Good morning, Karen Sarkissian with the California Chamber of Commerce in strong support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Enrique Ruacho: Enrique Ruacho on behalf of the Los Angeles Unified School District in strong support and proud of the work that you're doing. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ray Burnell: Ray Burnell with the Catholic Church in California, and we are in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrea Deveau: Good morning, Andrea Deveau on behalf of TechNet in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Watta: jennifer on behalf of edvoice in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katherine Wilcox: senators, my name is katherine latiera wilcox. i'm the executive director of the encore stem teacher's program. i have a letter from our board chair, sherry lansing. having founded the encore stem teacher's program in 2007 to help address the urgent need for math and science teachers in california, i whole-heartedly urge you to endorse senate bill 436. i feel that this bill is vitally important to support california k-12 public stem education, as well as to help ensure the economic future of our great state. thank you.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 150, 'end': 164, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dave Touse: good morning, dave, the program lead and bay area director with encore, also a former science teacher in california, and i strongly support with a bill from barry munitz, or a letter from barry munitz.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 157, 'end': 169, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 188, 'end': 200, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Roger Anderson: My name is Roger Anderson, I am the EnCorps STEM Teachers Program Sacramento program director and also I have a letter here I'd like to briefly read from ... Okay I am in support of the bill, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicole Rice: Mister Vice Chair Chair and members, Nicole Rice California Manufacuters and Technologies Association, if you could indulge me, we are here on a support if amended position. And we have been working with the Senator on that position. Our concern is just that the language of the bill specifies only math and science. And we would like to see that scope expanded, as the Senator has indicated in his opening comment, to incorporate those technologies and those experience in education that stem professionals have. To incorporate industrial trades organizations and professions, such as manufacturing. So we're happy to continue to working with you on that and we are encouraged and urge you to vote this bill out so we can continue working on that language. Thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kareem Gongora: thank you. good morning, mr. chairman and the distinguished members of the education committee. i want to humbly thank you for not only the opportunity to come and speak on you on behalf of my community. but also, some of the most vulnerable and precious members of it, our children. i'd also like to thank senator connie leyva and her staff for their diligent work on sb 26. a critical piece of legislation that will close a dangerous loophole that affects all communities across california. my name is kareem katherine gongora. and i'm the chairman of the san bernardino county committee on a school district organization. but more importantly, i'm a parent of three beautiful children that attend fontana unified school district in fontana. it is because of them, and the children they attend school with, that i am here today. as a father, i feel my number one priority is to ensure the physical and emotional safety of my children. and as a member of the community, i consider it a top priority to safeguard all of our children from danger. because it takes a village to successfully raise children to reach their potential. while rehabilitation is a key facet of our criminal justice system, it is critical that we are not adopting dangerous policies like the one that allowed mark christopher gurries a registered sex offender to gain access to a local catholic school that takes chances with our children's safety. i was present on wednesday, september 14th, 2016 at the fontana unified school district board of education meeting when parents, students, community members came forward to share their concern about a similar policy being adopted in our district as a result of sb 326. as i have stated, i have children who attend fontana schools, and i too share the concerns of many there that convicted sexual predators would be able to legally gain access to school campus without any direct business. the fontana unified school district board of education heard our community's concern and adopted a stringent policy that would restrict all registered sex offenders for mentoring school campuses. as senator leyva mentioned, they were sued and somewhat viewed as a violation of california law. sb 26 the keep kids safe at school act, fixes that loophole and provides clear, direction to school districts that unbinds their hands when it comes to protecting our children by keeping registered sex offenders away from schools. as a parent, i send my children to public schools and will continue to because i have confidence that the people we elected and the policies set forth by our government also place a priority on my children's safety. it is because of that confidence that i know you will do what is right and what will keep all of our children safe by supporting the ability of local school districts to make decisions that have such a large impact on our communities. thank you for the time today and i'm available for questions as needed.
[{'start': 315, 'end': 327, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 504, 'end': 528, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1283, 'end': 1307, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2119, 'end': 2124, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Maria Fernandatoris: Good morning, Chairman, distinguished members of the Education Committee, and community members present. My name is Maria Fernandatoris, co-founder of Communities United For Safety, Youths Initiatives Board member for the National Latina Businesswomen Association, and youth advocate. Today, I am here to advocate in support of Senate Bill 26 for the following reasons. As a survivor of eight years of sexual abuse from my biological father, I understand the scars and negative impact it has on one's life. This person was incarcerated. For over eight years. To this day, he has not changed. Therefore, it is very alarming that current law allows for a registered sex offender, who is not a family member of the student, to volunteer at the school. If an administrator grants permission and notifies parents 14 days in advance, also sex offenders who have committed violent felonies against children can potentially be on school sites, for school plays and other events. This is despicable, to parents, to victims of sexual abuse, and children who are being exposed. We are already facing an epidemic where one in every 3 girls and 1 in every 5 boys is being abused of their rights by the time they are 18. Therefore, it is imperative to ensure that the safety of our kids in the community especially on school grounds. Where children should be safe and parents should not worry about someone with a sex offender charge being close to their children because an administrator approved it. Although SB 26 does not solve the epidemic as a whole. It does close several loop holes such as not allowing sex offenders to volunteer at school sites. Ensuring that register sex offenders who have committed violent crimes, sex crimes against children are never. Never allowed in school plays, soccer games, and other events. Most importantly it ensures that children are never in a situation where they end up alone with the registered sex offender at school grounds. With that being said, please support Senate Bill 26, ensure our kids' safety on school grounds. Thank you for your time.
[{'start': 116, 'end': 135, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicole Pittman: Thank you, thank you for allowing me to speak. My name is Nicole Pittman, I'm the Director of the Center on Youth Registration Reform at Impact Justice, based in Oakland, California, it's a national organization We have submitted a letter with suggested amendment language outlining the concerns, but we are not formally opposed, but we have some very big concerns. Our concerns are with the unintended impact of SB 26 on juveniles who are enrolled in schools, and also on registries. Although the bill does not name juveniles specifically, it will have a horrific unintended consequences on them. As the last witness that just spoke, we all want to protect children, we all want to keep children safe. However, we must be aware that juveniles are on the California sex offender registry, meaning children adjudicated delinquent in juvenile court that are supposed to be given a second chance. We have totally about 3,000 kids on our registry that have been adjudicated in juvenile court. Children as young as 10 years old for a range of behaviors, some serious but most normative, youthful behaviors like playing Doctor and Romeo and Juliet offenses. Research reveals that kids reoffense rate is vanishingly low under, 2% for sex offenses. There are also some disparities, and there's some issues about, it's not a public safety tool, where 85% of our kids on a registry for life, are black males. I'm excited to work with Senator Leyva on this amendment, as I know it was not the intent to interfere with our children's rights. My recommendation is for amendment to explicitly exclude juveniles, as the bill smartly recognizes for parents and guardians on the registry with a child in the school. This exception is consistent with our state's good public policy sense and movement towards improving outcomes for system involved youth, and it will achieve three things. It ensures Senator Leyva's stated intent to exclude juveniles, it will help protect schools in the state from litigation, and it will also be consistent with Senator Lara's bill, SB 695, which is to overhaul and reform the sex offender registry. Thank you for the opportunity to comment, I look forward to working with you and the author on this bill to make this change. And I just want to say I think it's worth it, the extra words, for our children's sake to add the extra words. Thank you.
[{'start': 58, 'end': 72, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1432, 'end': 1437, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1890, 'end': 1895, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2037, 'end': 2041, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Natasha Minsker: natasha kareem minsker, aclu of california. we are also not formally oppose to the bill, but we have expressed concern to senator leyva's office. we really appreciate the amendments that had been taken, are improving the bill, and senator leyva's staff have indicated a commitment to continue to work with us. i did want to raise briefly our concern that theres a lot of stereotypes about sex offenders registries and the people who are required to register here in california. the problem we have stems from the fact that our registry is actually unique in requiring lifetime registration for a very broad number offenses, and as nicole says, includes people who committed offenses as children, relatively minor behavior who are required to register for life. as a result we have 100,000 people who are required to register here in california. some of them were required to register for offenses that were committed literally 50 years ago. one offense in some of these cases. and the vast majority of the people on the registry are there for offenses that involved adults, not children, and research shows that they pose absolutely no risk to children. so we appreciate the intent of the bill, we don't have any quarrel with the very core concept that a person who is required to register for an offense involving a minor, should not be left alone with other children while on campus. that core concept we appreciate. we continue to be concerned that the words of the bill, in practice, will lead to stigmatization of the children who it seeks to protect. so the problem is that we have children who's parents, who they love, are on the registry and they want their parents to be involved in their lives, and the idea of supervising them without further guidance could be implemented in a way that stigmatizes the children. it is already extremely stigmatizing for a child to have a parent on the registry. the sex offender management board has a report that goes into how difficult it is for minor children when their parents are on the registry, and it's really important that we take the extra steps to ensure that those children are not further stigmatized and that they have a best chance of success. so we are eager to continue to work with senator leyva addressing this. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 130, 'end': 135, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 239, 'end': 244, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 631, 'end': 637, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2256, 'end': 2261, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jason Morrow: Yes, my name is Jason Morrow.I live in Elk Grove and I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Neben: Good morning, Mr. Chair and members. David Neben, on behalf of the School Transportation Coalition and the California Association of School Transportation Officials. I would like to offer a support position, thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Enrique Ruacho: Enrique Ruacho on behalf of the Los Angeles Unified School District, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Teha Nguyen: Teha Nguyen on behalf of Public Advocates, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Egan: michael natasha egan on behalf of the california teachers association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carl Schaffer: Good morning, I'm Dr. Carl Schaffer. Delighted to be here. This is a, I don't want to call it a culmination but it may be the beginning of a culmination of the task I took on almost five years ago. Realizing that although the arts are mandated in the education code, they're been treated as an optional part of their program. And I Learned that near the State School Board or the Department of Education has the authority to enforce those sections of the education code, which was quite a revelation to me. I've been in this a long time. This year will mark 60 years as an arts educator, and I'm still teaching. And it is something that I have Learned that the arts are important, but thats not the issue today. The issue is that there are sections of the education code that are not being followed by local school districts. I want to thank Senator Allen so much for his support and his interest in my quest, and by carrying this bill. I believe it's a good strong start towards what we need to be able to accomplish. There's one thing that I might recommend that I'm not sure whether it would be a part of it or, but added, but the authority for enforcement of the education code is at the local governing board. And it says, this is code 51050, the governing board of every school district should enforce in its schools the courses of study, and then the use of textbooks and instructional materials prescribed and adopted by a proper authority. School Boards aren't doing this, and for one of the consequences could be litigation. They're not doing what the law prescribes them to do. So in closing, the current education code was adopted in 1995, that's over 20 years ago. Because the arts have been treated as optional, thousands of students have been denied their right to instruction in the arts. And this is what needs to be changed, thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 850, 'end': 855, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Joe Landon: thank you, excuse me. i'm joe, and i'm the executive director of the california alliance for arts education. i left a cozy job at the capital about 12 years ago and went to work for this organization. and i have to tell you that in 12 years of advocating for arts education, i have yet to meet somebody who is against arts education. everybody thinks it's a terrific idea, everybody loves the arts and everybody loves arts education. however, the issue comes down to priorities. and what happens when the arts are put against other issues, in the school day or in circumstances that the administrators face? that to me is the essence of what this bill is which is to consolidate the thinking around how do we make arts education the priority in our schools. how do we move that along beyond this place that currently exists where some places it happens, some places it doesn't? and it sort of is based on circumstances to a priority in every school district. there are districts where this is happening such as chula vista where they've made that investment, and we've seen the impact on the students. we have the research that indicates that. and in some places, there's the willingness. and in some places, i'm sorry, we don't have that. we commend and deeply appreciate senator allen's commitment to this issue, and to take on that larger conversation. our hope is that in the coming months and year, that we will develop language and strategies that help build out a response to this statewide, so that all of our students have access to arts education as it was written in education code. thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1281, 'end': 1286, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ron Rapp: good morning, mr. chair, and members of the committee. rapp speaking on behalf of the california federation of teachers. we don't have a formal position, but i'm recommending a support position. cft is a strong advocate for arts education and believe that it's essential to a well-rounded, high quality education, thank you.
[{'start': 55, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nikki Moore: Thank you Mr. Chair and members. Nikki Moore with the California Newspaper Publishers Association, here in support. We support more detailed information being provided to the public, we think it lets our reporters report more accurately, it lets the public draw more accurate conclusions. And we know that thats very important, so we respectfully urge an aye vote.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicholas Heidorn: nicholas jonah heidorn with california common cause, also in support. when the form 700's were adopted in the 70's the tiers did a fairly good job of showing small middling and large economic interest, but with inflation that's no longer the case today. it's just one example. one of the tier's for income is $10,000 which is about a part time job, all the way to $100,000 which is more than three times the average californian's income. with regarding a middle tier to that as well some other tiers will help provide more context and more useful information to public. so proud of being in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Watts: good morning. is that working? mr. chairman, members, mark nicholas watts here today on behalf of transportation california. i'm principally here to assist the senator if there are questions, but i would note transportation california has pursued constitutional protection for any revenues that would flow from a new package. we think it's helpful on two accounts. one, it helps ensure proper project delivery and no disruption by diversion of funds and it provides a level of comfort to the voters when they are facing new taxes. we recognize that this is a framework, as the senator pointed out. and we've been working diligently with the senator and leadership over the last several weeks on additional language that we'd like to see put into this, that i don't need to talk about today because it depends on what the final package looks like. thank you very much.
[{'start': 54, 'end': 73, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dan Carrigg: mister chairman, members, carrigg on behalf of league of california cities. we're in support of the measure. we think constitutional protection has to be there as part of an overall transportation finance package. so, appreciate your support as the issue moves along.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeremy Smith: thank you mr. chair, members of the committee. jeremy mark smith here on behalf of the state building and construction trades council, also in support. thank you.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 64, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Orville Thomas: Good afternoon, Mr. Chair, Orville Thomas in California Alliance for Jobs in support of the work that Senator Newman's shown with constitutional amendment. Ask for your aye vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 110, 'end': 116, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brad Barrow: Mr. Chair and members, Brad Barrow with United Contractors here in support, urge your Aye vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Darrin Bender: Madam Chair, Committee Members. Colonel Darrin Bender, I work with the California Military Department. And though we do not have an official position on this bill, I'm happy to answer any technical questions.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julie Worley: Hi, my name's Julie Worley and I'm a local HR consultant and a proud SHRM member and CalSHRM member. And we are here today in support, asking your support for this bill that will allow employers to give preferential treatment for our veterans. Currently CalSHRM, and SHRM collectively, have partnership with local veteran organizations where we provide outreach and counseling to help veterans find jobs as they transition out. However, we're finding that isn't enough. Employers need to have the option, if they so choose, to hire a veteran without worry and concern that they might be sued, because they have chosen a veteran versus someone else, whether they're female or male. So your vote for this bill will allow veterans the opportunity to help land positions that they might not otherwise be able to have. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lorna Greiss: yes, good greiss, representing california state commanders veteran council, military officers association, and vietnam veterans, we support this bill.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 16, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kevin Aslanian: Thank you. Good afternoon. My name is Kevin Aslanian, and I'm with the Coalition of California Welfare Rights Organizations. We're sponsoring this bill because we've had some veterans who came to our office and they ended up homeless when their general assistance stopped, because of the county was limiting it to three months. So this is a bill that will say thank you for your service, and you should be helped for 12 months and not 3 months. And we urge an aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lorna Greiss: Colonel Lorna Greiss representing California State Commanders Veteran Council and Military Officers Association and Vietnam veterans. We support this bill.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pete Contay: good afternoon, madam chairman, members. pete jonah contay representing the american legion, am vets, american gi forum, vietnam veterans of america and the california association of county veteran service officers who are in support of this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gillian Devores: we're not in opposition, but we have a concerns position. so my name is gillian pete devores. i'm with urban counties of california. also here on the behalf of california state association of counties, the county welfare directors association and the rural county representatives of california. our concern about the fact that this gives a special treatment to veterans. not that we're not trying to provide those services. we do use our county veteran services offices and try and coordinate services across all of our departments, whether it's mental health, health, or human services. however, there's a lot of other stakeholders and groups out there that would like the same sort of extended benefit. so we have to take that into consideration. and, our ga levels are established at the local level, depending on the local needs. so la has gone to a longer term, as the author said. but other counties, depending on their fiscal situation, or the needs in their county, may have different levels. also, we would note that this ga or gr is from the county general fund and in this era of fiscal uncertainty that we're in, we just don't think we can do this type of change. we have been talking to the author's staff about potentially a compromise or some other way to help the veterans. and we hope to continue those conversations as the bill moves forward thank you.
[{'start': 72, 'end': 92, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 837, 'end': 839, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Robert Callahan: thank you, callahan with the internet association, here in support. our support's pretty simple. in cyber security is a fact of everyday life for internet companies. it will only grow and import in the 21st century, we're going to need people to fill those roles and those jobs we know we can't create that workforce overnight. this bill's a great first step in the right direction of creating that workforce here in california. so we urge your support. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert Gore: Good afternoon, Robert Gore from The Gualco Group on behalf of Deloitte. As we've heard cyber securities unfortunately have a growth industry into a bar turned from another crisis water, you can't manage what you don't measure. This is absolutely essential. And also I read in the Wall Street Journal today that competition is fierce and growing, even Kentucky has a cyber haller now. So, we firmly support the bill.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Josh Pawn: Mr. Chairman and members, Josh Pawn on behalf of the California Bus Association, here in support of the Senator's bill. We think that a level playing field for all those operators that have already committed their resources and dollars would go a long way in this way, thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Shimoda: And thank you, Chairman Beall, Chris Shimoda with the California Trucking Association, we are pleased to support SB 174, which represents a rare win-win for both business and the environment. To demonstrate the broad support SB 174 enjoys, with me today are Bill Magavern, policy director for the Coalition for Clean Air, as well as Keith Sears, a CARB-compliant single truck operator, we respectfully ask for an aye vote, and are happy to answer any of the Committee's questions.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 29, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 31, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 258, 'end': 271, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 333, 'end': 344, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bill Magavern: mr. chair and members, bill with the coalition for the clean air, diesel exhaust is a toxic air contaminant and the diesel truck and bus rules are probably the most important clean air measure that the state has taken in the last 10 years, so this is a common sense measure to bring up the compliance rate, which is unfortunately still quite low.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Keith Sears: okay, mr. chairman and members of the committee, my name is sears and i am a sole proprietor of a small trucking company, single man operation. far back as in 2007, i knew that this law was going to go into effect, and we were briefed on it by the time, roughly around 2010, we would have to get vehicles that have clean air, clean air compliant vehicles. although it was a great expense for me to do so, i complied, i purchased a clean air vehicle in 2010, and daily, as i travel up and down the state of california, i see non-compliant vehicles that i'm competing with, and it's just not right, so what i'm here for today is to ask that members of the committee support sb 174.
[]
Victoria Rome: Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and members, Victoria Rome with the Natural Resources Defense Council in support.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Gonzalez: Thank you, Mr. Chair, David Gonzalez today on behalf of the Truck and Engine Manufacturers Association, representing the manufacturers of these heavy duty trucks, happy to be here in support of this important measure.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kirk Blackburn: Kirk Blackburn on behalf of the California Tow Truck Association and the United Coalition for Motor Club Safety in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jared Sanchez: Jared Sanchez on behalf of the California Bicycle Coalition in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cynthia Cory: chairman, members, cory from the california farm bureau, and i want to thank senator lara and his staff for working with us, and we do appreciate their willingness to address our concerns, but we just want to take a few moments. at this point we have to remain opposed until we see if our concerns can get addressed as we move through the process, but we wanted to just briefly explain what our concerns are, so as you see this bill move forward, you'll understand where we're coming from. so trucks are important to ag, we couldn't get all of the wonderful food that we produce, 400 kinds in this state, the food, and the fiber into your clothes, and into your sweaters, and into your shoes, without trucks, so trucks are important to us, and luckily arb has recognized that. they've worked closely with us from the beginning, from the ag woman that developed the truck and bus rule, and we were able to survey our folks and get an emissions inventory, and they gave us an ag mileage provision. so right now, as long as you register with arb, and drive under the threshold, which is 15,000 miles a year, you can continue to keep your engine until 2023, at which time you'll have to have a 2010 engine, in 2020, that drops down to 10,000. so the problem has been educating the farmers, even though we worked really hard to get this rule, i was going to make copies, but i didn't want to kill that many trees. the truck post rule is 62 pages long, it's really complex, and i'm paid to understand it, and i still gotta tell you, there's 15 to 20 ways to comply with this rule, it's pretty complicated. and so trying to get my farmers, who have a lot of things on their plates, to concentrate on this rule, and to sign up for the rule, even though we got this provision, has not been easy, if we can get their attention, hopefully they follow through, but some of them haven't, that's why we're here. so, sb 174 is a game changer, because now, for the first time, we're going to have folks that won't be able to get their trucks registered, but they're not going to know anything, they're not going to have cory beating on their head to tell them about this rule. maybe they belong to cta, and they know about it, but there's a lot of folks out there that are just truck owners that don't know anything about this, so, it's going to be a big deal come 2020 when they can't get their trucks registered. so what we're asking is a couple things. we're asking that the ag mileage rule that i just explained be reopened and that farmers and ranchers have the opportunity to sign up again before 2020. so open the door, close the door. if they don't take that opportunity that's their fault. but believe me, i will be beating them over the head to get them to do that. that helps arb bring those folks into compliance. the second thing is, one of the many provisions i talked about is a low mileage provision. it's 5,000 miles right now, it drops to 1,000 miles in 2020. and we'd like to ask if that state of 5000, we think that's going to be really important for the small folks that are not big businesses, they're not small businesses. they're not even businesses, they're people that are stringing jobs together and they might own a truck. and they don't know anything about this rule, so we're asking that. so both of those things, we've talked to senator lara about and we're looking into it. the last one he mentioned is the temporary permit. we think it's really important because i have folks that have spent days and hours working with arb to comply. they'll send in their truck information, they'll send in their odometer information and they're now hearing. i got a call yesterday from a guy in marin who's got a couple trucks, he's been in compliance since the beginning of the rule and he got told that his 2011 odometer reading is gone even though he has compliance certificates for last year. and he is out of the rule. so i'm really worried come 2020 what's going to happen to this guy that's tried to be in compliance. so we've got a database at arb that is not up to snuff. it's going to need a lot of work. it's going to need a lot of money. but who's going to hear about it come 2020? it's going to be you folks, you're going to be hearing from, why can't i get my truck registered? what happened? i heard the legislature did this. so i just want to make sure that we're spending the time and effort to make sure that it doesn't happen. so i just want to say that if you ask arb, we have done outreach, we've tried to make sure that folks are aware of this but we haven't been successful. there's not everybody, every farmer in the state knows about it and not every truck owner knows about it. and so, we've got to take the time and make sure that happens. what i'm asking for is not going to compete with the gentlemen who was here. we're not trying to set up any kind of provision that allows someone to go 50 and 60,000 miles with a dirty truck up and down the state. i'm trying to keep my ag guys farming in their seasonal trucks and i'm trying to keep somebody that's only going to drive 5,000 miles a year to have that opportunity in 2020. we, senator lara mentioned funding. but my guys, trisha and our folks, we're not the ones that get the funding. the truckers, the guys that are in long distance are the ones who get the funding because it's more cost effective. those are the guys that are going up and down the roads. those who you want to give the money to. but in the meantime, our limited use folks haven't been able to get funding. so i just want to bring that to your attention and i look forward to working with the staff and the senator. and hopefully we can get a resolution, but in the meantime, we have to respectfully remain opposed
[{'start': 19, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 85, 'end': 89, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2104, 'end': 2108, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3352, 'end': 3356, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5171, 'end': 5175, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5208, 'end': 5214, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tricia Geringer: mr. chair and members, tricia with agricultural council of california representing over 15,000 farmers from throughout the states. our letter went in a little late, so i apologize for that but very respectfully thank the senator for his open door and his staff for working with the agricultural community and eco farm bureau's comments. we do remain opposed unless amended and honing in on what's in the mentioned the seasonality issue. very important for our members, what our members are doing is using the trucks in a very limited way oftentimes under that limited use, limited mileage restriction, jestering harvest season. harvesting a crop and then using a truck to take it to the processor just for a few months out of the year. so that, in particular, is very important for my members. so with respect, remain opposed at this time.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Peter Treydte: Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee. My name is Peter Treydte, and I am here on behalf of SEMA, the Specialty Equipment Market Association. Headquartered in Diamond Bar, California, we represent over 6600 member companies, some of whom manufacture performance parts for motor vehicles. Collectively, our member companies represent a $39.2 billion a year industry, with approximately 25% of their members calling California home. Emissions related performance parts are regulated by the California Air Resources Board. Parts and components that affect emissions of a motor vehicle require testing and approval by the agency to demonstrate that they do not increase emissions. Air intake systems, exhaust headers, superchargers, and tuning devices are examples of the types of parts that are regulated by the agency. Under section 27-156 of the Motor Vehicle Code, California requires an executive order exemption for any emissions related product sold into the state commonly referred to as a CARB EO. To obtain an EO, a company must submit an application and test data to prove these parts do not negatively impact emissions. Parts that are awarded an EO by CARB for legal sale and use in California are generally considered legal for sale and use in the other 49 states, as well. The testing done in support of the EO process is not done by CARB, but rather by independent laboratories recognized by CARB as being equipped to properly perform from the strict regulatory tests. Over the years SEMA has developed an excellent working relationship with CARB in its aftermarket parts division. As an industry group, we work to provide focused technical assistance to our member companies, which must have their parts approved through the agency. In 2014 SEMA opened an emissions testing facility of our own, the SEMA Emissions Compliance Center, which is one of about 40 labs nationwide that are recognized by CARB to run emissions tests on performance parts in preparation for the submission of an EO application. With the Emission Compliance Center operating at full capacity, and with an industry that continues to grow, we are sending more EO applications to CARB than in any time in our history. And to its credit, CARB has expended all existing resources to insure that parts needing an EO can move expeditiously through the process. However, the agency is simply understaffed, and with the growing demand from the automotive after market industry, substantial delays in the processing and issuing of EOs are not uncommon. This can be discouraging to the parts manufacturers when companies are unable to obtain EOs in a reasonable time frame. They may lose market share to companies that don't comply. This is bad for business, and it fosters a black market of products that are not legal. We are proposing through SB 660 to simply allow SEMA and other industry groups to reach an agreement with CARB to fund additional staff in the agency's after market parts division to process EO applications. If reached, our agreement would not provide preferential treatment to SEMA members, and we fully support the Committee's clarifying amendmen in that regard. I respectfully ask for your aye vote and am available to answer any questions, thank you.
[{'start': 65, 'end': 78, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
James Lombardo: mr chairman, members of the committee, lombardo sr. on behalf of the california motorcycle dealers association, and we support the bill.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 51, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Josh Pane: Yes, Mr. Chairman, members, Josh Pane on behalf of the California Bus Association in support. We've been working with the author, and a couple of the details to it looked technically in nature. And so we would urge your support of the bill, and we'll continue to work with the author. Thank you.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Wolfe: Yes, Mr. Chairman and members, good morning, David Wolfe with the Howard Jarvis Taxpayers Association in support of the bill. And again, this is a technical cleanup that was meant to apply to all local tax measures. And Alex Gibbs is here from representing the City of Carson, and he'll speak a little bit further on this, thank you.
[{'start': 45, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 220, 'end': 230, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alex Gibbs: good morning, mr. chairman, honorable members of the committee, i am alex jonah gibbs from townsend public affairs here on behalf of the city of carson, as well to inform you that the full city council of carson voted in support of this bill last night. ab 195 is a much-needed transparency bill that will ensure california voters have all information needed when heading to the polls. last november, the los angeles county metropolitan transportation authority placed before the voters of la county an annual $860 million sales tax increase through measure m. according to election code 13119 b the measure required a ballot label for the proposed tax increase that included the amount of money to be raised annually, and the rate and duration of the text to be levied. however, the measure and proposed ballot did not include this required information. thus the city of carson, along with the cities of norwalk, torrance, santa fe springs, signal hill, rancho palos verdes, and commerce all filed suit seeking a court order to require the measure and ballot to provide the transparency described by law. surprisingly, a superior court judge ruled that these transparency requirements only applied to tax measures proposed by citizens and not local agencies, which is why we are here before you today. ab 195 will clarify any ambiguities in the law, and ensure that citizens receive the information they're entitled to, regardless of who proposes a tax measure. thank you for your time, and respectfully request your support today.
[{'start': 69, 'end': 85, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicholas Heidorn: Chair, members of the Committee Nicholas Heidorn with the California Common Cause in strong support of AB 1089 which helps secure the integrity of California elections down to the local level. Under current law the default, as the Assembly Member mentions, is that there are no contribution limits at the local level, unless the local government enacts it's own limits. This bill merely shifts that default role, so now there would be a default of $4,400 contribution limits, the same applicable to state officials, but again local governments which retain the local control to be able to opt out of the bill by enacting their own limits. Presently the vast majority of local jurisdictions have no contribution limits. Common Cause did a comprehensive survey had found that only 23% of cities and 28% counties have contribution limits. In jurisdictions without limits, we uncovered examples, numerous examples of candidates receiving five and even six figure contributions. Unlimited donations are a problem for our democracy, they open the door to corruption, pay to play, and undo influence.  They create the appearance of special interest control which demoralizes our democracy, and they help incumbents entrench themselves against competition. For example, in the City of Montebello the city sued one of its former Council Member alleging she voted for a $100 million plus trash hauling contract in exchange for a $45,000 campaign contribution. In Vallejo, a City Council candidate campaigned to build a port district on Mayor Island and received a $98,000 contribution, nearly all his money from the owner of the only rail line servicing that island. And in San Bernardino, County, one supervisor running for assessor received an astounding $242,000 direct contribution from a housing developer who had frequent business before the board. AB 1089 addresses the problems inherent in the system of unlimited contributions. by instead, placing a reasonable $4,400 default cap on local campaign contributions.  At the same time, I want to stress AB 1089 fully respects local autonomy. The bill establishes, again, only a default and locals can opt out of it. In closing, California is one of only four cities to have state contribution limits but no local contribution limits. We should not be an outlier when it comes to safeguarding the integrity of local elections where urge and aye vote.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bob Gerell: Mr. Chairman and members, Bob Gerell on behalf of the National Union of Healthcare Workers and Democracy Live. I'd like to say that this is about accessibility. It's not about partisanship. It's about the participation in the electoral process. I understand in certain districts, like yours, Mr. Harper, that it's easier for those that are disabled, and those that are in the military to get to a voting booth. But in those like Mr Cunningham's, where we were privileged enough to have former Assemblyman Bordonaro, which inspired the capitol to change accessibility In this building, in order to have the disabled participate in Democracy. Those voters would have a better chance of voting those disabled voters in the more remote parts of the district and others in more of a central part of the district. This is about accessibility to the process and we ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 296, 'end': 302, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 432, 'end': 442, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 505, 'end': 514, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
James Schwab: James Schwab, on behalf of Secretary State Alex Padilla, we're the sponsor of AB 840. Over the past six years, the Legislature has worked hard to reduce the number of rejected vote by mail ballots. In 2008 the number of rejected ballots was around 2.9%, or roughly 130,000 ballots. So these are voters who cast a ballot, but their ballot was rejected, their votes were rejected because of various reasons; it arrived late, they didn't sign their ballot, or they maybe switched up their signatures, the wife signed for the husband, the husband signed for the wife. Over the past couple years, we've signed legislation to allow postmark plus three. So if your ballot is postmarked by election day and arrives within three days, it still counts. Senator Mullen authored a bill to allow for voters who forgot to sign their ballot up to eight days after election day to make that fix. Unfortunately, the only way to, there's a couple ways to cure a missing signature. One is the county will send you a postcard to sign and return back, and that's done by mail. The other way is to fax it back or you can go in person to the registrar's office. Those aren't necessarily the most convenient ways. I don't have a fax machine. I don't think most people have a fax machine ready at home. So AB 840 simply allows the voter who forgot to sign their ballot to send back the card that county assigned them via email. We hope that continuous to reduce the number of rejected ballots during every election cycle. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 43, 'end': 55, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 751, 'end': 757, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kim Alexander: Thank you. Good morning, members. I'm Kim Alexander, President and Founder of the California Voter Foundation. We're very happy to support AB 216. There are a couple reasons why we support this bill. One is that we found that wealthier counties can afford to give orders better order services. We recently seen data that shows the amount county spent per voter varies from as high as almost $11 to as low as $0.85 per voter, so that results from a wide variety of voter services and experiences and we don't believe it should be this way. We believe voters should have equal protection of their voting rights in California statewide, regardless of where they live and vote. We think that not providing postage, disadvantages young people in particular who we know are already less likely to use. The postal service are already under represented in the voting process are already less likely to vote by mail and are going to be promoted to do so under SB 450. And when they do vote by mail, their ballots are more likely rejected due to voter error. So, this combination of facts results in a real discouraging experience for people who are voting for their first time. We appreciate having our 2014 study on voting by mail included in the Committee analysis, although I do regret there's an error in the report that got into the analysis. So, I just want to clarify that it is not currently state law that all counties that provide vote by mail voters in all precincts with paid postage. That's done by convention, but there's no law that requires counties currently to give paid postage to voters who live in all vote by mail precincts. It's our understanding that, thats the convention that counties do make a practice of doing that, but it's not currently required in state law, although we can get up to be as well and we just saw some recent data from Washington state that did show that paid postage Was attributed for increasing turnout in two jurisdictions. It was anticipated to be 30% and it was, instead, 37 and 40%. And the election official there said, this was because they provided the postage. Lastly, I want to just note that we know a lot about the rejected ballots, which is a big issue in California when people vote by mail. They do stand a chance of having their ballots rejected, but we don't know about how many voters didn't send in their vote by mail ballots at all because they didn't have a stamp or they were confused by the varying postage prices and so for all those reasons we hope that you will support this bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sujir Addi: Good morning everyone, and thank you for having me here to testify in front of you all. My name is Sujir Addi and I'm a third year at UC Berkeley studying political science, and middle eastern studies. Today I have the distinct honor and privilege to be here representing the 245,000 University of California students across the system, and it's student leaders, the leaders of tomorrow who will all find voting rights as one of the most important issues facing students today. I would like to start off by addressing something, something someone like me, a clearly engaged student who has to escape class in order to be here today, has hard time comprehending. That is the idea that my demographic and my peers and I are described as a politically apathetic generation. There are numerous articles stating that youth voter turnout is very low, and how we are unengaged with politics. While many American youth can be critical of the current political climate and politics more generally, one thing I know for certain is we are not apathetic, especially not today. Just across the UC System alone, we have registered more than 45,000 young voters in the last election cycle. Since the most recent presidential election we've seen a surge in civic engagement on our campuses and in our communities. California's youth is ready to get to work. While many students like those in Berkeley are actively engaged with politics and sometimes partake in protests as a way to show their engagement with the system, there's still a disparity when it comes to the civic engagement being translated into the realm of voting. I have often gotten frustrated contemplating how there are thousands of students erupting in protests across the country after a presidential election. Yet, where are these people hours before when it was time to go to the voting booths? I realize the answer didn't depend on just asking where were they but rather what does the system that we are a part of lack? What can we all do to improve access to voting and make sure people are prepared to vote. For students it can be unbelievably difficult to get us in the voting booth on election day. From trying to maintain our fortified class workload which is around 17 to 19 units, and spend to 10 to 20 hours of part-time jobs a week. It is nearly impossible to make it to the polls before the booth closes. Because let's be honest, we are most likely spending election day worried about not just the outcome of that election but also our day to day lives and how we can meet our basic needs in order to make attending a UC sustainable. Students are trying to figure out where their next meal is coming from, how we're going to pay rent each month and how we're going to actually get to campus in order to attend our classes and get our education. For these reasons, many students like myself opt in for a vote by mail ballot. I remember just this past election I quickly sealed my mail in envelope and placed in the mailbox as I headed to class. When I came home later that I night I noticed my envelope wasn't picked up since I hadn't put a stamp on it. Luckily I was able to ask my Boss at work the next day if I could get a stamp from the office and mail in the ballot, because let's be honest, lot of us students don't have stamps. However, I can confidently say that I am the exception exception to the rule. If I am the exception, you're probably wondering what that rule is. And it is this, most students care to vote, they just don't have the time, energy, and resources to go out of their way and remember to get a stamp on their envelope in order to have their ballot count. Something so simple as a stamp is creating a barrier for students to vote.
[{'start': 99, 'end': 109, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Fearing: good morning mr. chair and members, jennifer alex fearing on behalf of the california association of nonprofits in strong support.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 49, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Maya Ingram: Maya Ingram with the ACLU of California in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Trudy Schafer: good morning, trudy jennifer schafer from the league of women voters of california in strong support. and i apologize, our legislation committee just took up the bill.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christopher Sanchez : Christopher Sanchez with CHIRLA, the Coalition for Humane Immigrant Rights, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Talar Alexanian: Talar Alexanian with the University of California Student Association in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sean Botwon: sean jonah botwon on behalf of california coastkeeper alliance including santa barbara channelkeeper, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alicia Amerson: Alicia Amerson, in support for California Whale Rescue, Marine Life Studies, and Tesla Foundation and the various trending networks along the coastline.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kirsten Gilardi: Good morning, Committee Members and Chair, thank you, my name is Kirsten Gilardi. I am a wildlife veterinarian at the UC Davis School of Veterinary Medicine. Which many of you may have heard was recently once again named the number one veterinary school in the world. At UC Davis I serve as Co-Director of the Karen C Drayer Wildlife Health Center, a research service and teaching unit of the school. Our mission is to advance the health of wildlife in balance with people and the environment. I'm here today to testify as to the role that the Wildlife Health Center has played to date, here in California, with regard to marine mammal rescue and unusual mortality event investigation. First, the Wildlife Health Center has a long history of collaboration with the State of California on wildlife health programs. In particular and of most relevance to today's hearing, since 1996, the Wildlife Health Center has worked closely with the California Department of Fish and Wildlife's Office of Spill Prevention and response. To establishing and administering the state's Oil-Wildlife care network which provides best achievable capture and care to California Wildlife impacted by oil spills in both the marine and terrestrial environments. The ODBCN is comprised of more than 40 member organizations that are equipped and trained to assist the state during oil spill response. And that are reimbursed for costs incurred in responding during spills. As well in 2005, we launched the California lost fishing gear recovery project, which works closely with commercial fisherman to mitigate the impact of lost and abandoned gear on marine wildlife and underwater habitats. To date, we have removed more than 120 tons of lost and abandoned commercial fishing gear and other marine debris from California's coastal waters. With regard to activities related to SB 290, over the last two years, the state has directed funds to the UC Davis Wildlife Health Center to serve as the central administrator of grants to 12 different organizations belonging to NOAA's Marine Mammal Stranding Network. To assist with costs of rescuing and rehabilitating an unusually high number of California sea lions and other pinnipeds that started stranding in January 2015. The Wildlife Health Center used an agreed upon calculation of standardized rates to make allocation decisions that provided both base funds as well as per animal reimbursement costs to Marine Mammal Stranding Network members. Also in fiscal year 1617 state directed funds to the world health center to administer funds to the members of the California Whale Rescue Team to reimburse organizations for cost incurred and disentangling large whales from fishing gear. Also according to standardize rates. As with all wildlife health center administered grant programs, we form advisory bodies representing trustee agencies, NGO's and other interesting parties to review grant applications according to set criteria and in a transparent process. So in closing, the Karen C. Drayer Wildlife Health Center at the UC Davis School of Veterinary Medicine has been privileged to partner with state and federal wildlife agencies to contribute a very significant and high level of expertise, planning and support for programs aimed at conserving the state's tremendous and iconic wildlife resources. As such, should SB 290 be approved by the California State Legislature, the Wildlife Health Center would be honored and able to administer this program on behalf of the state, as it has been privileged to do for existing programs. Thank you.
[{'start': 65, 'end': 80, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kim Delfino: Good morning, my name is Kim Delfino and I'm the State Director for Defenders of Wildlife. I want to thank you for the opportunity to speak about this bill. And I want to thank Senator Jackson for her leadership on this issue. I'm really here to speak on the behalf of the volunteers who give a significant amount of time and energy to work with organizations that do marine wildlife disentanglement and rescue efforts. Volunteer networks have contributed significant substantial in kind contributions over the years when responding to these kinds of emergency events. As you've already heard, we are seeing an increase in the number of strandings of sea lions and entanglements of whales with more than 70 whale entanglements being reported just last year. The associated costs have made it difficult for networks to retain volunteers. For example, when you go to or respond to a whale entanglement it could actually take days to entangle a single whale from a net. And when your talking about people that have regular paying, 40 hour a week jobs doing other things. This is actually substantial burden on this network since very hard to recruit volunteers. Having a financial grant program being established through SB 290, will be a great help to the volunteers on the organizations that have dedicated their time and energy to rescuing marine wildlife and sea turtles. And for these reasons we urge your aye support, thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 185, 'end': 192, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Victoria Rome: Good morning, Mister Chair, members, Victoria Rome with the Natural Resources Defense Council here in support. Just briefly, the bill allows for additional funding and authority to clean up not just abandoned and deserted wells, but also the production facilities that can cause environmental and public health risks and safety risks to our citizens. And we urge your aye vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Fenstermaker: mark sean fenstermaker for environmental defense fund in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian White: good morning. mr. chair, members, brian mark white with western states petroleum association. we are not currently officially opposed to the bill. we've been working with senator lara and department for a number of months now. and we want to thank them for engaging with us on our concerns. last year we worked successfully on a bill that the department sponsored ab 2729 on idle wells. we know this is a bill dealing with orphan wells, which is an issue that needs to be addressed. since those discussions, we've come to a number of agreements on certain terms in the bill regarding decommissioned definitions and so forth. the funding piece of the bill, i think we've pretty much gotten to an agreement on the funding piece of it. so we're just waiting for the language to actually be in print. but i think we're going to be okay once we see it in print. so with that, we thank the senator and your committee staff for engaging with us. thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 179, 'end': 183, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ben Turner: So part of the task of the, well, right now the current funding levels is $1 million, so the bill- Right. Currently is $5 million- [For the record can-] I'm sorry, Ben Turner, Assistant Director at the Department of Conservation. And so the part of the task of this bill, and there's a report requirement in there where we come up with total inventory and a complete cost estimate. But we knew 1 million wasn't enough, we would need an increase, so we sought to increase the statutory authority for expenditures. And part of the bill is by 2019 we have to provide the Legislature with a cost estimate of the inventory and how much we think it will cost.
[{'start': 164, 'end': 174, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Chrismond: Thank you. Good morning, Committee Members and Chair. Thank you for the opportunity to testify on SB 263. We are extremely excited about the author's leadership on this, because we work with communities across the state to access state funds, amongst a bunch of different programs. Yes, sorry, Mary Chrismond with the Trust for Public Land. We are a national organization that works to create parks and protect land and places across the country. So we are here to support this bill because we believe it's a game changer for communities to be able to access state funds and other sources of funding. We work with communities across the state that really struggle both because of the matching requirements, because of technical assistance needs, not having grant writers, not having folks to be the applicants. A lot of smaller communities don't have the ability to take on the liability to be an applicant for bigger projects. They don't have the partnerships in place.  They also can't front the money, a lot of programs at this state have a reimbursement mechanism where you pay out and then you get reimbursed. In a lot of smaller communities, that's a hurdle they can't cross to be able to access state funds. So what this program would do is this would create climate assistance centers in urban and rural regions across the state. And these centers wouldl be locally staffed. So it would be local community based organisations, small businesses, local governments coming together in a collaborative to build the local capacity of communities. So what it would do, it would focus on leadership development, project development, technical application support, resource development, accessing other resources. As well as partnership development to help communities be able to lead on climate and equitable investments for their community. And this will cost money, change costs money, but we believe firmly that this is worth the investment for smaller communities across the state who struggle, who struggle to be able to lead on re-envisioning their infrastructure. Making investments that create access to nature, clean air, more mobility and this would be a game changer for those communities. And the way the current technical assistance approaches have happened haven't really address some of the deeper issues of having capacity and expertise to be able to be competitive for these programs. So we urge you for to support.
[{'start': 294, 'end': 308, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Yesi Lagunas: Great, thank you. Thank you Chairman and Committee Members. My name is Yesi Lagunas, here on behalf of the Greenlining Institute, in strong support of SB 263. Greenlining is an organization that is committed towards achieving racial and economic justice. And we firmly believe that SB 263 is fundamental missing piece towards simultaneously eradicating poverty and pollution in our most impacted communities. Specifically, SB 263, speaks to our ethos because it advances opportunity for the most vulnerable populations in California and it seeks to build local capacity, form partnerships with community based organizations, non-profit groups, small businesses and municipalities to achieve the state's goal of reducing pollution and fight climate change. You see, vulnerable communities have untapped potential to help the state reduce greenhouse gases and air pollution, if they did have access to staff or the expertise to put together competitive grant applications or really the money to hire a consultant to do just that. Greenlining supports existing programs aimed at combating the effects of pollution, particularly in low income communities of color. It is definitely not lost on our organization that applying for state funding climate grants is an onerous process. Excuse me. And the climate and I'm sorry, that applying for state funded climate grants does require technical assistance and capacity that vulnerable communities and small organisations simply do not have. This does require a high threshold of expertise to submit a competitive application or navigate the complicated and siloed funding process. For this reason we believe that the communities themselves are best apt to determine the needs of their community, and really come up with the solutions to some of their problems to improve their neighborhoods. And a lack of expertise, experience, or worse, a lack of knowledge on some of the programs that are out there should really not be a barrier for them to apply for some of these state grant money. It should also be noted that the Senators will encompassed all state funded climate programs which means that collectively we have the opportunity to provide all Californians with the opportunity to apply for state funded programs. And it is for this reason that we encourage you to support SB 263.
[{'start': 71, 'end': 83, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Lynch: Danielle Lynch on behalf of Fresno Economic Opportunities Commission and Central Coast Energy Services in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dominique Lofton: Dominique Lofton on behalf of the Los Angeles Neighborhood Land Trust and the California Association of Local Conservation Corps, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Juan Altamirano: juan brian altamirano with the audobon california, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jamie Go: jamie on behalf of the nature conservancy as well as the environmental defense fund, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dennis Zion: Dennis Zion, Executive Director of Move LA and a graduate of Colton High in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Doug Houston: Doug Houston with the Watershed Conservation Authority and a graduate of Colfax High in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rico Mastrodonato: Rico Mastrodonato on behalf of Transform and the California League of Conservation Voters in support
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tess Caldwell: Tess Caldwell from Center for Climate Protection and I'm in support
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Jolly: Amy Jolly, Center for Climate Protection in support
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Phoebe Seaton: phoebe in leadership counsel in justice and accountability in strong support.
[]
Fiona Smythe: Fiona Smythe, on behalf of 350 Bay Area, 350 San Diego and Fossil Free California in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kim Delfino: I'm Kim Delfino with Defenders of Wildlife in support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Fernando Cazares: Morning, Fernando Cazares with the Trust for Public Land, in strong support.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Croyle: yes, good morning chairman hertzberg and members of the committee. my name's bill juan croyle acting director for the department of water resources. and so we'll take your comment on with regard to talking fast and truncating some of our presentation. i want to make sure that we get to the really important part today, is what's happening out there today. as secretary laird talked about, from the beginning of this when we first found out about this concern on the spillway. on february 7th, this is a game changer for the department. and many of the local agencies, but actually the region and california and now at the national and international level with respect to how we manage these kind of incidents. this is, we have a whole number of first times as we work through the response and recovery of this facility. so our department has focused on public safety and transparency throughout this entire process. weve held 22 public briefings. weve moved as fast as we can to address the comments and questions that come up. and we are focused on emergency response. but we are right now transitioning over to recovery as we're getting towards the kind of tail end of the spring run off period in the fed river basin. so what i want to do a little bit today, but i'm going to kind of go back to the committee here to really focus on the interests. and making sure with the time that we have today to get to those points that you want to make sure that we talk a little bit about. but i do want to quickly highlight some of the response activities. and then really where we are transitioning to recovery today because there's a lot of steps, milestones that we've met here in the last couple weeks. first of all, again, this incident started on february 7th. this wasn't what we call a no notice event. this was not anticipated. this was not seen any threat, as a result of any inspections by multiple agencies and independent members in the past. but when this came to light the operators at orville that were currently discharging flood waters over the spillway into the feather river. recognized they had a problem, had to shut the spillway down to start doing the assessments. so that led to a whole number of sequence of events, assessing the spillway. assessing the weather monitoring the forecast a whole number of things started to happen. and we could not do this as secretary laird said with what we called the unified command group and it included army core of engineers, bute county sheriff office. sheriff honey has being critical to addressing the public and security side of this. and they've been along with calfire incident command team three. so as we brought those party together on almost a moments notice, again, there was lots of coordination, communication that needed to happen. decisions need to be made, as we had an incoming extremely important weather event that posed a threat to the flood control facilities, with or without damaged spillway. just to backtrack a little bit on secretary laird's comments, we again, thought unprecedented hydrology was a broken spillway. in 50 days of january and february of this year, 4.4 million acre feet of water went through the spillway and the powerhouse when it was operational. so this is is equal to average annual run-off, so that did not cause this spillway. but i think being able to manage this emergency response with incoming weather, with changing climatic conditions throughout this entire period. and the infrastructure that we still have on the mountain that's helping us manage this spring's run off with historic snow pack, it speaks to the engineering that's behind this facility. the dam is safe. the spillway is impaired. the emergency spillway worked. it does need some improvements and we're going to commit to make those improvements. so as we go through this, there's a whole number of, again, things with regard to emergency response happened. again, our key unified command partners have been standing side by side with us throughout this entire process. we ask for funding from fema with regard to emergency response is $274 million, that's what we anticipate spending through may. we have an executive order from the governor's office declaring an emergency that gave us the ability to do things that we would not normally be able to do. we have opened and closed this spillway a number of times to help manage this flood control system like we would normally would do. so the spillways that were generated from these hydraulic events and this runoff period up to date were managed through that spillway. and the power house in a way that did not threaten public safety. so taking water over the emergency spillway was a concern, and based on the latest information that we had at the time, with the changing hydraulic conditions we had to make a decision with regard to use of that emergency spillway, which was not by design. it was absolutely not part of the decision-making process. but it was there for the emergency, with the changing weather conditions over a period of about four to six hours. that in an effort to make sure that we had the spillway, itself, operational for the rest of this season. that we had to make sure that we kept it intact in a condition that we could use it throughout the rest of the season. but there is a point, through this whole period, that we needed to make sure that if we saw more degradation of the spillway to occur, there was a spot where, we call it a no-go point. in other words, the concrete on the spillway would degrade or fall away, because of the water we had to push over that spillway, to the point where we would have to stop using the spillway because of the threat to the radial arm gates. which meant all of the water coming into the reservoir for the rest of the season would have to go over the emergency spillway. that's huge. that's a very tough decision to make when you try to use all your available flood storage, protect the infrastructure you have and the people downstream, not just in oroville but all the way to the delta, making sure that decisions that are being made are based on the latest information. and the impact of those decisions and unintended consequences are assessed as part of our contingency plan. so that was done throughout this entire process. some of those decisions were really tough. but, again, i want to reiterate, we did not plan on taking water over the emergency spillway. but the spillway was used because of the change in hydrologic condition and that fact that we needed to better understand what the impact were with higher flows going over the spillway. now, the good news is the spillway that we've been using, and is being used today, has been stable since february. so we have done some protective measures, rock bolting, grout, all of which is out there online, some of the protective measures. some people have been out on the spillway deck and been able to see it firsthand. all of those protective measures have reinforced the integrity of the damage spill that we have, which allow us to pass the storm water that we receive in the snow melt here this spring. so that's been, i think, a successful, emergency response, again, to keep that infrastructure in place and almost, more importantly, the effort to keep the hyatt powerhouse protected and operational so that we can maintain water supply for the rest of this year. it's critical to maintain the hyatt powerhouse while we move through the rest of this year and manage our flood flows, and again to make sure that we can maintain those water supplies for the rest of the year. so we are in a spill right now. based on the latest modeling hydrograph, as of yesterday, we see that we would probably stop somewhere around may 1st to may 2nd, depending on, again, the snowmelt. and we would need to maybe operate the spillway one more time before we shut the spillway for the remainder of the year, and start the reconstruction of the spillway on the lower chute and the upper chute. and so with that, what i'd like to do is talk briefly about our current activities. if this is too much detail, let me know. and so we have advertised for a construction contract to rebuild the spillway, itself. it went to kiewit construction. the bid forms and the bid amounts are being made public. we, hopefully, later today or tomorrow on our website with regard to oroville incident webpage, the contract with kiewit's $275 million. and that'll get us started. the goal there is to replace the lower chute, the part that's been degraded and has been damaged extensively, as well as working our way up through the upper chute to make sure that we have a usable spillway for going into the wet season starting on-
[{'start': 27, 'end': 36, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 77, 'end': 93, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 370, 'end': 375, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2389, 'end': 2394, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2522, 'end': 2527, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3020, 'end': 3025, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Linda Draper: I'm Linda Draper and am a member of the Oroville City Council.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary-Ann Warmerdam: mr. chairman, members, my name is mary-ann bill warmerdam with the rural county representatives of california. just wanted to thank the committee for its interest in this particular incident. as was noted by director croyle the local response that allowed for a safe evacuation was key and i wanted to thank the committee for having an interest in what the implications are for the local communities and the county government that supports that. so thank you very much.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 217, 'end': 223, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Janet Goodson: My name is Janet Goodson, I am the Vice Mayor of the City of Oroville. On February 7th, the Oroville spillway became fractured, it broke and on February 12th 2017, the City of Oroville and surrounding areas were told to evacuate. When I received the call to evacuate from Don Rust, the Acting City Administrator, the emergency alert had not gone over the airways nor via phone. My husband and I, we made phone calls to community leaders to spread the word. We knocked on our neighbor's doors. We grabbed a few clothing items, two computers, and two dogs. We drove separate vehicles, we picked up people even a man with a dog along the way and yelled get in, get in. As if to say semper fi, no one can be left behind. Unless you have been through an evacuation, a disaster before you will never understand the paralysis that tries to envelop your mind, that would try to block you from making the most excellent of decisions not only for yourself but for others as well. I've had the opportunity to speak to many who were and still are to a large degree affected by the evacuation. You see, PTSD is a assuredly prevalent in our city. Approximately 24% of the City of Oroville residents live below the poverty level. How does that segment of the community absorb the burden of the loss ofe both earned and fixed income during the evacuation, the loss of revenue to local businesses and the catastrophic erosion of our natural water ways which affects tourism dollars? The City of Oroville has agreed and signed a coalition letter coauthored by Senator Jim Nielsen and Assemblyman James Gallagher on Tuesday, April the 18th. It is my understanding that DWR as of yesterday, April 24th, has complied with the request for transparency while protecting security concerns and we look forward to building a bridge of trust and openness between the City of Oroville's residents and DWR, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 272, 'end': 280, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1550, 'end': 1561, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1578, 'end': 1593, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bill Alio: bill mary-ann alio for environmental working group. as my colleague said, at one point doggr was really captured by the oil industry. but that's evolving and changing, and we're getting there. and no matter who, what administration is in washington dc. this bill would be needed in order to continue this evolution of reform at doggr. we urge your aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dave Ryan: Sorry, this is a support. Dave Ryan on behalf of Circle, California.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian White: yes, mr. chair and members, brian here on behalf of the western states petroleum association. we must respectfully oppose the bill as currently drafted. likewise, we appreciate the comments that were noted in the committee staff with respect to section 3.106. with regards to doggr's authority. as currently written, the bill makes some substantial changes to doggr's supervisor's duties that we view as unnecessary. it's a more, to us, a little bit more mission creep to put doggr in a stance of protection of water quality issues that are already addressed by the state water board. an operator currently must obtain two separate permits from doggr and the state water board, to conduct oil production. but sb 465 would expand doggr's authority by giving it dual authority to regulate drilling and water quality. by revising doggr's mission, to ensure that any resulting use of produced water during enhanced oil recovery process must be done in a reasonably and economically, technically, feasible manner. now while that sounds good, we would rather have that be the authority of the state water board. that is their authority, and that's what they actually do. we're concerned that this bill would, in the guise of reforming doggr's mission, give doggr dual authority over an issue where it doesn't have the expertise. and we'd rather keep those two issues separate. my colleague stated the issues about the advisory council, and we associate ourselves with that. but we are willing to work with the committee and the author on these suggested amendments that are in the committee analysis. about convening a work group to deal with this issue. but in terms of the advisory council, hopefully that will be addressed as well. so, but for right now, we are opposed to the bill.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Victoria Rome: yes, victoria bill rome with nrdc in support, thank you.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Alio: Bill Alio on Environmental Working Group, not supporting formally, we didn't get a letter in yet. But we will be catching up to a lot of bills. As the Senator said, this is part of the overall reformation of DOGGR. Right. And it really is a new DOGGR starting in 2011, when we found out they weren't regulating fracking. I want to make one quick statement. I'm the guy who found out they weren't regulated about fracking, and kind of started these wheels in motion in January 2011. And now you have staff on board who is well versed in the oil industry. Now, one thing in working with the WISPA and CIPA since 2011, they've done a pretty good job in this State of not messing up the environment. We've had major instance like an off-shore oil well blow out in 1969, the Aliso Canyon mistakes and terrible things that happened to that area. But overall, they aren't wasting things and polluting streams and creeks left and right, like you could probably find in other states. So they're doing a reasonably good job here. But as Senator Stern said, from both the Dias and here, this was agency that wasn't doing its job for years and years. And things weren't just slipping a little bit. The underground injection control program was a mess. They weren't regulating fracking. Their own well records, their documentation of what's going on, record keeping was not good. It wasn't transparent and accessible. So, SB 773 is part of putting this all in place. I think current management at in the administration at the department conservation DOGGR is doing a good job in working with the author and authors on getting this done, thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1035, 'end': 1040, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brian White: Mr Chair, members, Brian White here for Westchase Petroleum Association. We've had a chance to talk to a Senator's staff about some of the clarifications that might be needed in the bill. It's not clear right now. If this would be new information that industry actually provides so if there could be some language in the bill that says to extend the DOGGR request information. We acknowledge that the WellSTAR program needs to be reformed and this is actually currently doing that with the budget request.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Harris: Mr. Chair, I'll follow your lead, too. Richard Harris on behalf of Water Reuse. At this time, who is the co-sponsor of this bill, and we appreciate Mr. Quirk's leadership on this. Thank you.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 152, 'end': 157, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Shawn Bothwell: Good afternoon Committee. My name's Shawn Bothwell, I'm the Policy Director for California Coastkeeper Alliance. We're also a very proud sponsor of AB 574. I'll just say that more than 1.2 billion gallons of treated wastewater is discharged to our waterways and estuaries every year. That waste can be turned into a water supply resource. We're really proud to be sponsoring this bill and thank Member Quirk for his leadership on this, I actually know that you've been very interested in running a bill like this for some time and so, we ask your aye vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 402, 'end': 407, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Marlene Dumaine: Good afternoon, I'm Marlene Dumaine with the East Bay Municipal Utility District and we're in support.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Gogger: jessica with the california association of sanitation agencies in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jamie Miner: and jamie jonah miner for santa margarita water district in support and look forward to working with the author on just some technical fixes for some projects in our district, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brad Hoppy: brad jamie hoppy with metropolitan water district in support and we're seeking some clarifying amendments.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pilar Quintana: Pilar Quintana here for the North Bay Water Reuse Authority in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John O'Malley: John O'Malley with California Advocates on behalf of West Mesa Municipal Water District and Mesa Water District in support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Glenn Farrell: Good afternoon Mr. Chairman, Members. Glenn Farrell San Diego County Water Authority in strong support.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Basin: danielle with the california municipal utilities association in support, seeking some clarifying amendments, as well.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julie Kingsley: Julie Kingsley with the Eco Consult, representing the US Green Utility Council, as well as Seventh Generation Advisors and in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Beth Mole: Beth Mole on behalf of Inland Empire Utilities Agency in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Kelly: Paul Kelly in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Wendy Ridderbusch: good afternoon, mr. chair and members, wendy brad ridderbusch with the association of california water agencies or acwa in support.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ramon Medina: Thank you for the opportunity. I am the Mayor of Maywood. My name is Ramon Medina, I have with me Mayor pro tem, Ricardo Villarreal and City Attorney Michael Montgomery. We are here to support AB 272. Our current situation is that Maywood is received by three mutual water companies. Maywood mutual water companies number one service residents of Maywood and Huntington Park. Maywood Mutual Water Company number two also services Maywood and Huntington Park. Maywood Mutual Water Company number three services Maywood, Bale, and Vernon. There is duplication of board members and administrators for a one square mile seeding where quality is poor and transparency lacking. The general manager of Maywood Mutual Water Company number one set a new plan to be outlined in about a year and a half. In the meantime, this company has planned managed free water that includes the minerals. So manganese does not reach the tap in significant levels. Sampling in 2010 and 2012 showed concentration of manganese in water from Maywood Mutual Water Company Number One. And especially Maywood Mutual Water Company number two. More prevalent, though, was a previous overlooked problem. That the sampling found in a few of the source wells of Maywood Mutual Water Company number three. That the presence of PC, an industrial solvent, will pose serious health risks at high enough levels. Our goal is to coordinate all three mutual water companies as one public water agency. Thereby permitting a major overhaul and improvement of the water system. This was the intent of Speaker Rendon whose district includes Maywood. When he introduced AB 2 to-
[{'start': 69, 'end': 81, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 113, 'end': 131, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 150, 'end': 168, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 519, 'end': 523, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1563, 'end': 1569, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ricardo Villarreal: I am Ricardo Villarreal, I am serving as mayor pro at the present time. I was a President of Chamber of Commerce back in 2013 when two council members and myself submitted a notification. To the City of Maywood Mutual Waters Companies number one, two, and three, to the Superior Court. To force termination of providing contaminated water to the City of Maywood residents. In 2013, we'll present evidence of water and contamination in several containers, water bottles, different containers. Taken at different times from different homes and in different addresses located in the City of Maywood. The bottles contained water showing several particles of magnesium, TCA and other contamination components. The companies denied these facts and false contains. That the finding of cleaning several safe water will cost an increase of water rates. That's why I ran for office back in 2013 and I'm here to support AB 272 as well as Assemblymember Gipson and this matter. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 942, 'end': 948, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Richard Harris: mr. chairman to your point, richard on behalf of padre dam municipal water district and olivenhain municipal water district in encinitas, as well as the north san diego coalition on recycled water. glenn farrel from san diego county water authority is here as well. to your point about the part of the bill that relates to the definitions and the water quality. this bill is aligned exactly with another great bill, ab 574, to redefine potable reuse as was recommended by the state water board in their report in december of 2016. just so, that the notion of direct potable reuse, indirect potable reuse is somewhat confusing. where we're going now is to have, potable reuse defined and then four subcategories defined under that, and that's what we're trying to do and then the rest of the bill the assembly member is talking about as well. hopefully if the bill gets out of this committee, we can have further discussions about how recycling works in the conservation world, as we recognize the value of recycled water towards conservation. in fact, recycling is the ultimate conservation. so to that point, if you want i can go over those four subcategories.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 198, 'end': 210, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Glenn Farrell: Good afternoon Mr Chair and members, Glenn Farrell, San Diego County Water Authority. A lot of our interest in this bill obviously relates to the water supply aspects of the measure and I won't focus on those, but the Governor's Water Action Plan, California law, California State policies, state regulations are replete with direction to water agencies to reduce their dependence on the Bay Delta as a source of water supply, to create regional self-sufficiency to become more resilient to drought. That's what millions and billions of dollars of investments in recycled water, advanced purified drinking water, have done in California. That's what we aim to do in San Diego, County, as well. AB 869 makes a really important distinction for us, as we move forward in this context of making conservation a way of life. We think AB 869 says let's make water use efficiency a way of life. As my colleague, Mr. Harris said, we believe recycled water is an efficient use of supply, and for those reasons, we support the bill.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 908, 'end': 914, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Paul Gonsalves: mr. chairman, members of the committee, paul wendy gonsalves representing the san gabriel valley water association. we'd like to thank the author for her leadership on this issue and we respectfully ask for an aye vote.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 60, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : Thank you. Anyone in opposition?
[]
Tracy Quinn: Good afternoon. Thank you Mr. Chair, Members of the Committee. My name is Tracy Quinn. I am a civil engineer and policy analyst with the Natural Resources Defense Council. I am here to speak here today to oppose AB 1869. Our primary issues do lie with respect to the impacts on supplies, so if I could just have a moment to respond.
[{'start': 74, 'end': 85, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sean Bothwell: Good afternoon, Chair, Committee Members. My name is Sean Bothwell. I'm the Policy Director for the California Coastkeeper Alliance and on behalf of the Alliance, we have to respectfully oppose AB 869. As you will hear later in this hearing, I'm actually, we're very supportive of water recycling, just not at the expense of more water efficiency. AB 869 would create a loophole in new water efficiency standards by declaring that water recycling is an efficient use and would exempt recycled water from long-term use efficiency standards. Excluding recycled water permit from the emission standards would allow water suppliers to meet a less stringent water use target for non recycled water use and for those reasons, we respectfully ask for your no vote, thank you.
[{'start': 53, 'end': 66, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susan Little: hello, my name is little. i'm with the environmental working group and the environmental working group is a sponsor, excuse me, the environmental working group is a sponsor of ab 1316, primarily because it allows california to follow the lead of 10 other states and require universal lead testing of children. we've heard of a lot about the effects of lead exposure and lead poisoning, but i wanted to emphasize at just some very recent studies that came out, reiterate that, not only does it cause damage to children, but the children who are exposed to lead when they're young then showed that the demonstrable decline socio-economically in terms of their iq when later in adulthood. those effects continue with them for many decades. in addition, we also found that studies have also shown that lead does its damage very early and fast. nearly 73% of lead is absorbed into a child's bones within the first three weeks, first several weeks of exposure, and its appearing that that's really sticking with them. so in order to safeguard our kids we need to be sure that we're addressing their lead exposures early before the materials lasting effects take hold and the data is not clear but it appears that only a small minority of california's children are screened for lead. one report sited in the analysis indicates that only 5% of the children overall in california are screened. the truth is, is that we really don't know how well we're identifying the kids who are lead compromised, and we don't really know where the lead is exactly. a recent reuters study found that an at least 29 california neighborhoods children, had elevated lead rates of at least just high as that in flint, michigan, and one of the zip codes analyzed had nearly three times that rate. other states do much more to protect their children from lead than does california. as i mentioned, 10 other states and the district of colombia, require universal lead screening of children. these states have a much better chance of identifying kids who elevated lead levels. we'd like california to join the movement to providing lead screen to all of it's children and we urge your support for this measure, thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Barters: Mr. Chair and Members of the Committee, my name is John Barters I currently serve as the vice California, and I also have the distinct privilege of being the chair of the governing board for the Alameda County Healthy Homes Department which is the county's lead poisoning prevention body. I just wanted to add on a little bit to what you've heard already about lead. I spent 10 years as a housing quality's standard attorney working on healthy home environments to remove lead, asbestos, and other toxics from homes, and I think it's really important that what we're doing here today is a big step in the right direction California's future depends on it's children, and there's really nothing you can do to undo the impacts of lead on a child's development. A statistic I always like to put out their beyond the one who always hear is the average penny weights about two grams, and it only takes five if you ask the CDC none, but if it takes less than five micro grams if you divide that penny into 2,000,000 pieces. It takes less than five of those 2,000,000 pieces to poison the child and it's very important that we look at the past and current uses of lead in our state and look at how that's impacting children. City of Emeryville was long known as an industrial bedrock in the community. We had leaded fuel. We burned metal. When we re-mediate property to turn it into commercial development today, we find it laced with arsenic and lead from the prior uses. Having grown up in a rural county, we have lead paint on all the homes in the town I'm from, and so, lead is a metal, it doesn't dissolve and children are exposed to it, very tactically engaged it and testing for light is a very simple and smart policy and I ask you to support this bill.
[{'start': 51, 'end': 63, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Theresa Cook: cook on behalf of the county of alameda in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Victoria Rome: good afternoon. victoria paul rome with the natural resources defense council, in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathryn Alcntar: good afternoon. kathryn victoria alcntar with the center for environmental health and the change coalition in strong support. thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Fifel: jason kathryn fifel with calpirg in support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
James Hinton: hinton, californians for alternatives to toxics, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alicia Sanchez: yes, thank you. thank you, alicia jason sanchez representing the california medical association. and in many respects we agree with a lot of what has been said today, in terms of the impacts of lead on health and the risk to children. we, however, are on opposition to the bill because of the expansion to universal screening. so, screening is really about determining the potential risk. and then ensuring that those screenings are targeted to those people who have been identified at an increased risk. and the experts in the field at this point, in terms of the cdc and the american academy of pediatrics, are not recommending universal screening at this time. and even if they were, we have concerns about legislating guidelines, putting them into statute, because of the flexibility and the evolution of the science and understanding behind guidelines. and so, we come before you today with those concerns and our opposition. we appreciate the conversations that we've had to date. and we will continue to have those, but at this point we have to ask for your no vote.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Sarkissian: Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and Committee Members. Thank you. Okay, Karen Sarkissian with the California Chamber of Commerce here. We're opposed to AB 1316 as it's drafted. In California, roughly about 18 million people obtain health insurance through their employer. And California employers continue to be concerned about rising health care costs as is the rest of the country. AB 1316, as it's drafted, requires every child to have blood withdrawn and tested every year up to age 18, without any assessment of risk of exposure to lead or any determination of medical necessity for such tests. Though the cost impact has not been quantified just yet, the Joubert report is not out. There is no doubt the cost of this mandate will be high, as currently children that are not on publicly supported programs are first assessed for risk. And if there is a risk of lead exposure, then the child is screened.  This measure completely skips assessment. And it overrides medical necessity and goes straight to blood withdrawals. This mandate will not only increase premiums but it will increase out of pocket costs in release as well. Obviously, we want every child with the risk of lead exposure assessed, screened, and treated which is what currently occurs in pediatric offices. But to subject every child to a blood withdrawal every year, regardless of their risk of lead exposure and regardless of medical necessity, will not only be costly but will be a waste of resources and precious health care dollars, that could be put to better use. Thank you.
[{'start': 66, 'end': 82, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 655, 'end': 662, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Colin Robinson: and this was kind of one of things that we do routinely in my office and offices all around the state of california. and if we do find one of these higher risk situations, then we do go ahead and test the child absolutely. it's the medically correct things to do, of course. but, as it's currently written, this will be very financial costly. so, my name is colin alicia robinson, i'm a pediatrician. i speak on behalf of the american academy of pediatrics. also in respectful opposition to this bill again, in its current form as my colleagues have said. like it was mentioned before, we do agree with the spirit of the bill in that we want to minimize the potential effects of lead as much as possible right. that's partly what i was trained in. so, i'm kind of talking about the kind of the larger guidelines that we follow. kind of as mentioned earlier, the cdc and the aap, they recommend targeted screening for lead exposure. so, we were trained in looking for high risk communities, houses that were built before 1978, lead paint in houses. it will be very impactful on the health care system at large, to test these children every single year up to the age of 18. and so we think, a better use of resources would be for the government to put its efforts into obviously, identifying the children who might be affected in these communities. but then also, remediating the places like the plants or like the high-risk communities. where we could make an impact kind of at the community level, rather than trying to identify in this other fashion. so again, we do appreciate the spirit of the bill. we appreciate that we want to minimize lead toxicity and illnesses in our children all around california. but in the current form, unfortunately we have to respectfully oppose. so, thank you.
[{'start': 358, 'end': 379, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Winger: John Winger on behalf of America's Health Insurance Plans also opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ryan Spencer: ryan colin spencer with the california academy of family physicians in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anne Eowan: anne ryan eowan, with the association of california life and health insurance companies also in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Moy: Thank you, good afternoon. I'd like to thank Senator Hernandez for his leadership on this issue. I'm Amy Moy, I'm Vice President of Public Affairs at Essential Access Health. Proud to be a co-sponsor of this bill. Just quickly want to say, that in these uncertain, times there's one thing that's certain and that's that access to reproductive health care is at risk and is targeted in this new political environment on the federal level. So this is just a bill to stand up for our California values and hold the line and make sure that we don't lose access in the face of potential threats. And this provision, the federal provision was actually included in the affordable healthcare act recently introduced in the House of Representatives as a proposal included to eliminate this requirement. So it's timely and it's important and we ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 53, 'end': 62, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 101, 'end': 108, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eileen Schnitger: eileen, i'm a co-director at women's health specialist of california and we have four clinics, chico, redding, sacramento, and grass valley. and over 42 years we provided full range of sexual and reproductive health care with 30,000 visits per year. and people of all gender come to us from a 30 county area the size of ohio. so 45% of our clients now are on medical managed care. so they come to us directly and not through their health plan. they call our phone counseling, timely access, confidentiality, and knowing a trusted provider are the biggest reasons that women have for coming to us directly. and when people are coming for birth control, they're coming for abortion services, sti or pregnancy prevention, it can't wait, you can't, it's too late. so christina from oroville called us, she took a home pregnancy test, and she found that it was positive. and she called the health center to see what were her options with her medical managed care and found that she could come in and get help with whatever she chose. she ended up at six weeks of pregnancy, choosing to have an abortion and drive over to chico. so she got to pick the time when she was going to come that worked for her to come over and get those services. and it just based on the phone call, and because we have this in place, we need to codify that no required referral or authorization from the health plans. no roadblocks, so she got to come right in, she got to pick the date and exercise her choice so it was really helpful. a woman, linda from weed, got a call from her out of town partner resulting in the information that she was going to need her sti8 treatment. and need an sti treatment and without delay, just a phone call. she came to our redding clinic. so let's codify what we have in place. it's really important. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 763, 'end': 772, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1519, 'end': 1524, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Gregory Kramer: Yes, Madam Chair and members, Gregory Kramer on behalf of Planned Parenthood Affiliates of California. I would like to just echo the comments that my colleagues have made as far as protecting Women's access to a provider of their choice. This is what this bill does. Specifically though, since 2013, Planned Parenthood has seen a proliferation of Medi-Cal Managed Care patients enter our doors under the implementation of the Affordable Care Act. In 2013, folks on Medi-Cal Managed Care amounted to approximately 8% of our total clients. But now, at least in 2016, 31% of our patients are under Medi-Cal Managed Care. So four times the amount of patients are under this plan. And so the impacts of removing these federal protections are severe and so we commend the author for this bill on protecting the women's right to choose a provider of her choice.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jen Flory: Jen Flory on behalf of Western Center on Law and Poverty in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sara Spriggs: Sara Spriggs with ACCESS: Women's Health Justice in support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Hutchinson: sarah jonah hutchinson with act for women and girls in support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Valdez: mary sarah valdez with health access in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Chen: Kimberly Chen with the California Pan-Ethnic Health Network in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Victor Christy: Victor Christy with California Health+ Advocates representing 1200 community health centers across the state in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ralph Merletti: My name is Ralph Merletti. I live in the South Sacramento Fruitridge area, a member of Saint Rose Catholic parish in South Sacramento for the past 17 years. And I have some background in being active as a pro-life person, in as far as various activities. And this bill here that seems to continue the whole attitude of business and convenience over the right to life. I'm very concerned that we continue with this definition of women's freedom as the availability and accessibility to destroy her unborn. And it makes you wonder, what kind of a society are we moving to with bills like this? They are so worried that the federal government will begin to put some restrictions again on what California has been doing with all of this. And so I would say think what an abortion is. What is really an abortion? The destruction of the unborn for whatever reason. And we have to think we're moving toward a society, a culture of death, rather than a culture of life. Let's look way back on this, all the way compare this, way back. 1857, the Supreme Court decision Dred Scott. African Americans were declared to be, quote, unquote, property, not full people. In this case here, we look at the unborn for women. That's a womans property. She is free to destroy her unborn or do whatever. I mean they're property, they're not full people. Somehow magically they suddenly become a person with full rights at birth.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1065, 'end': 1070, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Terri Thomas: Madame Chair, Members, Terri Thomas on behalf of the California Association of Public Hospital and Health Systems this is an important funding source for keeping our doors open and serving patients and we ask for your aye vote, thanks.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicette Short: short with the private essential access community hospitals in support.
[]
Amber King: Amber King with the Association of California Healthcare Districts in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Johan Klehs: Johan Klehs representing Paramedics Plus, which is Alameda County's EMS ambulance provider. Paramedics Plus transports over 100,000 patients each year. Like a lot of urban areas in California, less than 20% of those transports are covered by third party insurance. The remaining 80% are Medi-Cal, Medicaid, Medicare or no insurance. Ambulance rates as you know have not been increased in many, many years. This bill helps ambulance companies. Senator Hernandez had SB 1300 last year. Was vetoed by the Governor. I believe that this measure will be signed hopefully, and we ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 451, 'end': 460, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jason Sorrick: jason mary sorrick with america medical response here today on behalf of the alliance. here to answer any technical questions you may have, and ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Micheli: Chair, Chris Micheli on behalf of the California Ambulances Association and we've supported prior efforts. As well as 1,300, and support this year's bill. Ambulance providers are very unique amongst MediCal providers because as opposed to most others we can't decline coverage or limit it. Obviously when somebody dials 911, we have to pick up that phone and address it. Unlike hospital EDs, which are the only other Medi-Cal providers that have to accept all patients, we have to do it within a specified time limit. Generally six to eight minutes. So it's very important that these rates be increased. And we understand that the QAF is the only measure, because as much as we like a general fund appropriation to increase medical rates, that's not going to happen. Thank you.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bruce Joe: good afternoon, my name is dr bruce, i've been a kaiser physician for 25 years. i'm here on behalf of my colleagues but also on behalf of our patients who wish to voice our support for sb 17. we work very, very hard to provide high quality but also affordable healthcare to our patients, and that's become increasingly difficult in recent years because of the skyrocketing costs of prescription drugs. in many cases, there doesn't seem to be any rhyme or reason for why these are so expensive or for why the prices are climbing so rapidly. and so we greatly agree that there needs to be more transparency as to the pricing of prescription drugs. to cite but a few examples deflazacort is a steroid medication which is used to treat duchenne type muscular dystrophy. this is a medicine that's been available in europe for sometime and sells there for about $1200 per year per patient. it recently gained fta approval in the united states and now the plan is to price it at $89000 a year. for the same therapy. just does not make sense. we often think of the high prices of health cares being driven by the new drugs but we are also seeing rapid price increases in drugs that have been around in some cases for decades. there's a medicine called nitropress which is used to treat high blood pressure and also congestive heart failure failure. it's been around since i was a medical student, which is a long time ago. but yet, we've seen the price of that drug go from $257 up to $805 recently a 212% increase. doxycycline an antibiotic that's used to treat acne, bronchitis and other infectious diseases, has recently undergone an 1,000% increase in price. as much as i worry about the impact this is going to have on healthcare delivery systems, i'm also very concerned about how this impacts patients. as just referenced, we hear about patients whose insulin prices have increased 300%, and as a result, patients are having to use expired insulin, starve themselves, or do without insulin. and as a hospitalist physician, as someone who cares for patients in the hospital, i can tell you that when patients who are diabetic do without their insulin, it results in very, very serious illnesses that require very costly hospitalizations to remedy what is potentially an avoidable situation. so we wish to lend our support to sb17 and we thank senator hernandez for bringing forth this very, very important legislation. we think that it's going to provide transparency in pricing of prescription drugs, that is much needed. thank you.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2349, 'end': 2358, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sara Flocks: madam chair and members, sara jason flocks from the california labor federation. we are here today because our affiliates negotiate and purchase health benefits for 2 million members in california. and the skyrocketing price of prescription drugs is taking money out of our members pockets in the form of wages. and we find that sb 17 is important because it is an actual tool that purchasers can use in the face of skyrocketing drug prices. and i just wanted to touch very quickly on why the 90 day advanced notice of excessive price increases is so important to us. and why it is such a powerful tool. the first thing is it just allows us to manage our budgets. there's very limited amount of dollars that we have. it either comes out of wages or it comes out of employer's budgets. and so we want to know if there's a big price increase coming or even a smaller price increase for a high volume drug like insulin. we want to be able to prepare and to figure out how we can have the money to pay for it. the second is to be able to notify our members if there's going to be a change to the formulary. pharmacy and therapeutics committees meet generally quarterly. and we want to have advanced notice before a drug is moved. we need to notify our members of this. and so, that 90 days gives a little bit of lead time, so we'll be able to get that notice out if there is a change. we also want to be able to avoid paying for unnecessary and expensive drugs. one example is vemovo. it's an arthritis drug. and it went up 600% from 2013-2014. and we were paying for it. we never got a notice. we didn't know, except when we found out, we said vemovo was actually just a combination of two over-the-counter drugs that cost $40 versus $1,600. so we would switch people but once people are taking a drug it's hard to reel them back and say, i know you had one drug now you gotta take two. we don't want to do that to our members, advance notice will help prevent that. and the last is just to be able to track these increases, there was public outcry over the increase in the price of the epipen, but that had been going up for years, it was a slow step increase. it got to the tipping point and there was people had outcry, but if we had known in advance that these increases were coming, we would've been able to try to do something about it. and so that is why the 90 days in this bill among the other parts are so important, thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 35, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Beth Capell: Beth Capell on behalf of Health Access California, co-sponsor of this measure. I'm going to ask the sergeant to hand out to you something that the MS Society has used in their lobbying on this. It's a visual illustration of what the other witnesses have testified to about how the prices go up and astonishingly with every new drug, the price of the old drugs goes up. So it's the reverse of the price competition we normally expect in the market where with new products of the price of the old product goes down instead the price of the old product goes up. And as you'll be able to see, up, and up, and up. So it's quite a remarkable hike. When we step back and looked at how we deal with healthcare costs in California in other sectors, we said, we've dealt with this before. What do we do? We do advance notice. We do public disclosure of costs and revenues and elements of the cost. We do lots of this. Currently, in health plan rates there is advanced notice of six months for people in Covered California and for people at PERS. Health plans are required to give six months notice generally in the individual market and the small employer market. A hospital or a medical group that wants to terminate it's contract with a health plan has to give 75 days notice. On and on and on, there's example after example where advance notice is what we do in order to allow for the kinds of activities that Miss Flock's described. In addition we disclose the elements of price in order to understand better what's going on. Hospitals have been doing this since 1982 in considerable detail. Medical groups do it, health plans do it. It would make sense for us that drug companies should do it. For that reason, we're pleased to co-sponsor the measure, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christy Bouma: Madam Chair and members, Christy Bouma, on behalf of the California Professional Firefighters, here in strong support SB 17.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Chen: kimberly sara chen, with the california pan-ethnic health network, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gail Yen: gail kimberly yen, with children now, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barrett Snider: barrett gail snider, representing the school employers association in california, and the small school districts association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jen Flory: flory representing western center on law and poverty in support.
[]
Randy Hicks: randy barrett hicks, california alliance of retired americans, californians for disability rights inc., in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Cabrera: Michelle Cabrera on behalf of SEIU California in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Kamermayer: tim with seiu local 1000 in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maxine Mantell: Maxine Mantell on behalf of the National Multiple Sclerosis Society in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rob White: Rob White with AARP in very strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Emily Rusch: Emily Rusch with CalPIRG in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shane Gusman: Shane Gusman on behalf of the teamsters, the ILWU, the IFPT Local 21 and the Machinist's Union all in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Zulma Michaca: zulma randy michaca on behalf of the california nurses' association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nick Louizos: nick zulma louizos on behalf of the california association of health plans, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amanda Welner: Amanda Welner on behalf of the California LGBT Health and Human Services Network, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Orack: orack with molina healthcare, in support.
[]
Dave Walwrath: Dave Walwrath, California Retired Teachers Association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jackie Coleman: i am jackie nick coleman, representing aarp and we are in support.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stuart Thompson: Stuart Thompson, on behalf California Medical Association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Winger: john jackie winger on behalf of america's health insurance plans and anthem blue cross in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dolores Duran-Flores: Dolores Duran-Flores on behalf of the California School Employees Association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sam Rodriguez: rodriguez on behalf of united food and commercial workers, 160,000 members statewide in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Seth Bramble : Seth Bramble here on behalf of the California Teachers Association in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ted Toppin: Ted Toppin for the California State Retirees in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Theo Pahos: Theo Pahos on behalf of Tenet's 13 Hospitals in the state in support.
[]
Dane Hutchings: Dane Hutchings with League of California Cities in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Herbert: mark john herbert with small business majority in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Valderrama: Tim Valderrama with the Weideman Group on behalf of NextGen California in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Steffanie Watkins: Steffanie Watkins on behalf of the Association of California Life and Health Insurance Companies in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul McGavin: Paul McGavin for Scientists for Wired Technology, supporting one big dig fiber optic to take away source of cancer. We would like to promote health for everyone. In strong support of this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eileen Schnitger: eileen, women's health specialists of california, in support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jack Gribbon: good afternoon, my name is gribbon. i'm with unite here, the hotel and casino workers' union, and we are one of the sponsors of this bill as we were of sb 1010 last year. so we're hoping it goes all the way this year. thank you very much.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kip Snyder: thank you, madame chair, members of the committee. kip mark snyder, vice president of state policy at the pharmaceutical research and manufacturers of america, or phrma, here in strong opposition of senate bill 17. just to dig right into the bill, let me first address this concept of advanced notification of certain price increases. we're seeing a lot of pricing legislation in the states nationally. i have to say this one has us scratching our heads just a little bit as it's not really clear to us what sort of useable benefit is truly going to be derived from compelling manufacturers to wait 90 days before changing pricing, and on the flip side, on the risk side. we believe the bill's requirements could be highly disruptive and counterproductive within the pharmaceutical supply chain. in terms of supply of physical product, we're concerned that this could incentivize potential hoarding of product by distributors. a middle man in the period after the notification has occurred, but prior to the effective date of the increase, possibly resulting in lack of availability and access, as suppliers potentially try to game the system. we have no way of knowing, i don't think, how the marketplace would react to the provisions in the bill. we're not aware of any other industry where this sort of a mandated delay when physical product is involved. in addition to ramification with respect to supply we're concerned that this could actually disrupt competition across the industry. that's competition that has helped to keep prices down. i want to walk through specifically very quickly just a couple points with respect to how the bill would purport to work. the triggers in the bill are based on what's called wholesale acquisition cost, or wac, which is essentially like a list or a sticker price. and like the sticker price for a car or the rate that you see on the back of your hotel room door, that's almost never the price that's actually paid. and that's because in the real world, we have these entities, pharmacy benefit managers, that negotiate very substantial discounts and the triggers, that are the backbone of this bill don't reflect those discounts. and keep in mind it's not manufacturers that are typically deciding and adjudicating what patients are going to pay at the pharmacy, it's the pharmacy benefit managers and the insurers who set up benefit design. we're also confident that the bill is structured could result in a voluminous amount of data and reporting. 10% over three year cumulative threshold is really roughly akin to cpi, so we believe there could be thousands of products in scope for the bill. keep in mind again, based on list prices, and if you look at late available data on net prices produced by ims, it shows that in 2015, on average, for branded pharmaceuticals, net prices only increased about 2.8%. finally, the bill contains this requirement that manufacturers provide a host of proprietary information, which the state would then provide to the public. our concern there, is that it will be disruptive to competition, again because the list price only tells part of the story. you might very well have a couple of companies in a commercial space that are in vigorous competition. and one company's commercial strategy may in fact be to discount heavily off the list price, in order to gain competitive advantage and formulary placement. and this bill would attempt to compel that manufacturer then to essentially disclose it's commercial strategy for all to see. we actually think it's a beneficial system when you have competitors that are offering rebates, and competing vigorously based on proprietary and confidential data. similarly for new products, the bill would require companies to actually disclose their marketing and pricing plans. that's extremely proprietary information, so i certainly have a lot more to say. want to be respectful of the time, but for those reasons as well as the overall way that pharmaceuticals fit into the health care system. we've got some, i think, pretty compelling data on that, i just want to close by saying there are some bad actors out there. we at phrma, we represent the research-based pharmaceutical industry. our stomach turns sometimes with some of the things that we've seen by those bad actors as well. a lot of those egregious examples are what i've heard that's been highlighted. so i think that in a search for solutions, the focus should be potentially on those players. and i'll wrap up there, thanks.
[{'start': 51, 'end': 66, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Steve Mento: fast as i can, i promise. thank you. good afternoon, chair and members of the committee. my name is steve kip mento, and i'm president and chief executive officer of conatus pharmaceuticals in san diego. i'm proud to say that conatus is one of over 350 biotech companies in senator atkins' district. thank you for the opportunity to present today. in the interest of time, i've submitted more detailed written testimony for the record, and i will try to highlight my main points to you now. first, to provide context, a bit about my company and the drug we're developing, it's name is emricasan. this drug was discovered in 1998. at iden pharmaceuticals where i was chief executive officer and targeted as a drug to treat liver disease. in 2005, after seven years of development and compelling phase ii clinical data, iden was acquired by pfizer for emricasan as a drug, again, to be developed to treat liver disease. i founded conatus in 2005 as a company that would in-license drugs and complete early stage clinical development. in 2008, pfizer shelved emricasan for business reasons. in 2010, conatus acquired iden from pfizer, and reinitiated development of emricasan as a treatment for liver disease. after a total of 16 completed clinical trials and 3 trials in progress, and over $150 million in funding, conatus partnered emricasan development with novartis, as a treatment for liver disease where we plan to continue development to completion together. after 19 plus years of development, emricasan still has a few more years to go before we finally get the patients, get it to the patients that need it. small companies are not household names but, drive approximately 70% of new breakthroughs. the process of discovering new treatments and new cures is long and expensive as demonstrated by our experience. and small companies like mine rely on outside investors to fund much of our research. biopharmaceuticals are a risky sector, of the thousands of potential new therapies explored, only a small handful make it to the clinical stage. and of those that do begin clinical trials, nine out of 10 do not succeed. biotech investors must balance risk and reward. any constraints on the ability to make up for losses in the aggregate will make it more difficult and expensive for small companies to obtain financing and will cripple innovation. while there are no direct price caps in sb 17, it does impose a form of price control that will potentially increase risk to investors, and disproportionately harm small biotech companies. sb 17 incorrectly assumes that an innovative therapy's price should only reflect the input cost for that product alone. if the drug was only priced based on the cost to develop that particular compound, almost no innovation would stop, i'm sorry, almost all innovation would stop.
[{'start': 100, 'end': 115, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 282, 'end': 288, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brett Johns: Brett Johns with the California Life Science Association, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Warren: brian steve warren with the biotechnology innovation organization, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jimmy Jackson: jackson, biocom, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brynna Clark: i'm clark with the association for accessible medicines, formerly the generic pharmaceutical association. we have a little different. we're opposed unless amended. we hope to work with the committee to ensure that the lower cost generic drugs that see a lot of volatility can be excluded from some sort of these burdensome regulatory requirements. thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Allison Raymew: and i'm shaking things up a little more. allison brian raymew with blue shield of california, in support.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Beth Capell: If I might, Madam Chair. Madam Chair, Beth Capell, Health Access. When we started out on this journey we didn't separate out new drugs. As this bill has progressed and improved, one of the things we have done is to separate out how new drugs are handled precisely, because of these kinds of concerns. And what we say now about pricing of new drugs is explained to us what the pricing is. It doesn't say, all the explanation we heard from the gentleman from your district is what we would expect to see in the pricing justification. That's what we ask for, is explain to us how you got to the price. What we spent the Fall, well actually Ms Flock spent most of the Fall, I didn't do this, reading the Congressional record trying to understand their investigations and what they uncovered. And this is a stronger bill as a result, but it does recognize that new drugs are different than existing drugs. So we have tried to work, as we have gone along, and to respect those differences. It is entirely legitimate, as you know, there are some issues I've spent more than 20 years on. I respect people who spent 20 years trying to develop a particular drug, and so we would expect an explanation much like the one we heard here today in the justification for the initial pricing. We would be a little disappointed if we saw the justification that we saw for some other drugs where the threshold was which, consumer groups will protest and we don't actually care if a number of the age groups protest. That would be to us some what troubling as a pricing justification. But that's actually what we saw in the congressional record, so.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Beth Capell: beth allison capell, health access. on the issue of whether the drug has improved clinical efficacy or not, if the drug's a better drug, and the price has gone up, the price is higher, that's important to know. if it's the same drug, if the clinical efficacy is no different, it's important to know that as well. that's a knowable thing. that's a knowable thing that drug manufacturers should know about their own product. on the issue of rate review, there is very detailed information. and we've discussed that in this committee before that's made available in the individual and small employer market by product, by each health plan. they have to file what the components of the rate increase are. how much has the cost of prescription drugs gone up? how much has inpatient hospital care gone up? how much has outpatient care gone up? both trend and underlying factor. so there's very detailed information in the large employer market we have. and we're happy to provide to you pages and pages of information by health plan. how many products do they sell? how many lives are covered? what was the medical trend? what was the pharmacy trend? pharmacy trend in the large employer market in the last year varied between a 9% increase and a 20% increase. that's kind of a big variation, that was very revealing to us, that we had different results with different health plans. so there's lots of detailed information. oshpd publishes for each hospital in california detailed information on how many patients go to which kind of unit. which discharges are there? dollars, aggregate costs, cost by payer. the oshpd pivot tables, which i'm incapable of operating any more, provide an enormous wealth of data. far beyond anything we contemplate in this bill for drug manufacturers. and they do it by hospital, by unit, and they've done it for 30 years.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Megan Allred: Thank you Mr. Chair, members, Megan Allred on behalf of the California Dental Association. We appreciate the conversations that we've had so far surrounding this bill, and are encouraged by some of the responses we've gotten, so I'll keep it brief. Senator Atkins really spoke everything that I could say and did it better about this bill so we will just respectfully ask for your support.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 257, 'end': 263, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Katie Andrew: Katie Andrew, Children Now, I just want to echo the comments of my colleague and ask for your support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Tannehill: jennifer with aaron read & associates on behalf of the california dental hygienist association. this is a great bill, we're in full support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jasmine Gordon: jasmine beth gordon on behalf of delta dental, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Chen: Kimberly Chen with the California Pan-Ethnic Health Network sponsor in support of this bill. It's been long standing California laws and regulations that have held plans and insurers to strong non-discrimination protection rules, standards for language assistance and notification to consumers of their rights, and it's for good reason. And the state values, and affirms the tremendous diversity of the state. Over 40% who speak a language other than English, and one in five who are limited English proficient. And because of this, our existing laws support the right of all Californians to receive equitable and robust access to health care. Without discrimination and with respect to the language that each person speaks, and to the culture that they come from, and there are our values. In many ways, the federal rules strengthens several parts of our consumer protections, but don't necessarily align with all parts of our strongest practices. So this bill preserves in state law the strongest provisions of a federal law and codifies California's leading practices. Establishing uniformed guidelines for our own interpretation, making certain consumers are notified of their rights to receive health care in a language they understand and without discrimination. And making it clear to consumers where to go to when there is trouble. So while an immediate repeal of the ACA has subsided for the moment, federal threats to health care and consumer protections remain. California should double down to defend the gains that we've made in SB 223 does just that. For these reasons CPEHN is in support and urges your aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1583, 'end': 1588, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jen Flory: good afternoon, jen jasmine flory with western center on law and poverty, in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Autumn Ogden: Good afternoon, Autumn Ogden Smith with American Cancer Society, Cancer Action Network, also in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 34, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Randy Hicks: randy jen hicks, california disability rights, moderate support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eileen Schnitger: eileen randy schnitger, director of public policy, women's health specialists of california in strong support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Steffanie Watkins: watkins on behalf of the association of california life and health insurance companies. first, i'd like to thank the author, sponsor, and committee staff. they worked very diligently bill and on the amendments. and spent a lot of time going through with us what the bill's intent was. this is certainly no small task as you try to take federal regulations, california state law, and california regulations, and try to merge them all together. unfortunately, we do sit here today in opposition to the bill. we do think in some areas, and we've had conversations with the sponsor that have been very helpful, we do believe that the bill goes slightly further and is more restrictive than the current regulations, and we'd like to continue to have those conversations as the bill moves forward. i think we are also concerned about the potential for codifying the 1557 regulations which are the federal guidelines. as we go into a very uncertain time period, i think, what we we're concerned about for our members are there have been instances for which california has adopted federal guidance into statute. and as the federal guidance changes, our members are sort of putting in attainable situation of trying to figure out how to comply with both the state's statutory requirements as well as the federal guidelines. that puts us in a situation where we either choose to be out of compliance with our federal regulators or we are forced to come back to the legislature and request some sort of special disposition or changing the law. the regulations give us an opportunity to do that with our regulator which is far more efficient in our process. so, for those reasons, we remain opposed to it. we do look forward to continuing those conversations if the bill does move forward today, thank you.
[]
Jennifer Alley : Thank you. Jennifer Alley with the California Association of Health Plans, so also in opposition and I'll just align myself with my colleagues comments, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cathy Chidester: good afternoon, mr chair and members. my name is cathy eileen chidester, i'm the director of the los angeles county emergency medical services agency. and i have with me mr ed morrissey, our county council. los angeles county is strongly opposed to sb 792 which would create a measure the oversight committee. which includes representation from outside the county including the state. first let me clear that los angeles county follows the original language of measure b ballot measure as overwhelmingly approved by the voters. measure b not only funds trauma care but also emergency medical services, bioterrorism response activities throughout the county. the county already has advisory committees relating to the allocation of measure b funds. they're called the trauma hospital advisory committee. and the emergency medical services commission, which includes representation from private hospitals, physicians, including trauma surgeons, fire departments, ambulance companies, along with representatives from the league of cities, and five members from public appointed by the board members. our board of supervisors has been proactive in increasing the number of trauma centers within the county to help ensure access to life saving trauma services. since the passage of measure b, we've added california hospital, antelope valley hospital, and most recently pomona valley hospital which is in the san gabriel valley with the use of measure b funds. the county now has no areas that are under served with trauma centers. the board has also allocated measure b funds among the non-county trauma hospitals in proportion to the value of the trauma-related care. for an uninsured patients those hospitals serve, and for the additional cost to maintain readiness such as on-call physician, surgeons, and operating rooms staff. board of supervisors recognizes the importance of revisiting the measure b allocation methodology. and the county's department of health services continues to work with the non-county hospitals to develop new allocation methodologies. finally, sb 792 attempts to rewrite the language of the ballot initiative and impose new and resource intensive requirements on local jurisdictions by imposing a whole new bureaucracy. this effort is in violation with the will of the voters. sb 792 also sets a bad precedence to allow an outside commission and state to control or to participate in the distribution of not only measure b funds but potentially any and all locally approved tax revenues. so i urge a no vote on 792. i'm happy to answer any of your questions, or mr morrissey is also here to answer questions.
[{'start': 49, 'end': 71, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 173, 'end': 185, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2593, 'end': 2602, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Snyder: jennifer cathy snyder on behalf of the california association health facilities. there is a process that's in place in situations where you do have patients in skilled nursing facilities that cath represents that have the inability to make decisions for themselves and they don't have family or friends available to do that. that process has been in place for about 15 years. we believe it works well. it's a combination of the attending physician and the interdisciplinary team and folks important healthcare professionals that are at the facility. what we need here with this bill is to add some notification requirements that a court ruling feels is important, and we think it actually will improve the process, process that we think is already very effective. so these notifications will allow for the patient to have the ability to be notified that these decisions are being made, and they have the ability then to challenge those decisions if they so need to. so, we would appreciate your support of the bill today. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Peter Kellison: Peter Kellison for Leading Age California, representing not-for-profit skilled nursing providers in the state. We're in support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Durbin: amy jennifer durbin with the california medical association in support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicette Short: nicette amy short, on behalf of the alliance of catholic health care, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christy Bouma: Mr. Chairman, members, Christy Bouma, on behalf of the California Professional Firefighters, pleased to be sponsors of this measure. I think that with the Committee's assistance, we've made this a balance of synchronizing the existing laws with respect to the notification requirements, but also streamline them in cases where it's appropriate to receive direct notification to the EMS personnel. My best example of the myriad of examples that I have been provided by my members is that 10 firefighters, 4 ambulance, EMTs, and a CHP officer responded to a call in January. The captain found out a month later, third hand, that potentially the private EMT was told by a nurse at the hospital that the patient had tuberculosis and they might want to look into that. So the firefighter went to their department, proactively asked for a test. Now, three months has transpired, three months, and then finally the first test was negative. They knew enough about TB to get tested again, and one of the firefighters was known to have contracted inactive tuberculosis and has received the medication appropriate to help them overcome that. But I think what's significant to note is that firefighter also had a department based physical two weeks prior to respond to that incident. And they were, did not have tuberculosis. So these are the reasons why we think a direct notification is appropriate when the EMS personnel believes that they have suffered some sort of exposure so they can get the treatment they need. We urge your support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Connie Delgado: Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and members. I hope you can see me over this low chair. Connie Delgado with the California Hospital Association. We do have an oppose unless amended position. We believe that the current reporting requirements are sufficient, and it ties into the Workers Comp system by notifying the designated officer that an exposure has occurred. We believe that the recent amendments bypass that system by having the employee go directly to the hospital. We do appreciate the conversations that we've had with the sponsor and with the author, and we hope to keep working with them as this bill moves through the process. We do share those concerns with you today. Thank you.
[{'start': 82, 'end': 96, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brenda Diaz: brenda nicette diaz with california coverage and health initiatives, in strong support, and also in representation of the children's partnership.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Mextroth: hi, i'm dr. mextroth, and as she mentioned, i'm clinical professor at ucsf. i'm also the gyn medical director of the women's community clinic, and one of the experts that staffed the fda-mandated hotline for medical abortion. i've also helped smaller organizations institute medical abortion services. i'm here in a personal capacity and my views do not necessarily reflect those of the university of california, ucsf or zuckerberg san francisco general where i work. the evidence is clear that medical abortion is about 98% effective for early abortion and extremely safe. mifepristone and misoprostol are on the who, the world heath organization, list of essential medications. even tylenol and viagra have narrower safety margins and higher risk than these medications. complications are extremely rare, as the senator mentioned. the process is clinically simpler than many of the care that's already offered at university health centers such as diabetes management or iud insertion and students who require further followup can be referred to external hospitals or clinics as they are for currently for other medical conditions. any hospital is equipped to care for a woman with a potential miscarriage, would be equipped to care for someone with a potential complication of medical abortion. even in san francisco, where obtaining an early abortion may be one of the locations that it's easier than anywhere else. i still see women every week who experience obstacles and barriers to obtain abortion. the barriers to abortion have been shown in research to increase the gestation that abortions take place. they've also been shown to, when medical abortion is instituted, that the mean gestation for abortion decreases. so those are often goals for many people in this state. not all college campuses have easy access as we provide in san francisco to local universities. we have working relationships with usf and ucsf. and this leaves obstacles for students that limit their success and possible control over their futures. so as a physician researcher and mother of adolescent daughters i urge you to vote yes on sb 320.
[{'start': 12, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Adiba Kahn: Good afternoon. My name is Adiba Kahn. I am a student at UC Berkeley and one of the co-founders of Students United for Reproductive Justice. I am here today to ask you to vote yes on SB 320. I will be reading a testimony from a fellow peer, also a student, who wish to remain anonymous. This is her story. I'm currently a student at UC Berkeley where I juggle a job, participate in student organizations and an internship all on top of my classes. Last summer, I learned I was pregnant. Despite having an IUD, one of the most effective forms of birth control. I was scared, alone, and worried. How could I have a child when I could barely pay my rent? What about my goals and dreams? What would my family say? I was lucky to live in California and I was lucky to have have health insurance through UC Berkley. Still I did not know it would be weeks until I could actually get my abortion. First, I had to prove to the student health center that I was pregnant then I had to see a social worker in order to get my referral. In some ways this felt like counseling where I had to talk about my feelings, why I thought this was the best choice for me and what I thought my other options could be. After all this I finally got a referral I never used because it was not until two weeks later at a Planned Parenthood an hour away that I learned that Planned Parenthood did not take my health insurance. Luckily I was able to be covered with Medi-Cal and I got this procedure that I needed. While this may seem doable to some, I had to take several days off work. I to my employer just to get days off, miss my summer classes and take days off my then internship. I lost around $300 throughout this entire process. I lost days of lecture that could have helped me get a higher grade. I lost valuable experience for my internship. If the University Health Center would have provided medication abortion sooner, I would not have lost that much. I urge you to vote yes on SB 320 for University women who were trying to make something of their lives, provide for their families and have control over their bodies without unnecessary measures that cost them time, money and their education. Please vote yes on SB 320.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dianne Tober: My name is Dianne Tober, I'm assistant Professor at University of California San Francisco and occasional lecturer on California State University and UC campuses and I urge you to please support this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christina Flores: hi, my name is christina brenda flores and i support sb 320.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sara Spriggs: My name is Sara Spriggs with Access Women's Health Justice in Oakland, we're one of the cosponsors of this bill and I urge you to support this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sara Atchison: Hi, I'm Sara Atchison with Act for Women and Girls, one of the cosponsors of this bill from Tulare county, and I am a resident of Fresno. Please support this bill.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Chen: kimberly christina chen with the california pan-ethnic health network in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Natasha Minsker: natasha, aclu of california, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Moore: Amy Moore with Essential Access Health, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jerilyn Stapleton: Jerilyn Stapleton, President of California NOW. We are in strong support of this bill. Please pass it.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gregory Kramer: mr. chair and members, gregory kimberly kramer on behalf of planned parenthood affiliates of california and our 115 clinics support this bill.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Gonzalez: Rebecca Gonzalez, National Association of Social Workers California chapter in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Hicks: randy gregory hicks member of planned parenthood miramonte in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Miranda Fildelda: miranda randy fildelda student senator and member of students united for reproductive justice at uc berkley in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tiffany Chan: tiffany miranda chan, uc berkeley student in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roger Robinson: roger tiffany robinson, external affairs vice president elect of the student government at uc berkeley in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jasmine Milo: jasmine roger milo, student longfellow middle school in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amelie Martin: My name's Amelie Martin. I'm a student at Longfellow Middle School, and I support this bill.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lucy Montgomery: lucy jasmine montgomery, berkeley high school, i support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roxanne Goulde: Roxanne Goulde, American Nurses Association in support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Morgan Kelly: morgan lucy kelly, i'm a mom and a student at humboldt state university, and i support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anna Alvarez: anna morgan alvarez from humboldt state university and i support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Angela Gilliard: my name is angela anna gilliard and i represent the university of california. we are not opposed, we have a concern position. the university supports the concept and the goals of sb 320. the uc already provides for abortion services in the benefits covered by student health plans at all campus locations. also aligned with the goals of sb 320 uc health centers provided an array of counseling services for students including information on abortion and other options in accordance with the best available scientific knowledge and understanding. however, experts have advised that providing abortion by medication is not advisable at student health centers as a matter of safety. for a variety of reasons, the safest approach is to have obgyn specialists provide the service and needed 24 hour availability if complications occur. uc campuses generally do not have ob-gyn on staff, although some campuses do. uc student health services generally service the primary care home for students and make referrals for abortion services by making confidential connections with community ob-gyn providers, private clinics, fqhc clinics, and planned parenthood. these services are located often times within just a few moments from all of our campus locations. students in need of these services receives support from student health centers with planning and transportation to ensure the least disruption of academic schedules. a vast majority of student health centers in the country do not offer this service some primary care officers office. some primary care offices do, but not student health centers are beginning to pilot projects where ob/gyn have agreed to provide the needed 24 hour specialist back up. student health centers are supported by student fees, adding specialists for this service would add additional expense directly for students. we believe adding this cost to students is not necessary at this time, especially when community access at each campus location is provided in close proximity to the campus through multiple providers. i've not had a chance to thoroughly review the amendments proposed today, but we're certainly willing and able to work with senator leyva as we go forward.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2180, 'end': 2185, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Andrew Martinez: andrew angela martinez, california state university.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ashley McCortland: my name's mccortland i'm in opposition.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ashley McPartlin: my name is ashley andrew mcpartlin. i'm here on behalf of big california pro life council. i'm going to read a brief statement prepared by the california pro life council. the drugs being referenced in this bill are u486 and other combinations used with miprestone, etc, are extremely powerful, artificial steroids that work through attacking and altering the mother's body during pregnancy. this is not a morning after pill. on the contrary, it is only taken when a child is known to be present, by which time, said child's heart is beating, extremely dangerous for the woman's body. the net result is often a dead baby, because the woman's body has been chemically altered. it is an assault, first, on the woman's body, and then, secondarily, on the flow of nutrition to the child. this is a highly unnatural chemical intervention. this has been proven in studies by feminist researchers cited in i have citation here if this is passed, there should be a fully explained informed consent reflecting the implications outlined by the authors. in our submitted material. every remedial procedure to the complications of this drug cocktail should be as readily available, as these extremely dangerous drugs that are being made available on college campuses.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sandra Palacios: sandra ashley palacios with the california catholic conference. we don't believe that the state of california should have any role in encouraging abortions in our public postsecondary institutions. no government funded institution, medical or counseling center for that matter, should be forced to provide one sided, politically motivated advertisements for state funded abortions as the only alternative to pregnancy. this bill offers female students on a campus but a single choice because it discounts their ability to choose other alternatives without any external pressure or influence. with this bill, a pregnant woman of college age who chooses life for her baby, will receive differential treatment. and won't have the same type of immediate access to the full range of pregnancy related options, or resources for parents including for example, childcare transportation, housing assistance, emotional support etc. the bill proposes to facilitate a women's choice, but in actuality sb320 only promotes one choice. it discriminates against individuals who hold a pro-life point of view, by not simultaneously mandating the on campus advertisement of pro-life services and clinics. we would contend that the state should at the very least also promote life affirming clinics that are located near campuses, most of which provide free services so that women in need have access to all equally available choices. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ralph Merletti: My name is Ralph Merletti, member St. Rose Catholic Parish, South Sacramento and I strongly oppose this culture of death bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Siri: my name is siri and i am very much opposed to this dangerous bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Brackney: brackney, uc santa barbara class of 1980 in opposition to this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Greg Bertz: greg sandra bertz with the california family council in opposition. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Column: Danielle Column, Capital Resource Institute in opposition. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debra Porter: Debra Porter, UC Davis student in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jonathan Keller: Jonathan Keller also with California Family Counsil. I'm representing Students for Life of America's 100 State Clubs, and the California Southern Baptist Convention respectfully opposed to the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bob Bach: Thank you. Bob Bach on behalf of the California Society of Pathologists or Physicians who direct cosmical clinical laboratories. So we've been working with Senator Hill and his staff on the amendments, and very much appreciate the direction and the change in regard to clarifying clinical laboratory reporting. Make sure we don't have over reporting between a hospital and the clinical laboratory working on development of the anti biogram so the data meaningful reported. A very important issue and very supportive.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 164, 'end': 168, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kate Deberg: Kate Deberg with the health officers Association of California, we're neutral on the bill, we want to thank the author for taking our amendments to make sure we be neutral, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alex Hawthorne: mr. chair and members, alex greg hawthorne of the california hospital association. we are still formally opposed, but we think the amendments are moving the bill in the right direction. we are very close to removing opposition. we want to thank the senator and the staff for working so extensively with us on the bill. so we look forward to working out a few more things and eventually removing opposition. thank you very much.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jovanka Beckles: Thank you very much. Mr. Chair, members, my name is Jovanka Beckles and I'm the Vice Mayor of Richmond, California. On behalf of the more than 110,000 residence of Richmond, I'm pleased to support SB 687, authored by Senator Skinner. In 2015, our community was devastated by the closure of Doctors Community Hospital, and the loss of its emergency room. People north of Berkley from San Pablo to Valeo have relied on the safety net hospital. One of the hospitals that absorbed patients after the shut down was Alta Bates, already a substantial distance for people who live in the heavily trafficked communities on interstate 80. On the Interstate 80 corridor. Now, Sutter Health has proposed that it will close Alta Bates before 2030. My community with be further harmed by this decision. Wait times, of course, will rise. Patients will be at risk of dying, as the Doctor just said here, some have. With the added travel time to other hospitals and emergency services will cost our city more. Sutter is a nonprofit hospital that is supposed to operate in the community's interest. Under existing law, Sutter would have to get the Attorney General's approval to sell the hospital or merge it with another hospital but not if you wants to close a hospital. That makes no sense. The community has a role in these decisions and the AG speaks for the community. My constituents who want to voice in these decisions, if it were your community. You also would want to voice in this process, I'm sure. So losing a hospital is devastating for any community. I urge you to please vote yes on SB 687 to make sure your community, our communities have a voice in the process. And I've brought a long an original copy of the signed letter from our City Council which unanimously passed a resolution in support of this bill and I'd like to be able to share it with you. I have one original and about four copies. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 52, 'end': 67, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 225, 'end': 232, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sherif Ali: Sherif Ali, Kaiser Permanente Sacramento, I support this bill.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 10, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Melvia Lattimore: Melvia Lattimore, Acute Rehab Southern Medical Center, 17 years.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rochelle Pierce: rochelle, vallejo southern salano medical center, 18 years, i support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jaime Sanchez: Jaime Sanchez, St. Luke's Hospital, San Francisco, five and a half years, respiratory therapy, I support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Claudine Person: person, mercy general sacramento, i've been there 17 years and i support the bill.
[]
Zenithia Williams: i'm zenithia alex williams, i work at kaiser permanente in walnut creek, california. this is my 20th year, i am also an seiu member. and i support senate bill 687.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 120, 'end': 124, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michelle Cabrera: Mr. Chair and members, Michelle Cabrera with SEIU California. On behalf of our 700,000 members statewide in strong support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joe Vonbata: i'm joe zenithia vonbata from alta bates summit medical center, and i support this bill.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tom Farerra: I'm Tom Farerra from Alta Bates ER Tech, I support this bill as well.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Annie Reyes: Annie Reyes, 17 years at Alta Bates Summit, and I support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Hicks: randy joe hicks, californians with disability rights, california alliance for retired americans, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ryan Spencer: spencer with the city of long beach in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lawrence Campbell: lawrence, alta bates summit medical center, environmental services, seiu. i support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
PJ Barrilson: good afternoon, pj randy barrilson from the california hospital association. and i just wanted to give you some additional statistics to some of the testimony earlier. between 2011 and 2015 there were six closures of hospitals and emergency departments. in that same time, there were seven hospitals opened with emergency departments, and we had 710 emergency department bed spaces added to all of our 340 hospitals. so there is certainly a need for emergency services. and we are right there with the author, relative to the fact that emergency services and hospital care are vital to our communities. however, financially troubled hospitals may be unable to sustain continued emergency department losses. hospitals that close are usually facing multi-million dollar losses before they close or reduce services. we have three issues with this bill. first, this bill adds ag approval to a process that already exists, whereby hospitals notify cdph and lemsa and emsa relative to ed strategic closures. adding an additional ag approval step could further jeopardize the financial stability of the hospital. which further compromises access to care for the entire community. our second issue was adding a retroactive clause to the bill that could significantly disrupt recent and finalized hospital transactions that have stabilized the hospital and services. again could jeopardize community care. and finally, and oddly, while the state does not currently have a clear pathway to licence a free standing ed, there have been ongoing conversations about the advantages of this model in some communities with future changes in healthcare delivery. there are over 500 free standing emergency departments across the country that are serving under-served areas and seem to have a new focused way to deal with emergency care services. while the evidence and the objective information is yet to be collected we are looking at those models of care. and we're looking at those models to care to improve emergency services. this bill will strictly prohibit licensure of free standing eds and impede the ability to explore this type of care delivery for our future. and it's for these reasons that cha respectfully asks for your no vote on sb 687.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2186, 'end': 2189, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jim Beall: We should get going to avoid people from missing their transportation needs as they come and go from Sacramento here. So, we're going to start now, we have several of our Committee Members present. This is the Senate Committee on Transportation and Housing. I'm Jim Beall, Chairman, and we will start our meeting. We are very pleased to host today, the meeting and informational hearing, high speed rail, where we are now and where we are heading. We will have the informational hearing and adjourn the informational hearing, and then take up our regular meeting which will consist of one item, SCA 2, Senate Constitutional Amendment 2 by Senator Newman. So those of you who have a desire to speak on Senate Constitutional Amendment 2, we will do that subsequent to the informational hearing. Today, we acknowledge representatives from the High-Speed Rail Authority local businesses, and the High-Speed Rail Authority peer review group. And thank you for providing us with the information. We also have Caltrain and Metrolink which are connected partners to the high surreal project, and thank you. We'll get a status update on the High-Speed Rail project, and we'll hear from our panelist regarding the progress and the work performed by local businesses and the fiscal outlook as the project moves ahead and moves forward. This project is a monumental task and we have a lot of work ahead of us and we know, all know there are many challenges on our way to completing the project. If the project is to keep moving forward and be successfully completed, not only the High-Speed Rail Authority but we, the Legislature, and the State of California all have a part in addressing these challenges that makes this project a success. However, right now, we're continuing construction and the project is being built. And with that, the authority has been successful in working with local and small businesses, providing economic growth in our Central Valley. Further, the authority together with peer review group has developed a dashboard of key measurements that are published on a quarterly basis. The document has been effective for me and others that are monitoring the project and providing important information about the status of the project. Now, as chair of the Committee, I will look forward to hearing from those testifying today on the status and how we move forward with this project. And with that, I'll ask Committee Members, do they have any comments? And, we'll ask that the first panel, please come forward and begin our hearing. Thank you. And, we have a panelist, Dan Richard, the chair of our High-Speed Rail Authority and the Executive Officer Jeff Morales of the High-Speed Rail Authority. We have Council Member Oliver Baines from the City of Fresno. Curtis Lovett, owner of Outback Materials. And Dr. Vida Wright from the Rico Group. So that's our first panelist and we'll turn it over to the panelists at this time. So welcome to the hearing before the transportation Committee. Mr, Chairman and other honorable members of this Committee, thank you.
[{'start': 262, 'end': 271, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 647, 'end': 653, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2580, 'end': 2591, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2662, 'end': 2674, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2732, 'end': 2745, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2771, 'end': 2784, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2822, 'end': 2833, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dan Richard: My name is Dan Richard, I'm the chair of the High-Speed Rail Authority board. It's my pleasure and an honor to be here today. Mr. Chairman, as you said, this is a momentous project. And I appreciate the way you said we all have a stake in this. Part of our responsibility is not only to make sure that we are the effective stewards of public resources, but also to make sure that we are responsive to the oversight responsibilities of the Legislature. And so, we always appreciate the opportunity to come here and to answer your questions. I would note that I'm going to keep my opening remarks very short, there is a second panel on financing that will get in to more substantive matters. I also would like to keep my remarks short because, as I think the members know, we just delivered in the last few days, a project update report required by Senate Bill 1029 which the Legislature added to the appropriation bill for High-Speed Rail to assure ongoing oversight of the project. And I believe that this report, which is entitled in managing the nations largest infrastructural project, talks about where the project stands in terms of its costs and risk and so forth. I would just make a couple of quick points here. First of all, we are certainly not, we're not unaware of the controversial nature of much that surrounds this project. I think it probably goes with the territory these days of trying to do anything of this magnitude in America. But I would tell you that it's always important to come back to kind of a fundamental question, and often people ask me, well why does California need a high-speed rail system? And I respectfully always suggest that perhaps that's not the right starting place. The right starting place is to envision a state by mid-century that's going to have 50 million people. And the question for us as leaders, you as people's representatives in the Legislature, and those of us who are in the Executive Branch, is how we plan today to meet that challenge. We think that the data has shown that alternative investments to provide mobility for those 50 million people would cost two to three times what we're talking about here. And not provide the sustainability benefits that High-Speed Rail does provide. The authors of the High-Speed Rail bond act, had a vision that this transportation system would connect areas of California. And I think one of the things you are going to hear today, when you hear from the small businesses, is about the impact of high-speed rail on one of our most underinvested areas in California, in the Central Valley. The counties of Fresno and Merced have the two highest poverty rates in the state, in excess of 25%. And we are making a multi-billion dollar investment there to connect that economic, socioeconomic region with the rest of the state. Very quickly, in our 2016 business plan that we developed last spring, we indicated that the High-Speed Rail program has now moved from the planning stage to the project delivery stage. And as you mentioned Mr Chairman, construction is underway across the Central Valley, my colleague Mr Morales is going to update you on that. But we also articulated for the Legislature and the public in that business plan A real confidence that we have a path to getting the high speed rail program up and running, and it's really based on three legs of the stool. First, we envisioned the first operating segment that would connect the Central Valley to Silicon Valley. And this could have transformative effects on both regions. Central Valley needs the investment. Silicon Valley has no place to house people who are working in what is the engine of the California economy. Second, and we see that with the resources that we would have, particularly if cap and trade is extended, which we hope that issue is clarified by the Legislature, that under constrained budget scenario we have enough resources to make that connection between the Federal dollars, the bond dollars, and the cap and trade dollars. And that's a very significant determination we made. Second, we've been very proud of the fact, going back five years that we described the program as not a standalone transportation system but as an integral part of an integrated, rail modernization system in California. Becomes essential for us to work with local and regional transportation systems to connect to high speed rail. And we're the backbone of that but we're making parallel investments in Southern California and in the bookends with some very critical, timely investments that have immediate beneficial effects throughout the State. And third, we continue to do the work necessary to prepare for other legs of the project to be built when the funding becomes available. So we have a very clear sense of how we want to do this. And what I'm going to talk about in the next panel is how we're addressing and managing risks, financial and otherwise. But with that Mr. Chairman, I, again, want to thank you for the opportunity to appear here today.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 3108, 'end': 3115, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Vida Wright: good afternoon. thank you for providing me with this opportunity to express my support for the california high-speed rail project. my name is vida jonah wright, and i own a small business in roseville, california. i would like to briefly acquaint you with my background. i have a phd in civil and environmental engineering from the university of california davis. and i'm also a registered professional engineer in the state of california. prior to starting my business in 2007, i worked in increasingly responsible senior management position for fortune 100 and fortune 500 engineering and construction companies. managing major programs and projects for department of defense and department of energy clients. but when i started my business, the view was very different from where i was sitting, compared to when i worked for major corporations. it is simply very difficult for a small business, no matter how qualified or how experienced, to have a seat at the table with large businesses, working and contributing to a major project. i think that is why i think the high-speed rail authorities' commitment and goal of 30% small business participation is really admirable. this project has helped numerous small businesses throughout california to grow and prosper, and further develop, which overall helps our economy. i have been a supporter of california high-speed rail project since 2012 when i first attended an outreach event hosted by the authority. at that time, i was the regional vice president for the society of american military engineers, known as same. same is a worldwide organization with a mission of bringing together engineers in our uniformed services with private sector professionals to work together in support of our national security challenges. i felt that this project was a great project to put our returning veterans to work. so in 2014, i urged same national leadership to lend its support to the project, and allow my region to participate in the business adviser in the authority's business advisory council. this is a relationship that has continued to date. my company, as a subcontractor to parsons brinckerhoff, provides contract and project management support services for high-speed rail-related projects in the north region. i sincerely can't say not only this project has been very beneficial financially for my company, it also has become a highlight of my own career. i would like to express my gratitude to our governor, governor brown, for his leadership, and to our state legislators for their continued support of this project. it is very natural to be excited and interested in a project that i believe is creating, is basically transforming our transportation system, is helping our environment, and will create mobility for the californians in the decades to come. i'm also appreciative to chairman richard and the authority board of directors for their unwavering support and commitment to small businesses. and also none of this obviously would have been possible without ceo morales and his staff commitment and dedication to making sure that small businesses have numerous opportunities to participate in this remarkable and transformative project, and basically contribute to building the first high speed rail in our nation. thank you.
[{'start': 142, 'end': 159, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2478, 'end': 2483, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2853, 'end': 2860, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3028, 'end': 3039, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Marvin Dean: First of all, I wanted to say, my name is Marvin Dean, I'm here representing the Kern Minority Contractors Association out of Bakersfield. Okay. Which is in the central valley, I wanted to make some remarks about the high-speed rail, in support of it, some staff comments, and also some things I heard while I was sitting here. Yeah, go right ahead, sir. I have a train that's going to leave here in about 45 minutes so I'm going to have to get out of here pretty quick. So, I'll be brief. First of all, Mr. Chairman, you have mentioned about the linking of infrastructure projects and, Workforce investment. We think that's an excellent ideal and if it's anything that's going to come out of a bill, is something you need some help with, our Association would very much want to work with you on that because we think that that's a very good plan.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Keith Dunn: welcome sir. thank you mr chairman and community members. keithe for the association of california high speed train. and i'm going to be checking my schedule to see if i can invite you to any events either, coming up. i get back to your office on that among my colleagues in the building trades and labor fed talk about the jobs that are created. don't want to brush over them. but they're going to talk about that. i want to talk just a little bit about success of high speed rail and communities and transforming them jobs, their housing areas, where you are going to be able to see from downtown fresno, which today, if you've been there doesn't tend to offer. but, if you go to other places who've built these stations and transform their communities, you can really see that they've turned into, from places which were really kind of bleak and not very user friendly to really communities that are walkable, livable, and people have as destinations. so, we're doing a great job, the planning's coming along, the project's moving along. we have our challenges, but we're all committed. and these types of hearings are very helpful and just to thank you for your time.
[{'start': 58, 'end': 64, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jeremy Smith: Thank you Mr Chair and Members of the Committee. Jeremy Smith here on behalf of the State Building and Construction Trades Council. I'd like to thank you for holding this hearing. The hearings you've held like this every year, they're much more helpful I believe, in providing oversight to this program than the myriad pieces of legislation that get introduced every year to redirect money, to do more. Oversight activities, it's clear that this project is under tremendous oversight already. Between this Committee, the Assembly, transportation Committee, as well as the budget sub-committees, that they have to go before every year. So, thank you for holding this hearing, I'd like to just reiterate a couple points that were made first of all, I thought it was breathtaking, to hear a $500 million investment, our leveraged investment, in Fresno, because of this project. This is exactly what this project is going to do. It's 15 or $20 billion to get us from the Central Valley to Silicon Valley, but it's going to leverage so many more billions in these areas where stations are built. And secondly, to Pick up on Mr. Morales' point about what are unions are doing in these areas? Our passionate programs are booming. Construction is up throughout the state. The Central Valley always logs behind whenever these recoveries happen. High-speed rail is a big reason why things are really booming in our apprenticeship programs in the Central Valley. And finally, I'd like to just let everybody know about helmets to hard hats. Mr. Morales mentioned that as well. That is the state building trades, national building trades, our local building trades, that's our program. We've been running that program for, going on 15 years now. Throughout the country, it is placing veterans coming home from war in positions where they can work with their hands and use the skills they received in the military to become excellent construction workers. And it's important to remember that these workers getting trained in our apprenticeship programs, whether they're veterans or non-veterans, are going to be trained for a career. After they're done with the high speed rail project. And that's the point of this project is to ramp up these programs. Get these folks trained so they have a career.
[{'start': 49, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1123, 'end': 1130, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1533, 'end': 1540, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sara Flocks: yeah. thank you. mr chair, members, sara vida flocks, california labor federation. just wanted to thank you again for this hearing and for the high-speed rail authority for being here. when we started supporting this project and testifying in hearings like this, it was 2008 2009. and it was a time we would come up here and say that our trades had 50% unemployment. there are 50% of people on the trades on the bench in the central valley. and this really was the project that we held up. this was going to be stimulus project. and that would people back to work in the valley. and would be a stimulus for the economy. and i just have to say that i thought that video that was shown was so impressive. to actually see the construction happening, after we have advocated so long for it. people are back to work, people are able to have good middle class jobs. to buy houses, to pay rent, to start shopping in communities in the central valley, in all of these areas across the state that needed economic stimulus so much. and this really is not just a transportation project, and the largest transportation public works project in the nation, but it's an economic stimulus package for targeted areas of the state. so we are very thankful for that. i also wanted to put the cost of the project in context. inaction on high speed rail will cost much much more. without high speed rail, the state would have to invest over 1$50 billion.. to build 4000 new lanes of highway, and 150 gates at airports, just to move our population around the state. so really, compared to that, 64 billion is a bargain, especially with the economic stimulus. so, we appreciate these hearings, we love getting the updates, i think that video is excellent, it should be shown all over and we look forward to working with you in the future. thank you very much.
[]
Brandyline Hastings: mr chair, my name is brandyline sara hastings, i come from fresno city college with a group called i will ride. we support the high speed rail. thank you for holding this hearing. i just want to say a couple of things as to why i support the project. and from my generation's view why i think it's so important. two major things, obviously, would be the environment, and investing in infrastructure. i come from fresno. i'm a huge advocate of downtown fresno. that's actually why i got interested in high-speed rail originally. if this is somewhat accurate. i believe somebody that's involved in that told me there is, i think, just over or under a million square footage on the fullton mall land that's vacant. there's a lot of deteriorating buildings. there's a lot of misuse of space. and personally, i feel the effects of a generation that lived before me that didn't steward things properly or invest into the future. but, they were selfishly just lived off of what they had. so, i see high-speed rail project as just a mandatory investment in connecting our state. but i love the way that the authority runs it and how they're conscious of the communities around them, being conscious of our environment, being conscious revitalizing areas that have been down, and being good stewards of our space. and so, i'm grateful for the project. i'm happy to see it continue. i hope everybody does everything they can to make it continue efficiently. and also, that this might be a staple for california moving forward in the future and future generations, that we don't repeat what the past generation did and we actually invest in our kids in the future generations.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Arlene Sodi: Hi, my name is Arlene Sodi. And I just graduated high school and I'm currently a full-time student at Fresno City. My father is heavily involved in the political field in terms of hosting galas in favor of electing certain Senators. I'm now Yeah, I know. He hosts them for certain Senators that he likes, sometimes they do get elected. Yeah, I'm following in his political footsteps and so here I am. This is the first time I've ever been to one of these. And I wholeheartedly support this project. I'm sure we're all cognizant that this will help with unemployment and small businesses, proving itself to be a fruitful long term investment. But it will also help the environment, which is one of my main areas of concern. It's not a secret that a majority of my generation supports green companies and the high speed rail will help reduce our CO2 footprint, plant more trees, all with a zero net pollution and recycling. Another goal is the preservation of land. Now, scientists have recently come to the conclusion that every 24 hours, 150 to 200 species of plant, insects, birds and mammal become extinct, that's every day. This is a thousand times faster than the natural Earth rate, and we're going through a sixth mass extinction, which is not debatable. And this extinction crisis is purely man-made with one of the main reasons being, loss of habitat. So I'm just going to leave you guys with this. Our biosphere will collapse if something isn't done soon, and the continuation of this project is a step in the right direction. So thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 188, 'end': 193, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark Watts: Well, I might as well start. Sorry, Mr. Chairman and members, Mark Watts, I'm here on behalf of Transportation California, a coalition of contractors and allied labor. We've been working with the author's office, very supportive of the effort to put a lock box package together. We found it, from day one, as we've pursued transportation financing for our deferred maintenance in the State of California, that in addition to the revenues that we have, we find it very important to have reforms to accompany it, in addition, we want to make sure that the protections that are on the books are strengthened and applied to whatever packages that may emerge. I was also asked today by CALCOG's director, Bill Higgins, to indicate that they have the same perspective on this measure, thank you.
[{'start': 62, 'end': 72, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 700, 'end': 712, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jeremy Smith: thank you. thank you mr. chair and members of the committee, jeremy brandyline smith here on behalf of the state building and construction trades council, also here in support, thank you.
[{'start': 61, 'end': 84, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Lee: Chris Lee on behalf of the California State Association of Counties, we also think that constitutional protections to ensure that any new revenues are dedicated and protected for transportation purposes are going to be a vital part of any deal, and we look forward to working with the Senator in making sure that everything's locked up, thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Orville Thomas: thomas from the california alliance for jobs, conceptually supportive of the senator and the pending legislation for protecting transportation revenues, we look forward to working with you guys as we get closer to sca 2.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Westling: Good afternoon, my name is Amy Westling, I'm from the Association of Regional Center Agencies. First and foremost, I want to echo Director Bargeman's thanks to the Committee and staff, and for all the people who came here to talk about this essential issue. We know that service disparities exist not just in the Regional Center system, but throughout health and human services programs, including special education, in-home supportive services, medical, SSI, and mental health. That's not to make an excuse, it's to point out that it's a problem that's much larger than just our service system. But we're pleased that everyone has gathered here today to talk about this issue and how it impacts those served and supported by Regional Centers. What we see in other health and human services agencies' programs is that there is significant challenge in getting people in the front door. We see less of that in the Regional Center System, which means the outreach is working fairly well in those populations, but it's critical that we examine the issue of whether people's needs are being met through a combination of services available to them. The goal of Regional Centers is the service provision and meeting of people's need for individuals with developmental disabilities in their families. As the Chair mentioned, they were intentionally created to be non-profit agencies and the benefit of that is that they are responsive not just to the Department of Developmental Services, but also to their local communities. We know that there's certain things that drive disparity. We know that certain populations have a distrust of government and that people have a challenge in discriminating a Regional Center from a government agency. We know that that distrust of government has grown significantly in recent months because of issues at the federal level. We also know there are differing attitudes among various racial and ethnic groups about disability and also the private versus public role in meeting the needs associated with it. We also know that challenges associated, not with race and ethnicity, but with differing levels of socioeconomic status, also drive some of these differences. For instance, individuals who are facing housing or food insecurity oftentimes have difficulty prioritizing the developmental needs of their child over those concerns. We know that parents with difficult work schedules or who maybe are working multiple jobs also face similar challenges. As Dr. Level mentioned, the data that Regional Centers have been collecting tells a piece of the story, but there's other pieces that are missing and those are the things that we need to explore further. One pieces the data that's available tells only what Regional Centers are purchasing for individuals. Regional Centers are required to seek services from other generic agencies such as schools and Social Security and medic health and private insurance before they purchase services. The available data doesn't tell us the whole breadth of things that's being purchased for an individual, only those things that Regional Centers are funding when there is no other service available. The available data doesn't allow us to break out things that are purchased through a contract with a vendor, such as transportation and some supported employment services. So, even though an individual may be receiving those services, they won't appear in the data. We also are concerned and want to talk a little bit about individuals for whom the Regional Center isn't purchasing any services. It's important to note that the core mission of the Regional Center is service co-ordination, ensuring that an individual's needs are met across his or her lifespan. Individuals who have no services purchased from them through the Regional Center still receive the critical support of service coordination and they continue to rely on that service, and they continue to choose to have that person, their service coordinator, in their lives to help them to navigate other complex systems, such as Social Security and medical. Dr. Level did a fantastic job explaining the impact that living arrangements have on purchase of service utilization. And we know that individuals from diverse communities are much more likely to remain at home as adults than individuals who are Caucasian. There are some other things that we need to consider, such as systemic barriers, services to support families who are supporting individuals at home were cut in 2009, things like camp and social recreation opportunities, as well as, there was a cap put on respite. Additionally, in 2011, the federal government set, provided instructions that the state was no longer to pay families directly for services. And if they did, the federal government would no longer contribute to the cost of those services. Many of the families that were receiving respite services were doing it through an informal network that they had developed themselves and this change at the federal level required that this process become much more formalized and that the caregivers that they selected whom they chose and whom they trusted would go through formalized training, background checks, screenings, and it made the system much less nimble for them. A lot of work has been done in the last five years. As Director Bardsman noted, the promotora model out of Frank D. Lanterman Regional Center used two community members who were known entities in their communities. They spoke Spanish and they were trusted among the Spanish-speaking individuals who reside in that area. They each worked with 26 individuals and worked to meet them where they were, worked to help them to address things like housing and food insecurity, so that they could focus on their child's disability, help them to develop self advocacy skills so that they knew how to better access and navigate systems. This was a tremendously successful model, but there's been other good work done, as well. Both Golden Gate Regional Center and San Andreas Regional Center worked with Stanford University to explore different options for how to meet the needs of various communities. First, by identifying what are those barriers, what are their perceptions that may be blocking people before they access the services they need, and then coming up with creative solutions for addressing those. Regional Center of Orange County works with English, Spanish and Vietnamese language newspapers to make sure that they get the word out about meetings that they are having about important topics. There's been some good information that's come out of the annual meetings that each Regional Center holds as well. For example, San Gabriel Pomona Regional Center heard from their Spanish-speaking community that they were accessing less respite than they were authorized because they couldn't schedule respite providers with in a timely way and their monthly respite allocations would expire. So Pomona Regional Center changed their authorizations to quarterly to make those services more usable and more friendly to the intended audience. I could go on and on about various examples, but I did want to touch on the additional work that's being done as a result of the special session last year. Director Berg Smith spoke of the cultural specialist that Regional Center is in the process of hiring and there's many projects under way that are being tried to see what is it that will work because there is nothing like testing something in the field. For example, are there ways to address families maybe forgetting appointments, and so Frank D Lanterman Regional Center is working with other Regional Centers to develop an automated phone system that's multilingual to provide information for families. Another Regional Center, Inland Regional Center, is working to provide parent training specifically for people who aren't accessing Regional Center paid supports and they're using a known community entity to do that. So overall, I just wanted to share these things that have been done, and while recognizing that there's more work to be done, provide some assurance to the Committee that the Regional Center System takes these issues very seriously, and looks forward to continuing to address them. Thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 139, 'end': 147, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4095, 'end': 4100, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5343, 'end': 5351, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7283, 'end': 7293, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Areva Martin: Good afternoon, Senator Wiener. Thank you for convening this very important hearing. My name is Areva Martin, and I am a civil rights attorney, and I'm the founder and President of Special Needs Network, a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization I started over 11 years ago. Shortly after my own son, Marty, was diagnosed with autism. Special needs network has offices in Los Angeles and Compton, California. In the 11 years since we started, we have served more than 40,000 families who have kids and adults with autism and other developmental disabilities, most of whom are African American and Latino families. Most of the families we serve live at or below the poverty line. Many work two or three jobs, and they have three or four children. They represent the thousands of families each year that suffer from a state funded program that consistently spends less on their children than on white kids. In more affluent parts of the state and there may be disagreement about why these disparities exist, but it is undeniable that the Department of Developmental Services, and the 21 Regional Centers facially neutral funding scheme is discriminatory in its application and effect, and it has been so for over two decades, and this Senator is reprehensible. Over the last decade, I've been a member and I've played a key role on almost every task force convened by this legislative body. Dating back to the 2005 blue ribbon Commission on Autism convened by then speaker, Fabian Nunez. That report that was issued as a result of that blue ribbon Commission found that minority and poor children who have disabilities in the State of California bear an additional burden. In fact, that burden dates back to 1992, almost two decades ago. It was confirmed in 1992 that disparities exist in the spending on kids of color in the Regional Center system. The 2011 LA Times article revealed those shocking disparities in the Regional Center funding. U.C. Davis study, some six years later repeats the same disparities. We've seen that in a state audit that was issued last year by Betty Yee. We've seen it recently in a public council report that will becoming out in March of this year. Report after report confirms that this state spends less on children of color. I sat here almost five years ago to the day, and testified before a hearing about these disparities. I watched then, Director of the Developmental Disabilities, Terry Delgadillo, give her testimony. She testified that the disparities that exist in the Regional Center services was based on an antiquated budgeting process that favored providing the same level of funding for those Regional Centers based on their historical spending. Terry Delgadillo confirmed, that for smaller Regional Centers, those that have larger populations of African-American and Latino children, it would be almost impossible for them to ever provide equitable funding based on the budget process that's used by the Regional Center. At the hearing with Terri Delgadillo and those of us from the autism community, Steinberg convened an equity and diversity task force. I co-chaired had the honor of co-chairing that task force. We met for a year. We met with legislators. We met with members of DDS. We met with the advocate community. We made recommendations about changing the budget process and changing the way that the POS dollars are spent to be more transparent and to provide for the immediate elimination of disparities based on race and ethnicity. To provide for a system that funded the care for kids and adults in the system based on their needs and not their race. Those recommendations as I sit here today and testify, have not been implemented by the Department of Developmental Services. So it's a little shocking to me, frustrating and quite frankly, offensive, when I hear officials from the state talk about needing more time. Families in the autism community, we have waited long enough. We have written thousands and thousands of letters to legislators. We have spent, I can't tell you how many hours, traveling from Los Angeles and all parts of the states to Sacramento. We've marched, we've rallied, we've passed numerous pieces of legislation, but yet, the disparities persist. I don't know what it's going to take for the State of California that prides itself on providing care for kids who have autism in an equitable way, to finally eliminate these disparities. In concert with public council, we submitted some recommendations to address some of the issues. And some of those recommendations include eliminating parent participation requirements that often prevent families from receiving early intervention services. Requiring the Regional Centers to provide a comprehensive list of all services provided by the Regional Centers before the IPP process. Reinstating the respite and recreational services that you heard about earlier, that disproportionately impact poor families. Requiring DDS to reallocate some of the $11 million that you heard talked about today, so that a large portion of that money goes to non-profit organizations working to end disparities. And lastly, I think what's most important is establishing an independent body to develop a budget process that ensures the funding is based on client needs and not ethnicity and race. A body that doesn't work within the DDS system because we've heard, for years, thar DSS, for whatever reason, can't get this right. We're also calling for a study to look at the impact of these inequities on families to determine if policy or financial enumeration is warranted based on these continued disparities. I'll close by saying, today is the day. Dr. Martin Luther King said it most eloquently when he stated, the time is always right to do the right thing. Today is the day to do the right thing. To end the discriminatory practices of DDS and to stand with families. And to give each child in the State of California with a developmental disability the opportunity that he, or she needs to reach their highest potential irrespective of their race or their zip code.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 30, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 96, 'end': 108, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 294, 'end': 299, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1465, 'end': 1477, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2066, 'end': 2075, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2411, 'end': 2429, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2686, 'end': 2702, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2982, 'end': 2998, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3042, 'end': 3051, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5667, 'end': 5685, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
 : thank jonah you.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 11, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
April Lopez: thank you very much. and thank you for the opportunity to be here today to speak. i'm april  lopez, the chair of the state council on developmental disabilities. i'm also part of the legislative and public policy committee. and i'm the chair of the statewide self-determination committee. i also happen to be the chair of the cac. which is the community advisory committee for the placentia-yorba linda school district. so i get to hear it at the elementary school level as well as once they leave high school. we all recognize that we are a minority majority state. and so those numbers have been given i think one of the biggest problems in the community is that consumers don't know what to ask for. and i like to use this example when i'm out and about, because sometimes if you haven't been, we are all fighting for our disability community, but some of us have never had the privilege of working in the regional center system. i have three children, and my daughter isabella, who's now 14, has a dual diagnosis. she's autistic, and she has down syndrome. so i've been living it for 14 years. and i like to use this as an example of, you go into a restaurant because you're hungry and you say you're hungry, what do you want? what do you have? well, what do you want? well, i want pizza. well, we don't have pizza. okay, well, do you have tacos? no, we don't have tacos. so, there's no menu. and so if you don't have a menu and don't get me wrong, i don't believe that there we should live within that box, we need to think outside the box. so i believe there should be a list and we at the state council right now are currently working on a list of the services, so that it can also be in the languages and the threshold languages. we should have our list compiled, at least in spanish-speaking, by september. so, in most of cultures, people take the person that's speaking that's in charge for their word. and they go away at that point, like we did 14 years ago. when we receive an noa which is the notice of action and they give us our rights, due process, there's socioeconomic that have a big huge decision in that. do i want to an ulcer that year? do i want to create pain with the family because it's quite stressful? often times, the regional center will lead you to believe that everything is satisfactory because it is documented on the ohh form that it's satisfactory. so if you don't go beyond, then it doesn't appear that anybody is in dispute. or has any issues with the services that they're receiving or not receiving. there's great disparities across regional center due to cultural, ethnicities, and also there's geographical issues. i want to tell just two short stories, really quick because i know we're limited on time, but i think stories are important. many of you know who senator emerson is and i'm an orange county and i go to these self determination meetings because i sit on that advisory committee. and he called me up one day and said, i needed to talk to a friend of mine who is another doctor in the area. has a successful practice, he and his wife, and if you can give him some resources because he has a child that is in a day program through the regional center. and i said i would. so he came over to the meeting and he spoke to me. and said that often times when his son is in the day program that they will leave early and bring him home as early as an hour from the day program. he and his wife, who have a very successful practice. and they are from india and are reluctant to say anything because of the fear that there will be retaliation. because apparently if you say something they could change you take you out of that program and put you into a different program. and they had been in so many programs already they were not good. and it has already happened, and so they could in the middle of their job, and have to leave and be home for someone to receive his son. so i put him contact with someone. so i guess my point to this story is someone, like myself, who i've never been described as being shy. someone who feels more confident to reach out to people to have help are still feeling this sense of fear. that there might be some retaliation or they can't speak up because changes won't be made. and it interferes with even working parents. i tell you another story real quick about a friend who is a cuban woman who is afraid of authority. and who receives a denial-of-services, the noa. she understands that she receives something that says due process and you have, what your rights are, informal actions, seeing a judge. these are all culturally, advocating is costly, socioeconomics is an issue, and needless to say the list goes on and on. and i'll tell you my last my last story. most know i'm a chiropractor and i've been in practice for 20 years. and i had a patient come in that was sent over by her primary doctor because she had back pain because she was lifting her child now that's 10 years old. because he has to have an enema three to four times a day. and he's already 10 and she's been lifting him and moving him for several years. doctor says, you can't keep doing it. and i explained to her, well, don't you know what regional center is? have you reached out? yes, she has 15 hours of regional care hours. and so, but they haven't found anybody for me and it has been a year now and i'm still calling. so of course i call and try to help her out and they gave her 30 more hours. my point to this is vietnamese woman, she did not want me to call and ask because she was more afraid of the case worker getting in trouble. and i had to convince her that she wasn't going to get in trouble. this was, there was maybe a language barrier, she just felt like if they don't have anyone they'll call her and she's been waiting a year. the additional hours isn't going to make a difference if you don't have a nurse there to help. and she was not aware that she could have a family member that could be trained, so they could help her because they didn't have anyone. there's also a six year old boy that was a brother of the 10 year old. and he asked his mom, how come we never get to go on vacation? so she's telling me these stories, and i say, well, there's services you can get. again, we're back to, not that they weren't available to this family, but the family wasn't aware that they were available to her. and in closing i'll tell you my story of three weeks ago, maybe four weeks ago where i had two individuals come to my office because i myself was asking for some additional services and i wasn't sure how the system worked. so they came to my office with respite as i have a daughter that's entering puberty and it's quite difficult. as it is probably for any child that doesn't have a disability. it's been pretty crazy. and so i had two people come to my office, and one nurse out there, and explained to me, and said to me, what do i want? and i said, well, i filled out this paperwork and she explained to me what my responsibility was as a parent. so my smiles went immediately, i was frustrated and i said, you don't need to tell me what my rights are, what my responsibility is as a parent i have been living it for 14 years. and i expressed myself, i'm sure not all parents were in the position to sit there in front of two people and feel comfortable enough to do that. so needless to say, i said i think this meeting is over and it ended. so i thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak. there's plenty of stories. i think, we at the state council and developmental disabilities are doing, as much as we can. and we will continue to fight on this path. and thank you for giving us the opportunity to be here today.
[{'start': 86, 'end': 97, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 971, 'end': 979, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2811, 'end': 2818, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tien Nguyen: I try to keep to five minutes. Maybe a little long, but I'll try to talk as fast as I can. Good afternoon. Let me introduce myself. My name is Tien Nguyen. I have a sister, her name is Tran, and she was diagnosed in Vietnam as cerebral palsy when she was 5, and now she's 39 years old. My sister uses a wheelchair and needs help to move around. So she has become a consumer of the Regional Center since she was 16, when she just came here. I'm also volunteering as a secretary of Vietnamese Parents with Disabled Children Association, short name is VPDCA, which has more than 200 members in Los Angeles and Orange Counties. I am here today to represent both my sister and the people of the VPDCA to present the Committee some difficulties and issues that we Vietnamese parents, families, experience trying to get the Regional Center services. The first thing I am going to talk about is the most common problem that our family encounter is that they don't know what services are available and useful. Sometimes, we don't know what services are available and useful for our families. Also, sometimes the service coordinators don't tell us what services available we can get and that can help us. And also, if we don't know all the different in the services that are available, then, we don't know what to ask for even if the Regional Center asks us what we want. So, what can help us is if a service coordinator gets better training about different services so that they can tell us about it, and then help us identify them for our families. Also, if they can give us the information about different services that are available in Vietnamese language, so that we can read and understand it and so that we can have the better make a choice. Also, and so, if before like home visits, the service coordinator can study the family's case, so that they can think and research what services the Regional Center can offer to the family. The second point I want to talk here is our families have not gotten information on what their IPP is, what our rights are and how we should be involved in the planning process. Sometimes when the Regional Center calls us to schedule a meeting and they don't tell us it's a IPP meeting. So... a lot of families don't even know what the IPP is. So, a lot of families know about IEP but not much about IPP. So they don't understand, don't know what their rights are, and they don't know why the IPP is important. Sometimes, family dont even know whether they have a copy of the IPP document because they don't know what it is. Regional Center can help us if they mention that the meeting is IPP and also explain what important IPP is and also let our families know that they have the right to have IPP meeting in Vietnamese and also the document in Vietnamese. So a lot of Vietnamese families don't know about that. So the third point I want to talk to here is in our culture, sometimes this is not comfortable for us to speak out, to speak up for something that we utilize, question when the services are denied. Sometimes when services are denied, the Regional Centers don't tell us why they deny it. Sometimes they just say, just tell us that, say no. And, as a culture, then we just accept it. Because we were told no, we might not ask again for it, even though we might really need that service for our kids or our children. It's just not comfortable in our culture to challenge what the Regional Centers say because we think that they know what they are doing. So we think that the Regional Center can help our family when they say no, they should give us explanation why and tell us what our rights are. Tell that can help us understand. Also, sometimes when we get the service provider that we don't trust, or feel that they are not helping us, we are gladly to give up the services because without knowing that, we can't ask for help from the Regional Center. So, the Regional Center can help the family by letting the family know that if the service provider doesn't work out, they can find help from the Regional Center to find other service provider. That way, we don't stop using the services because we still need it. If the Regional Center can do that, this will help our family a lot. The fourth point in here I want to talk is what services are being denied, just want to give you some brief example, not a lot. So, first thing is the special education. Sometimes we don't know what services children can get from the Regional Center when they are school age. For example, I know that the family with a child that has a lot of behavior problems at home but the families didn't know what to do, and it caused a lot of stress for the family. This family doesn't even know what IPP is, so of course, they don't even know what to ask for. Maybe the Regional Center can help explain to the family what services they can get, maybe in the home or on the weekends that will help the family to overcome the difficult situation. For the health, first of all, physical... It is very hard to get the service based on the parents' insurance. The insurance usually doesn't cover it and it's very rare for the Regional Center to get involved into it, the same with the Medicare too. So we really need the Regional Center to help us to get those needed services. Another example is the leg brace for my sister; she needs the leg brace to help her to stand up. So she got it paid by CCS when she was still under 18, but now she grow up, and taller, and then that did not fit anymore to her. So, she needs a new one, but the Regional Center refer us to insurance, and the insurance won't pay for it, And we and up, like right now, she doesn't have anything, so she cannot stand well by herself, and to stand up without braces. And I know the same way, for my sister, also, is the wheelchair broken, a few years ago, a couple of years ago. At that point the Regional Center referred us to the Medi-Cal, but Medi-Cal doesn't give us every seven years to getting a wheelchair. So we end up to pay it by our own, but the wheelchair is not very comfortable for her, because we don't have much money to pay for the expensive car and wheelchair that can fit to her. And another issue, Regional Center has walk-in workshops that mostly happen during the weekday that most of our parents working, so they cannot come to attend the meeting, so we have to ask that if they can have the meeting on the weekend or weeknights so the parents can come to attend. And also, the notice sent to us, maybe, in our language, Vietnamese, so that parents can understand to read it and understand about it. So in summary, our Vietnamese family hope the Regional Center understand our culture better. So we can work together to help our children get the services they need. They do some work, but there needs more work to be done. Thank you.
[{'start': 143, 'end': 154, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 185, 'end': 189, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Marty Omoto: marty april omoto, california disability senior community action network, and the california person centered advocacy partnership, more important of all, it was a family member, my older sister, elena, had developmental disabilities and she passed away about 14 years ago. just want to explain to everyone here, it may seem that we're trying to divide or there's a division within our community. and there is anger and there's division right now and i think the whole reason for this hearing that you're trying to do is to bridge that division but the anger is real and my own family felt that when my sister was alive and especially the last 10 years or so, or even before that. when we're fighting for services and we kept hitting barriers, one time after another and then you realize the enemy, everything you're fighting for are those barriers, but it's also time. and every one of these parents and families are fighting not just against barriers, they're fighting time. because their children are getting older, of if they're becoming adults they become fragile because of health needs, and because they don't get the right services and we lost that battle. and you try to find a time to fight, and then you try to find the time to cry and to be angry and then you find the time also to be hopeful, because there's so much hope and joy with my older sister, or their sons and daughters, or siblings, all of us. but i think, in saying all that, i've always realized that there is good people everywhere. there's good people who are working in the regional centers, good people working in the department, here in the legislature, good providers, good families. and i guess what we're asking for, ultimately from all of you and from all of us, is that we're not looking for a civil war and we're not looking for a truce. we're not looking for a treaty. we're looking for a union that works with all the families, with the regional centers, with the providers, with everybody. and there's a couple of things that we need to do and that can only happen with good oversight. and so this hearing is maybe the first step towards that, but it can't be the only step and we can't see you five years from now, and the legislature needs to step up too, as well as all of us. there are some barriers that i want to identify. as amy westling mentioned, the problem is much larger than just the regional centers. the reason i agree with that is because we need to look at the problem systemically, that it crosses the silos of services that our families access, or people with developmental disabilities access and that's important because to try to solve a problem, we really need to really understand what the problem is, and also there's solutions that other systems are putting forward. but as she said, the problems exist in special ed., medical, and ihss. i know that from firsthand experience. number two, there's a lack of consistent oversight and accountability that is crucial, by the legislature, in budget hearings but also in policy committees like this, by the state meaning the department of developmental services and other state agencies, by the regional centers but also oversight and advocacy and accountability by providers and advocates groups too. we need to do a better job. and also, i've worked with minority or civil rights groups. who deal with communities of color and they need to step up and push for the right things to happen in all the communities of color and they're not doing it. we're not part of their agenda meaning people with disabilities. number three, there needs to be better information and more outreach by the state at all levels including the department of developmental disabilities in posting important notices in languages, at least the threshold languages, that medical uses so that information is out there for people to access. and i approve from my own work that getting good information out there can bring people together. i've done that on my own for the last 17 years, and certainly the state can step up and do that too. they've made inroads, but they can do a better job. number four, efforts- one of the problems, i think, is that we do these efforts towards reducing disparities which is great, but they're often segregated from the mainstream of other things that we do. meaning we have our normal programs and services and then we have these additional programs and services meant to reduce disparities. and i think one of the problems with that is it really doesn't touch upon the things that we need to do in terms of reducing disparities in those mainstream programs such as competitive integrated employment, housing, supported living and other needed services. number five, there's an unmet need. there's a lack of providers and a lack of good services that people need, especially from communities of color, that are not out there. and lastly, there's funding, which you're going to hear from all types of groups for all types of problems, but this one is especially true. some recommendations as i mentioned before, outreach needs to be better. post notices in language, threshold languages. and most importantly there is a grant issued to reduce disparities to the regional centers which i thought was a good thing except we need to get the department of developmental services to post the entire proposals that they approved on their website so everyone can see them, because you can't have good accountability and oversight if you don't know exactly what goals and outcomes were approved to reduce disparities. and again, it's a partnership. it's a union. we need to start working together. number three, continue the dashboard on the department of developmental services website. it's a regional center oversight dashboard. it's great. we need to make sure that continues with good information. number four, incorporate, as i mentioned before, all the efforts toward reducing disparities in the things that we normally are doing within developmental services such as making sure that the issue of disparities is addressed as we're moving forward on person centered planning. person centered thinking. that, towards efforts to comply with the home and community based services final rule, that disparities, that issue is built in, that the issues of reducing disparities is part of self-determination, part of the community placement plan expansion, part of other systems such as the hope person care pilot program that is administered by the department of healthcare services. housing, transportation. number five, target unmet need in where services are not being met in communities of color by restarting something that was put away a long time ago, which was developing new resources, new program development in regional centers catch man areas across the state. the state put a freeze on that and we need to change the culture of thinking that this is important and this can help reduce disparities. lastly, and there is no lastly, actually, this list can go on, but at least for this hearing my final point is, i think also, aside from the regional centers and the state needs to be, to do a better job and the legislature needs to do a better job too in oversight and accountability. providers and advocates need to do a better job too. we need to mobilise our communities, and not just the advocates who represent or work with communities or color. the other advocates do need to be looking at these issues as they own it, too. providers need to own this issue, too. ultimately, it's the responsibility of our entire community, again, we want a union, not a civil war. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 195, 'end': 200, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2321, 'end': 2333, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Catherine Blakemore: good afternoon. i'm catherine marty blakemore with disability rights california. we're a federally mandated legal services program for californians with disabilities. we assisted over 25,000 individuals last year and of that number, about 11,000 were individuals with intellectual or developmental disabilities either through our federally funded services or through our office of client's rights advocacy. a vast majority of the people that we represented were from traditionally underserved communities. that's a priority of our agency. so, the stories that you heard today from families are stories that our staff help people resolve every day. but obviously, given the numbers and the resources we have to represent people, while we're successful in resolving those, there's thousands of other people who don't find their way to our services and, therefore, continue to face barriers. i want to spend just the time today looking at the recommendations we're making. because i know we're running out of time, and that is the focus of this panel. so, on page eight of our testimony is a series of recommendations that we have in about four different areas. and the areas are, first of all, increased oversight of service disparities and language access. i often say that we can't get someplace unless we set an outcome measure about where we're trying to get. and so, asking the department and the regional centers and working with stakeholders to identify a specific target about what we are going to do in concrete and real terms to address the service disparities that we've talked about today and then the specific steps we can all take to address those kinds of barriers. but knowing where we're going in a measurable kind of way. similarly, i think an effective evaluation of the services, particularly the $11 million in what's worked and what hasn't worked in terms of reducing disparities should be expected by the legislature and should be expected by the communities that we serve. the second area i want to talk just briefly about is expand culturally competent services and eliminate service delivery barriers. because, in large part of the 2009 budget cuts and the changes to the service delivery system, i am really convinced we could not have designed something that was less likely to be friendly to low income monolingual spanish speakers. and the service system is now far beyond the initial intent of using regional centers to help families access services. but instead, an agency that is required by law to tell people, you have to go here and you have to go there, and you are sort of on your own in many instances to resolve that. so, agreeing with ms. wong who said, restore the services that were eliminated, that is long overdue. those are the services that individuals from minority communities relied on and it is something that would immediately make a difference in terms of reducing service disparities. i want to also add to that the notion of looking at culturally competent ways to provide respite services. a family that we are currently representing is russian speaking. there are two children in that family, both children have autism. the mother was completely overwhelmed with caring for the children. her mother, the grandmother, previously lived in a different home and provided respite service to the mom. because of the difficulty the family was experiencing, the grandmother quit her job, moved into the home to help provide care for the children. and at that point, the regional center said, i'm sorry, you now live in the home and you're no longer eligible to provide respite services. you, family, needs to go look some place else to find a respite agency that will assist you. that just turns things on its head. this is a family who does not speak english. needs a language competent person to provide the respite service. there's trust issues with going outside of the family. so, ensuring, as we restore services, that we have the flexibility to provide those services in a culturally competent way, is really a critical component. similarly, ensure flexibility for parent training components for applied behavioral analysis services. some regional centers say you have to go to group training as a parent. not all of those training classes are offered in languages that parents can understand. it requires families to give up additional valuable time on weekends to attend up to eight hours of a training program. there is not actually that requirement in the law, but sometimes, apparently, we need to be more specific than we thought we were being at the time that that was drafted. identify new ways and new service models that individuals need and want and that means meeting with members of the community to have those discussions. when that's been done, i think there's been creativity demonstrated about what families actually want. meet with consumers and families to identify the barriers they, specifically, are experiencing, particularly when authorized services are not utilized. one regional center did that recently, talked to each family who was not utilizing the services that had been authorized in the ipp and was able to identify barriers such as, i don't have a way to get to that particular service, and regional center could then resolve that barrier. it is much akin to the model that ms. wong was talking about in terms of meeting with families and understanding and planning individually for that particular person. the complexities i talk about now require that families go to a variety of administrative hearings before they can access regional center. so, if you are a recipient of medi-cal and you want speech therapy, which the regional center should be able to provide to you, you are instead told you need to pursue an administrative hearing against the state medicaid agency before regional center will then authorize the service. that is made even less logical by the fact they're all medicaid funded service. it actually doesn't matter whether regional center provides the service or whether it is provided through the state medicaid agency because it will all, at least at this moment in time, be reimbursed by the federal government at $0.50 on the dollar. so let's eliminate that complexity, let's restore regional centers to the effort of coordinating services but not sending families off to do battle with a number of other agencies who probably have less of an incentive to provide the service to a regional center consumer. because they know the regional center, in the end, is the backstop for that service. we also know of barriers, when families have private insurance, where families cannot access the private insurer because the insurer does not have an adequate number of providers. and, instead of having the family have to go through an appeal process with that, what if instead we said, regional centers, you know who the big providers are that work with your family, determine if there is an adequate network. if there isn't, then you're authorized to provide that service directly as opposed to families having to go against the private insurance carrier to get the service. as we briefly talked about before, expand the capacity of regional centers and service provides to deliver culturally responsive services, target operation fund increases to reduce service coordinator caseloads. i'm thrilled to hear about the model that east la is using. and other models such as navigators or promotorios that have been mentioned in the past. ensure that we're hiring bilingual service coordinators and paying bilingual differentials as is appropriate. expand regional center vendors' capacity to communicate with their clients. one of the largest barriers to receiving services is that the provider does not speak the language that the family speaks. that may require some additional rate adjustments when providers are providing bilingual services so that people can access them. finally, expand language access. we are currently representing a regional center mother who has an intellectual disability, she's a monolingual chinese speaker. she also has a child who is a client of the regional center. this family was receiving supported living services until the provider, the vendor, determined that they could no longer serve her. they communicated that fact to the mother in english, did not provide her written notice, she did not understand that if she lost the supported living service that she would also lose her rent subsidy. so, the service ended. she never got notice from the provider, nor did she get notice from the regional center, and she has been out of services for six months now. we're now representing her in an effort to get the service restored. but much of that could have been avoided had we done the right thing at the front end. which is, one, communicate in the language that the person can understand, and, through a person-centered planning process, work with that family to identify the other services and supports that are culturally appropriate, that provide services in a language that she could understand. so that she and her daughter, both of whom are regional center clients, would not be left without those services for six months. we should provide clarity about which translation costs are operational versus for the individual client. that came up with the example that was given earlier. public meetings are operation costs and the translation associated with that should be paid out of a regional center's operation budget, not out of a purchase of service budget for the individual family. consider more effective ways to translate documents, including, perhaps, a single contract that the state administers, so all the regional centers can use that and have their documents translated, particularly for less common languages, in a more efficient way. there also seems to be a concern about a median rate for translations that we should consider revising. ensure that the annual statement that tells consumers and families the services they're authorized to receive be provided in the family and consumer's native language. and finally, ensure that both the regional center and the service provider notify the consumer, where appropriate, their family, in writing and in their native language, before a service is terminated. so, a long list of things we think could be done. many of these could be done legislatively. we hope that you'll be receptive to looking at some of the legislative solutions. others, i think, involve collaboration between the department and regional centers and other stakeholders in the community. and we look forward to working with those agencies to implement some of these recommendations as well. thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2678, 'end': 2682, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5366, 'end': 5370, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Barbara Wheeler: good afternoon, my name is wheeler. i'm the associate director of the university center for excellence in ddusc. i've been in that role forever, long time, long time, and i've had the privilege of working with a lot of the la regional centers. i tend to feel that the issue is not with dds, but with regional center directors. i think the directors set the tone for their organizations, and when the tone really embraces addressing pos disparities, it happens. and i think gloria is a very good example of that. i've always enjoyed working with her. i've also worked with a lot of minority parent groups, so i hear from that end. so, i'm just going to give you some quick examples. i see i have four and a half minutes left. there's a difficulty keeping the momentum going. so, we all know that racial disparity is present in almost every service system. i'm very discouraged that i heard from families, when we were helping them prepare for public testimony, that one family said that they heard from their regional center director that he did not like the term disparity, he liked the word variance. and wanted to start using that word instead. variance is defined as a factor quality of being different. i know you guys know that. but disparities, on the other hand, refers to the creation of better-off and worse-off groups. because decisions associated with differences in resource allocation, so that's pos authorization and expenditures, which are avoidable and perceived as unjust. so they are not the same thing, and we should use the term openly in our collective efforts, or we are going to go back to the first 21 years before drc passed the trailor bill language that we need to post disparities. i find that very discouraging when that's the leader of a regional center saying that in a public hearing. i want to also talk a little bit about the abx 21 proposals, because some interesting things. i sort of did an analysis of those, and wanted to share my thoughts about that, and whether i think that's going to make a significant difference on pos disparities in general. so three root causes of racial disparities. lack of understanding or experience with diverse cultures. eight of the regional centers in their equity proposals included training for staff on cultural competence. four more identified training for staff in person-centered thinking slash cultural competence, and one included training on person centered thinking. i wasn't clear if there was a belief that person-centered thinking is the same as cultural competence. i've had people who believe in family support and they say, well i'm family centered, so i'm also culturally competent, and they're different. they are intertwined. so i worry about the one regional center that says, we just need training and person-centered thinking. i think that we have to really be comfortable with the fact that person-centered thinking, while it is the way the system is going and a key value, it does clash culturally with some groups who really value collective decision making. and the system is saying, your son or daughter has a right to make this decision without you, and so that doesn't work as well. the other thing that i found was the regional centers, many of them, included cultural competence training in their proposals. there weren't many of them. but i, as a person who does training all the time, i fundamentally do not believe giving people information changes their behavior. it starts with cultural competence training, but if regional center administration doesn't then take their staff, and say, how are we going to apply that with every step of the regional center process? starting with intakes, assessments, service coordination, the ipp process, then people hear it. and it's the service coordinators, et cetera who deal with families, it doesn't get implemented. and then, there needs to be very focused management oversight that those practices are adopted. and i think people feel that training is enough and it just isn't. so, i'd rather people didn't do otherwise it's just used as an excuse. so the next piece is minority clients, oops, receive services from providers who lack an understanding of culturally responsive approaches. many of the proposals included what i call cultural brokers, but different ones. so nine proposed the promotora, three regional centers use fiesta educativa, i can certainly understand that. regional centers are hiring vietnamese, korean, mandarin outreach workers, bilingual service coordinators, navigation specialists, navigators, and reducing the caseload for those service coordinators who work with underserved populations, which i think really makes sense. all of which are good ideas, but until we, i didn't see, i didn't read the whole proposal, i only read what they did. if there isn't evaluation of all those methods, we don't know which one should be adopted by all the regional centers. i also firmly believe that the notion of local autonomy should not be applied when we're dealing about issues of chronic inequity. if we find something works, and you serve a similar population, everybody should adopt it within the system. when everybody does that, then you should have a full-court press. and we should start seeing the numbers going down. but everybody's deciding how they're going to deal with this, it just messes it up, and where we have strength in sort of changes in the regional center, it gets muted by stuff that's not done as well. but the last piece i wanted to talk about is bias, discrimination, and prejudice. it's not a happy topic to talk about. and i just want to remind people that most bias is implicit bias, we all do it. we all have lenses we apply to people, every single one of us. most bias is unconscious, but it doesn't mean it doesn't have a negative impact. so, i think we have to address that at the organizational level, and i really highly recommend that regional center management really do that assessment of not only their whole organization but their management team, because the management team basically sets the tone for the rest of the organization. and this is my last statement. ooh, sorry, give me another couple minutes. while i commend the dd system for investing in the potential solutions, which came, out and they were great ideas, i fear that the diversity of the proposals and then very different approaches to the same concepts, such as the cultural broker, cultural competence training, with all of that sort of mish-mosh, you will have no test of whether any of those things really work, and that is unfortunate. but it allows people to sort of do it their own way. so if we could get regional centers to get together, everybody who has cultural competence training, and say, we think this is the best way to do it, let's all do it this way. then we can really test whether that will make a difference, in terms of addressing disparities.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 473, 'end': 479, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Fernando Gomez: good afternoon, mr. chairman. my name is fernando catherine gomez and this is my wife elizabeth. we appreciate this opportunity to address you. first of all, i want to say thank you. as a parent we have that success, that intuition of who really is listening and seated here today we can see that it is not falling on deaf ears, so thank you for your time and concern on that. behind me there are about 32 parents. a week ago, when we heard about this hearing, we knew we had to be here. so we jumped through hoops and did everything possible to be here. the conversation that's been taking place today. it's really representative in this room within these parents and the self advocates. there is a lot of different, in a minute and a half, i can't share all the different thoughts and points i want to share with you. but one of things that i want to do say, is that i have to take accountability as a father. i don't have a son with down's syndrome, we are family with down's syndrome. so that accountability i think has to also transcend the regional centers that serve us. we hear about disparities being referred to as variance, we hear about disparities referred to as residential livings and so forth but there is no accountability. somebody said listen we've messed up. five years ago you had this conversation, five years later you're still having this conversation. let's start from the beginning, please include our voice, let us be part of that decision making, that strategy making points across the table so that we can make that change, thank you.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 65, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 86, 'end': 95, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Shannon Primer: hi, my name is shannon fernando primer. i'm from san diego regional center, but i do represent clients in orange county. i'm an educational paralegal, and i hear these stories every single day. i'm also a talk about curing autism now mentor, so i help other parents get services, and i am a parent. and as our children age out, this is just going to get worse. my child's 15 and a half, and it already scares me that at 22, i don't know what our plan is because there's not enough help, and regional center needs to get it together. thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Timmory Torres: Hi, my name is Timmory Torres, I'm with the Kern Regional Center. I live in Tehachapi, California. I have a son who has autism, and he is 17. For the last six years, we have received zero services. Our case worker does not get back to us. I email, I call, we do not hear from him. We missed the last IPP. He's overdue for his IPP that was supposed to be in December. And when I tried to email, about a month later, I finally got a response that our worker had left. And nobody had informed any of the parents. We're still waiting to get in contact with the new worker and their services. We live in a rural area, and there aren't a lot of services in our town. Most families, I'm involved in the community with a lot of other families of individuals with special needs. And everybody seems to have the same story. Nobody is getting any services whatsoever, Social-Rec was cut, SOS is cut, there's nothing available. Most people just give up, our family members do not get what they need. There are services out of the area that we're willing to take our children to, but we are not allowed to access those. I don't understand why when other Regional Centers, I know that these services are vendorized by other Regional Centers. So why can't we access them? We can't seem to get an answer on that. There is a specific program I would like for my son to be able to access. And I have been requesting it for two years. My worker refused to even submit the request. So I have not even been able to get to the point where I can appeal. That's just kind of the story that we all deal with, and we would just like some cooperation and the respect of being responded to, so that we can move forward. Thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Felicia Molinado: hi, i'm felicia, and my son is three. i'm new to all of this, and i just want to show you his, well, can you hear me? you have to talk in the mic? okay, well, this is his entire case right here, and this is a picture of him. that's my son, shay, and when he turned three, he was completely dropped of services. because i guess that's when school district is supposed to take over. but unfortunately, because of this gap, he was kicked out of preschool. and then i was fired from my job. so my job, i worked at lake shore because you can only work part time when you have a child with autism, unless maybe some of you are able to work full time, i don't know. but i had a very simple job at lake shore, because lake shore has excellent things that my son could benefit from. but lake shore is very expensive, so i worked there to get the discount, so i can get him the things he needs. but he used to have an occupational therapist on mondays, speech therapist on tuesdays, etc. they would take him out of the ratio, so his teachers were not inundated with him all the time and his behaviors. once all of that stopped at three years old, they couldn't handle him anymore. and in that folder, i have a letter that says that shay cannot go to that school anymore because they can't handle him anymore. consequently, i can't find him another school, and now i lost my job. so regional center could've really helped me out with that and said, until this is all done, maybe even give it three month or six month gap, but to just drop my son of all services, i don't even know what to call that, abandonment? i don't know, but now he doesn't have a school and i don't have a job. thank you, regional center.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 240, 'end': 244, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1222, 'end': 1226, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Daniel Tunisa: hello, my name is daniel. i came here to speak for all children who cannot do it, because i feel tired of being looked at as wasting money instead of seeing us like an investment. this is the opportunity to support us or turn your back on us again and regret it later. thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Imana Lopez: good afternoon, my name is imana and i have a 10 year old son who is severely autistic and also consumer of south central los angeles regional center. as a mother i always treasure the professionals at the regional center. and trusted what they said to me. for years, i've asked for services that could have helped my son, but the response from my service coordinator at regional center was always the same, no funds. and my son didn't get the opportunity to receive therapies that could have changed his life. unfortunately, i am not the only parent that has gotten the same answer when they ask for services. as a latina mother who was not aware of my son's rights, i feel bad that i didn't get the opportunity to see how these therapies could have helped my son. time has passed and nothing or no one can return the time lost. i come here today to demand that dds takes responsibility for the people who work in the regional centers and demand high standards of service. and to give them appropriate training to do what their work requires, which is to serve the community with disabilities. i think it is time for the regional centers to respect and stick to the lanterman act, thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carolyn Medina: hello, my name is carolyn shannon medina. i have a son who's 16 and we live in hesperia, california, and we are with the regional center, inland regional center, sorry. and i am concerned because my five year-old, i had applied for services before the tragedy had occurred at inland regional center. and a regional center did not do assessments, and just denied him right off the bat, saying that he just didn't have enough paperwork. now, my young one, he was four at the time, i believe. and he was denied this service. he could have had a early intervention through regional. and he was just brushed off, on a paper work technicalities, and now he is about to be six years old. he's gone through all kinds of crisis stuff, he's got developmental disorder delays, and profound communication barriers. and he just could head all these services and regional center, inland regional center. i can't blame the other regional centers because i can't say that is was them specific. but our local agency, inland regional center, refused to provide a service that could have been attainable and he has missed out on those services now. and it would take bills, due process, wait a minute, i'm pass my 30 days. so, i guess i have to reapply and wait longer, right? at some point he's going to be a client. there's no way around it. cause he fits the profile, just like he's sibling. but so, in collaboration with other parents, who also have special needs childrens with developmental disabilities, i'm discovering that this is across the board. in the high desert area, the inland empire, riverside, san bernardino. that whole area, children are being denied, that are disabled, from inland regional services. the center has been shut down, i understand that. however, at the same time, declining and refusing service for an area that is so large on the california state map, with a such a heightened level of disabilities and areas of need and poverty. inland regional center needs to step up and do some service for these children instead of just leaving them hanging. i didn't go over my minutes, did i? i'm so sorry. no, i'm not. basically, i'm just, i'm tattletailing. it's not fair to leave little ones without services when they qualify, when they have issues. thrown a blind eye and ignoring them. i've had parents that have been retaliated against for trying to fight, and that's also not appropriate. and i want you guys to know that you guys are in receipt of funding. and you have the lanterman act. and so, provide accordingly, please. thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dana Mccular: Hi, I'm Dana Mccular. I'm a service coordinator at Alta California Regional Center. We, as service coordinators, are the link between clients and families and services. We help clients and families even if the services and clients and services need don't cause the Regional Center any money. For example, with myself, I do a lot of researching about what's happening in the local community. And especially, like a community centers. I do a lot of that especially for the purposes of socialization and generalization and inclusion with the clients that I do have on my case load. And we also access parents support group centers available within the community but not widely advertised. And I assist in navigating with the parents and generic resources that are available because we are not always able to provide those resources. We also partner with community leaders, to help individuals with minority communities learn about Regional Center services. For example, in regaining the rapport and trust of some of the parents of my clients, who happen to be influential within African-American community. Some of these parents, in turn, have invited ACRC, Palo Alto, California, to come to the local African American mental health care in order to make known the services that we do have available. There's a lot that I could say about what I am able to provide as an individual, but I actually just wanted to say thank you to the families. because had I not been here, I wouldn't have gotten that perspective of what's happening with other services coordinators, so thank you.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marcella Donate: buenas tardes. me nombre es marecella donate. good afternoon, my name is marcella carolyn donate. [foreign] my son is a client of sclark. [foreign] i would like to speak to about the pos disparity plan.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 18, 'end': 44, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 73, 'end': 96, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stephanie Lopez: Hello, my name is Stephanie Lopez, I am 16 years old and I just want to say a little background. I was a consumer for Sclark, but I got this line, and I have a younger brother. He got accepted, which is good. But for me, it's really difficult because in elementary, I had a hard time studying. No one had my help and nothing like that. I didn't want that for my brother neither. For me it was difficult because there was nobody to help me around not even whenever- I'm sorry. I just want to say that there are students that they need help and also like me. It took me a lot of years to talk. To stand up and talk like I'm talking today. I would say it took me around eight years to stand up and start speaking for myself. And I want to say also that my mom, she's a really hard working mother. She works so hard to get services for my brother and the saddest thing is that I realize like a mother of mine. It's very difficult for her to access services with the Regional Center System, because, my mother, she doesn't speak English very well. And, apparently the staff from Sclark, they seem like they don't want to put an effort or don't care what a parent have to say. Especially, that we're Latino, Hispanic family. They don't really care what they say. Like, for example when Sclark had a meeting with us, the mothers were gathered around and they seemed very disrespectful. The director was, the director and their management staff were, what's it called? When the mother's trying to say something necessary about their child, they would laugh, they would do hand signs and saying, we don't like them, or would you shut her up, and things like that. And they would just make unpleasant faces. Which, it's sad, because, I mean, we're trying to have, we want our children, our brothers and sisters, to have a better life for us. For me, I can't have a future until my brother has a future like me. And, They don't care to deny any services from the consumers and for us it's a huge impact. And for the families, because they're risking the progress and the advancements for our future as well as the welfare for the whole nation. And, children like that shouldn't be suffering on their own. They should need help. They need services a lot. That's all. Thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maria Lopez: my name is maria marcella lopez. i do not speak english. i will try my best. i am here today because the latino families has have already ask. we [unknown] for services in a system change in the unfairly way and nobody does anything to solve this problem. and it is a great disparity that is severely, negatively affecting outward families, consumers and the communities. and we are here today to demand all of your inclusion, inclusion, respect, and equality for all of the consumers and their families. and we are demanding that everyone present here, think on your responsibilities and to start working hard to make a change in our system. that is completely broken of many years ago because families aren't willing to continue with this. because does not is a purpose or the spirit of the lanterman act. that's it. that's it. thank you so much.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maria Garcia: [foreign] my name is maria. and i could not start to tell you about the existing disabilities that my son actually is diagnosed with. [foreign] unfortunately, there is staff from regional centers are not prepared. [foreign] they give us the wrong information rather than giving us information. [foreign] they deny services. [foreign]and the few services that we receive. [foreign] are about 50 hours. [foreign] a month. [foreign] and vendors actually report that total of hours in three or four days and my son wasn't even present. [foreign] she wants me to read her letter. i'm the mother of my 16 year old son, year old disabled son, jerry garcia. i came here today to speak on his behalf and to represent him, seeing that he cannot fight for his own rights. what is the point of my son having a well-equipped wheelchair specially adapted to him if there is no way to transport it and use it anywhere. he needs it the most out in the community, his wheelchair does not fit in my vehicle and i do not have sufficient funds to purchase a more spacious vehicle. access refuses to offer services to my son due to his behavior issues and his discomfort being around other people. so, how can my son enjoy out in the community without his wheelchair. yes, my son can walk but only for short distances. he still requires the assistance of his wheelchair. this is the behavior.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 636, 'end': 648, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ruby Santana: hello, i'm no speaking english, but i'm going to try my best. my name is ruby maria santana. i'm a mother.
[{'start': 73, 'end': 91, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cecilia Ortiz: ...good afternoon, my name is cecilia ruby ortiz, i'm the mother of carlos.... she's a client of harbor regional center....to be a parent is not an easy task, but it's even a lot more difficult with a child with special needs.... it's a very difficult task to do.... the diagnosis is not what is the most difficult.... what's hardest to deal with day-to-day with all the obstacles....the excuses.... and the internal policies that are developed by, such as, harbor.... the lack of responsibility that regional centers have to provide the services.... this is what these family members to be constantly demanding.... every time the client needs or requests a service...the service that may be essential and that may help the individual... so that he can integrate into the community...and to have a dignified life and independent.... we need changes in the system...and a lot more responsibility from the part of the regional centers.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 68, 'end': 74, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Guadalupe Malasco: hola, buenas tardes....my name is guadalupe, and she's bringing somebody else's testimony.... maria ortuno. she's bringing maria ortuno's testimony.... mrs patricia de monaco. okay, ms. patricia del monico limits the services to our people and makes services very difficult. ...there's no vendors for the services and the ones that exist are not appropriate for what's required.... even though the offices of the harbor regional center are located in a very beautiful area, in my opinion...in my opinion, inappropriate to provide the services.....loved ones are missing the services and lack the opportunities.....
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6, 'end': 19, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 34, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 94, 'end': 106, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 123, 'end': 137, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 156, 'end': 174, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 186, 'end': 205, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jordan Graham: Hi, my name is Jordan Graham. My husband and I have a seven year old son, who has severe non-verbal autism, sensory processing disorder, Pica, and a rare chromosome deletion. We've only had him for about a year, but we went through Regional Center immediately. And they promised us everything, and they said everything would be available, Respite, IHSS. Our IPP is outdated by years, and we have nothing. So after a year of emails and follow ups, my service coordinator doesn't even usually call me back. So I just want to thank you guys for hearing everybody's concerns, and I wish you guys a lot of luck.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sandro Antunez: good afternoon, my name is antunez. i'm here to basically, not asking, but basically demanding high level of service from the people that is responsible to do their jobs. gotta remind you guys. this is a job. whoever is responsible and running these entities, whoever is in charge of these employees, have a job that they sign up for. they get paid every week or biweekly or monthly, and they get paid some fat checks. why is that we're not doing the job? i have a job, which i imagine is basically to make sure that the groceries, yell at you, buy me. that's basically what it is, and i work for a supermarket chain. and my job is to provide excellent customer service, high level of quality product, and a safe store. every day, we deal with government entities, like health department, waste and measures, and we require high levels of service. we're not allowed to let a customer get out of the store unhappy. our job is to make sure that customer wants to come back. i do everything i can and i have in my power and my knowledge, and i utilize every single tool that is provided to me to get the job done. i don't understand why is that people that my son's future is on their hands, and not only my son, but hundreds of families, hundreds of kids, adults already, some teens already. i don't understand if they don't get the sense of urgency that this is, it is urgent. and i don't really see them responding to it. thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Judy Mark: hi, i'm judy cecilia mark, i'm a parent from los angeles, as well as work with the autism society of los angeles and i sit on the board of disability rights california. today, you've heard from family members and individuals with disabilities from about 11 regional centers that have been identified, could be more. and what i'm seeing is that there is a serious cultural problem here within both the regional center and in the developmental services in general. that even though as we as family members created the system of developmental services, created the regional centers 50 years ago. it has completely flipped and now it is only responsive to professionals and not enough responsive to parents. they are often an after-thought or a window dressing in many of the decisions that need to be made that affect us directly, we're considered problems. we are considered difficult. we're not partners and we're not getting the kind of respect that we deserve. as you see, a movement has begun, we are coming to change the system like we've created it 50 years ago and we look forward to partnering with you on creating these changes.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Janelle Lewis: good afternoon my name is janelle judy lewis and i serve on the state council on developmental disabilities where i chair the legislative and public policy committee. today i am speaking as a parent of a 20 year old who has autism. i would just like to share that i have over 20 years of experience with education, and advocacy, and serving on the senate on task forces and work groups for the senate select committee on autism. and the legislative blue ribbon commission on autism, and doing everything i can to help people get the services that they need. and that i personally, even though i have all of this knowledge and ability, have had nightmare after nightmare in accessing services for my son. and what i would like to share is that when we talk about disparity there's a part of the system that i experienced major barriers. and i can only imagine what it must be like for someone who may not speak english as a first language. or have other cultural things that enter in. and that is in the due process part of accessing services. if you receive a notice of action, which is a denial for services, which some regional centers issue as sort of knee jerk kind of reaction. you have the opportunity to appeal that through due process. it's a very complex deck stacked against you kind of a system. and it involves needing legal assistance, which if you can't afford that or some people can access low or no cost assistance, but those are very few people. there's just not enough help in that area. it's very complex and intimidating to go through the office of administrative hearings and prepare evidence, and witnesses, and all that to go against a regional center who has a legal department. so that is another area that needs to be looked at very closely in terms of equity. also, if you withdraw from a oah hearing for regional center, it is always recorded as being satisfactorily resolved. so the data is very skewed in that respect. thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sandra Lewis: hi, my name is sandra janelle lewis and this is my son marcus lewis. he was born 28 years ago very medically challenged. a rare syndrome i was told that was 40 something cases known world wide at the time he was born. and it's called joubert syndrome. there was a portion of his brain completely missing. the central place for that part of your brain was your central place for your motor development. so as he grew, he was in a wheelchair. total care, from the crown of his head to the sole of his feet. and he also had dandy walker syndrome, and was never shunted. and so marcus was very medically challenged. we left the hospital with seven specialists, an apnea monitor, and i was cpr trained. in 2000, marcus was diagnosed with a fatal liver disease. and we got involved with ucsf liver transplant division. at that time, marcus had what i call a major bleed. he was 15 years old, dropped down to 45 pounds. and regional center at that time, actually before that, when i want to go back to when he was born before i left the hospital. quite a few of the staff came to me and said, he could be institutionalized, mom. and they said it more than once, even after i told them no thank you, i'm taking him home. and so because of the limited respite services we were getting in the beginning, i began to advocate for those when my 15 year old son had a mental breakdown. he was my right hand and my support in helping to care for his son. so at that time regional center upped the respite hours to 463 hours on the contingency that i get him enrolled in the epsdt program. and then once we got enrolled in that, they still kept 250 hours of respite. this is a very young man, medically challenged, and he was still wearing an apnea monitor at 25 years old. and so when he had the fatal liver disease, about 2/13, i was told by one of the specialists that the ammonia was building up in his brain, and he only has a small time to live. so i went to regional center and said, we need more respite hours we only have 90 after some budget cut in 209, they dropped us down from 250 to 90 hours a quarter. so i felt like i was a juggler trying to juggle services and i'm a working woman too. so when i was told he was terminal, and actually i didn't expect him to live that long. but because of the ammonia buildup in his brain now from the failing liver, what alta presented to me in place of respite was, why don't you go and apply for hospice? i told him hospice wasn't in my choice because if there was still a pill or still a reviving i wanted it for my son. but that's where the stance they seemed to have taken so i went ahead and applied for hospice. my son did not qualify for hospice because he was one point low, one point, he was one point higher than what he needed to be on a particular blood draw. he was supposed to be a two, and he was a three. which a two is pretty critical, you're at death's door anyway. they still wouldn't provide the respite. and i had to go all the way to full blown court. and in the process of that i was associated with someone that was helping me, a michael rosenberg. and regional center kept wanting me to create a calendar because they kept saying something about ish hours and they needed to figure it all out. and i created this calendar of 24 hours of his life, and they would not believe that i was the one doing that. i was the one providing those services. and i had to take off of work the last seven months of his life, not knowing i would be his hospice nurse. i was going to court battling with alta, saying, please i need some time with my son. you talk about disparity, i feel that alta failed, not only my son, but they failed me. the morning he passed and i came home from the hospital about 2:30, talked to family members and got in the bed at 7:30. the respite company called me at 8:00 and said, i got a referral from alta regional center for some court hearing. we need to get together and talk about how much respite he needs. now mind you, i told them how much he needed. i said it's a little too late. he passed away this morning. there's no need for that. my son is very medically challenged and physically challenged, and i was told there's a small percentage in regional center. he's no stranger. when he had that major bleed when he was 15 years old, he was placed into a unit i was told was called a specialized unit for children that need a lot of services. how can you need a lot of services and now you're down to a critical point of life and you don't need them anymore? that's not so, i heard it mentioned that noas were flying all over the place. that's what happened to me. i feel that regional center failed me and they failed my son because the time that i was being his hospice nurse. and i remember one night counting the alarms of the apnea monitor where he was having his heart rate would go low and he would quit breathing at 500 alarms in less than an hour. i put the pen down and said, enough is enough. what else do they need? they failed, that's disparity to where it ended to death. and i felt like i was not granted quality time with my son in the end that i could have had because i was so busy trying to be his nurse instead of his mother. thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 55, 'end': 67, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 574, 'end': 580, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 707, 'end': 713, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 827, 'end': 833, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2356, 'end': 2360, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3088, 'end': 3107, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ellen Peter: thank you very much. good morning chairman bloom, members of the committee. my name is ellen jonah peter, i'm the chief counsel of the california air resources board. prior to joining arb, i was at the california attorney general's office for over 20 years. there, i defended state agencies and also prosecuted their enforcement cases. today, i'm going to talk about arb's enforcement program. of course, stop me at any time for questions. arb's second witness today is deputy executive officer edie chang. she will address the legislative mandates and also how arb addresses them. as edie will describe, a key approach of arb is regulations, but without enforcement regulations are meaningless. vigorous enforcement sets a level playing field and it also assures that companies that cheat do not benefit from this cheating. regulations basically are setting out public health and air quality goals. without enforcement, these aren't met. so, the case i want to highlight today is arb versus volkswagen, a diesel scandal case that broke in september, 2015. the reason i want to focus on this case is for two reasons. one, it's the biggest enforcement case that arb has ever brought. and second, it really highlights the scientific and engineering abilities of the arb staff. frankly, i want to brag about them. they forced a confession with persistent questioning, innovative testing, an a refusal to back down. i'm still under the federal court's gag order in the civil case, but more information is now public because of the criminal indictments that were unsealed later this year, earlier this year, sorry. last week, vw pled guilty in criminal court in detroit and, also, there are seven individual vw employees that are now under indictment. so i'm going to rely on all of that public testimony that's out, available, for my testimony today. the conspiracy started a decade ago. diesel vehicles are common in europe, but they were not sold in california because of our tailpipe emission standards. however, over time, arb cleaned up the fuel and then diesel vehicles became a possibility. vw jumped on this opportunity and was the first to announce a clean-diesel vehicle to be sold in model year 2009. the problem? their marketing announcement was ahead of their engineering expertise. instead of solving the engineering problem or waiting a year, vw decided to cheat and then to lie. in the criminal indictments and guilty pleas the facts are set out how a research project started by arb and others, including the west virginia university, blossomed into the discovery of this enormous emission scandal using a defeat device. so what's a defeat device? essentially, it turns off your emissions control system in your car and, in some cases, the vw's system increased the emissions up to 40 times higher than was allowed. so cars are really complicated computer systems and they continually adjust the various systems. if your car has a problem, for example, a rock pierces the oil pan, and all your oil drains out, the car automatically goes into a protection mode and shuts down different systems including the emissions control device. that's totally okay, and a less dramatic example is if you're accelerating and passing another car, the engines are allowed to adjust the emissions control system, that's all okay. these are considered aecds, auxiliary emissions control devices, and they're fine as long as they're listed in the company's certification application, they have to be disclosed. what's not okay is not telling arb about these different devices. so for each year, for each engine type, for each manufacturer, both cars and trucks, arb considers these certification applications. they must be submitted, and until approved, these cars cannot be sold in california. in vw's certification applications, instead of outlining the permitted aecd situations where the emissions control systems turns off, in fact, what they did was they had an emissions control device system that only turned on the emission control system in the lab, on the dyno, using the prescribed test cycles. so in our el monte arb lab we have these huge dynos where we put the cars on and run them on these cycles, they have certain cycles.
[{'start': 43, 'end': 48, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 87, 'end': 104, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 495, 'end': 505, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 585, 'end': 589, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2094, 'end': 2096, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2354, 'end': 2356, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Edie Chang: good morning. good morning chairman bloom and members of the committee. my name is chang, i'm a deputy executive officer at the california air resources board and today, i've been asked to talk about arb's process in meeting our overall goals. the arb is tasked with three main mandates. achieving health based air quality standards for ozone, particulate matter, and other air pollutants that are regulated under the state and federal clean air acts. second, reducing public exposure to toxic air contaminants, such as diesel particulate matter. and third, and most recently, is reducing greenhouse gas emissions. thanks to the leadership of the legislature and the administration, industry investment, and local and statewide policy, today cars, trucks, and other equipment in california are cleaner and more efficient than they ever have been. we've also seen significant reductions in emissions from stationary sources like factories and refineries. california has led the nation in developing innovative and technology advancing pollution control programs and over the last 50 years we've adopted regulations that set vehicle emissions standards, require cleaner fuels, and mandate cleaner consumer products. so a lot of our early programs focused on reducing smog-forming pollutants, but many of these programs have multiple benefits. as we've acquired these additional mandates we've been strengthening our efforts to develop programs that do all three. that reduce smog forming emissions, reduce toxic emissions and greenhouse gas emissions simultaneously through a coordinated planning effort. one example of this is the mobile source strategy that we released last year. so this strategy outlines a comprehensive set of actions to help the state simultaneously meet its air quality, climate change and toxics risk reduction goals over the next 15 years. in developing that strategy we did a coordinated assessment of how advanced technologies, cleaner renewable fuels, and efficiency improvements can all work together to meet our multiple goals. and then we identified a core set of measures that needed to be implemented to meet these goals. these include pushing new cleaner technology, cleaner fuels and also durability and inspection programs to make sure that in the field we actually continue to obtain those emission benefits. and that's a theme that you will hear from us over and over. sort of this three prong strategy of having newer, cleaner equipment, having clean fuels to reduce emissions and help that clean equipment continue to run and then making sure that equipment stays clean. the light duty car sector is one example of that. so we set new standards and make sure that new cars are as clean as they possibly can be. we have fuel standards that require the use of cleaner fuels. those cleaner fuels allow the technology in the cars to work and they also depending on the fuel formulation can reduce emissions of toxic air pollution. and then on the car side we have a smog check program and it makes sure that cars that are on the road stay as clean as they can be. on the light duty side we have an additional component sort of a fourth prong which is the zero emission vehicle program. so that electric car program is really designed to drive new technologies for the long term transformation that we need to meet our longer term air quality goals. so this integrated planning process is what helps ensure that our policies and programs are all working together. as we implement the specific programs that are described in these plans, we monitor the program effectiveness through reporting, certification, and enforcement programs, as you heard from our chief counsel. and through our public process, when something isn't working we hear about it from the public, and we work with the legislature, the public, and the administration to develop a fix. these reductions translate into real world air quality benefits and the real world proof is in the air quality that we measure. we have over 250 air quality monitoring stations that measure the air in california every day. and what we see is that air quality is improving. i want to quickly walk through the progress that we've made in each of these areas starting with criteria pollutants. california has a long and successful history of meeting the health-based standards. if you look in the package of materials, there's a map of california and it shows the 19 areas of the state that once exceeded the federal ozone standards. sometimes i'll use smog instead of ozone. so, the lighter grey areas are the only areas that are still non-attainment. that still have what the federal standard would be considered unhealthy air. of these southern california, we call it the south coast, kind of in the air quality jargon and the san joaquin valley continue to face the most critical air quality challenges. the next map shows the progress that's occurred just in the south coast and that's the nation's smoggiest region. the map on the left, and if it was in color, you would see it's very, very dark red, it's very very dark black and gray in what you have, that shows ozone levels in 1990. in 1990, the entire region violated the ozone standard with peak levels, the highest levels that were measured twice as high as the standard. and i have to say i grew up in riverside, and my family moved to riverside in 1970 and i graduated from high school in 1986. so the whole time i was living in riverside, it was much, much worse than the graph that you have right there. the map on the right shows peak concentrations today. they've declined 45% and 40% of the population lives in areas that meets the standard, because it's not in color you can't see, but the coastal areas are actually green, and so those areas are meeting the standard now. we still have work to do as we move to the eastern part of the air basin. moving now to air toxics. exposure to toxic air contaminants has decreased substantially since the 1990s when the legislature passed the tanner bill and the hot spots bill. the reduction in benzene is one of our biggest success stories. benzene is known to cause cancer and can be found in gasoline. and as you can see in the chart that's in the materials, benzene levels have dropped nearly 90% since 1990. and 1990 was when we passed a package of regulations focused on cars, that required cleaner fuels, and cleaner emission standards for those cars. benzene reduction and air toxics reduction was one of the points of those regulations. it included this cleaner-burning gasoline that i mentioned, cleaner air quality, cleaner emission standards for cars, and also better vapor recovery. so this is the gasoline that is emitted from your car when it gets hot and cold. making sure that those vapors are captured, and also making sure that when you're fueling your car at a gas station, those vapors are captured and you're not breathing them in. in addition, in 1998, arb identified diesel particulate as an air toxic and we embarked on an aggressive control program to reduce public exposure to diesel particulate. since 1990, levels of diesel particulate have dropped nearly 70% with some of the most significant decreases in california's most disadvantaged communities. and then lastly, i want to talk about the greenhouse gas program. in ab32, arb was given the responsibility for putting together the plan for how we will meet the state's targets. we work closely with our state agency partners develop and implement this plan. and together we're implementing the renewable portfolio standard, energy efficiency standards, the low carbon field standard, and the cap and trade program. as a result of these comprehensive actions, we're on track to meet the 2020 greenhouse gas target. more is needed to meet the 2030 target that the legislature enacted last year in sb 32, and that's the subject of the draft scoping plan update which is currently out for public review, we've release the document in january. the scoping plan is our comprehensive planning document for climate change, and its development has been coordinated with a mobile source strategy and other work at the air resources board. to get to 2030 on the climate perspective, we don't need new programs, we can depend on our existing and tested programs. the draft scoping plan proposes increases to renewable energy, reductions in short live climate pollutants as called for by legislation in sb 605 and 1383. it incorporates the mobile source strategy that i discussed earlier, which also includes a sustainable freight strategy. and it proposes the continuation of the cap and trade program. the main goal of the cap and trade program is to cap greenhouse gas emissions and it is achieving that goal. one of the additional features of the cap and trade program is we auction allowances, these permit to emit, and the related investment of the proceeds to advance our climate program to provide multiple additional benefits especially in disadvantaged communities. yesterday, we released the 2017 annual report for our climate change investments. it looks like this. a $3.4 billion has been appropriated to date by the legislature and this report provides information about the projects that have been funded. we are always continuing to look for ways to improve our understanding and our methods. for example, in the scoping plan that i talked about we've begun to expand the types of analysis that we're doing partly as a result of direction from the legislature. the scoping plan economic analysis looks at state level impacts which we've been doing for awhile. but it's also going to look at regional impacts to try to take those economic impacts and focus in, in different areas, which our particular concern as we start thinking about regional impacts in disadvantaged communities. we're also estimating the health benefits of the plan, and you're going to be incorporating that into our economic analysis. having a better understanding of regional effects and health impacts is going to help us better design and implement our programs as we move forward. in response to feedback from stakeholders including our environmental justice advisory committee we have delayed the consideration of the scoping plan to june of 2017, to allow time to refine some of our analyses, and also allow time for additional public process, including community meetings in environmental justice communities. arb and the administration as a whole is continuing to work to improve our outreach to environmental justice communities. there's $2 million in the current year's budget for technical assistance, on applying for grants under the california climate investment program, and the administration is proposing to continue this work in next year's budget. at arb as part of our efforts to improve our communication with environmental justice communities and have a better understanding of ej issues we created a new position recently. it's an assistant executive officer for environmental justice. our first assistant executive officer for environmental justice is veronica eady and she's here today and i think she's going to say a few words. you can use the mic.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 41, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 83, 'end': 88, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 11131, 'end': 11144, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Matt Almy: thank you, good morning matt ellen almy department of finance. the budget supports the state's ambitious climate change goals by proposing a $2.2 billion cap and trade expenditure plan to be allocated after a legislation confirming the air board's authority to administer the cap and trade program beyond 2020 is acted through a two thirds vote. this proposal aligns with state wide climate change goals. in 2015, the governor introduced the most ambitious 2030 climate target in north america, a reduction of greenhouse gas emissions to 40% below 1990 levels and the legislature codified this target with the passage of sb 32. california also strengthened its global leadership role through its participation in the paris climate agreement. achieving these ambitious and necessary environmental goals while continuing to expand the state's strong economy requires implementing cost effective solutions to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. as ms. chang discussed earlier, in january, the airboard released the draft scoping plan providing a blueprint for reaching 2030 climate targets. the scoping plan evaluates five scenarios for meeting the 2030 target which includes, sector specific emission reductions to traditional command and control regulations, a carbon tax and a continuation of the cap and trade program. the draft's scoping plan explains that cap and trade represents the most flexible and cost effective approach to continue reducing ghg's to meet emission reduction requirements over the next 13 years. furthermore consistent with the legislative directive and ab 197, to prioritize direct emission controls, the draft scoping plan calls for direct reductions at refineries. to complement these direct reductions an ongoing priority for the state will be to find ways to reduce toxic air contaminants and criteria pollutants from large emitters. in terms of the specific budget proposal and consistent with the proposed scoping plan, the governor's budget proposes trailer bill legislation to confirm the airboard's authority through a two thirds urgency vote to administer cap and trade auctions beyond 2020. not only is the extension of cap and trade beyond 2020 necessary to meet the statewide climate goals, but to also address the significant volatility of cap and trade auctions over the past year. after several consecutive auctions that generated over 500 million in proceeds, the may and august auctions in 2016 generated only 10 million and 8 million respectively. the november 2016 auction generated 364 million, and then the most recent auction in february generated 8 million. one of the factors that may have contributed to this revenue volatility is the perceived legal uncertainty about cap and trade beyond 2020. the budget proposes a $2.2 billion cap and trade expenditure plan to be allocated after legislation confirming the air board's authority to administer cap and trade beyond 2020 is enacted through a two thirds vote. the budget builds upon the investment categories funded in the 2016 cap and trade agreement such as short lived climate pollutants, carbon sequestration, low carbon transportation and transformative climate communities. the cap and trade plan also includes $500 million for the administration's proposed transportation package. although the $2.2 billion budget proposal currently reflects broad program categories, it is the administration's intent to collaborate with the legislature on the cap and trade package that supports specific programs. in closing and as ms. chang alluded to earlier, the administration has released the 2017 annual report on outcomes of cap and trade programs which will inform the budget discussions moving forward. thank you.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 946, 'end': 951, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3529, 'end': 3534, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ross Brown: Thank you, Mr Chair and members. Ross Brown with the LAO. Our office released a report analyzing the governor's cap and trade proposal several weeks ago. Copies of that report, I think, were delivered to members' offices. We have extra copies here if you do not have a copy and would like one. I'm going to run through as quickly as I can, some of our key recommendations from that report related to the governor's proposal. In our view, the proposal raises kind of three broad critical questions that the Legislature will be wrestling with as they consider the proposal. First, should the cap and trade be authorized beyond 2020? Second, is the two-thirds vote needed to extend cap and trade and if so what are the merits of that? And third, how should the Legislature if it does approve cap and trade, how should it use the revenue? So in the first bundle of question, should the Legislature authorize a program beyond 2020, we are recommending that the Legislature extend the program. Either cap in trade, or a carbon tax, and I'm happy to get into a discussion of the tradeoffs associated with those two. But we do recommend the Legislature authorize some sort of market based mechanism to help achieve its 2030 goals. And I think some important context here is just the uncertainty around what it will take to meet those 2030 goals and the potential for actions needed to meet those 2030 goals being much more aggressive and potentially much more costly. And we think market-based approaches are much less costly approaches to meeting the 2030 goal. So that's our primary rational for recommending extension of either a cap and trade or a carbon tax. Along with that and related to kind of the uncertainty and the potential for significantly higher costs associated with meeting the aggressive goals, we make some more specific recommendations around the design of the program. For example, strengthening the seal on allowance prices. Given the more aggressive goals, there's potential for if the program is extended that allowance prices get significantly higher. And so the Legislature might want to think about setting sort of a hard cap on those allowance prices to limit some of the potential costs to households and businesses. We also make some recommendations related to just additional oversight, related to moving forward and analyzing the state's climate policies. Just so the Legislature can have better information available to it in making decisions about policies moving forward. For the second set of questions, the two-thirds vote issue. If, I think technically, the cap and trade program could be extended with a two-thirds vote but we're recommending the Legislature to try to extend it with, excuse me, it could be extended with a majority vote. But we're recommending that the Legislature does extend it to try and do it with a two-thirds vote. That would provide some legal certainty around the ability auction off allowances which we think is an important part of the program and in sending the appropriate market signals. So there's the legal certainty around the two-thirds vote and the benefits there. Another key benefit we see with authorizing the program with the two-thirds vote is that it potentially gives the Legislature the flexibility to broaden the potential uses of the revenue that come in. Currently, the legal requirements on the funds are that they be used for greenhouse gas reduction activities only. And so, this gets to sort of our third set of recommendations on how the Legislature should use the money if the cap and trade program is reauthorized. And, we think broadening that allowable use is an important consideration for the Legislature generated revenue from the program isn't really a primary goal of the program. The goal is to use allowance prices and price signals to encourage those cost effective productions. And as sort of a result of implementing the program and auctioning the allowances, the state does generate revenue but that's not a primary goal. And so, we think sort of removing that requirement that the money only be spent on greenhouse gas reduction activities creates some additional flexibility for the Legislature to use that money on its highest priorities. In our view, one of those highest priorities that we think that the Legislature should be looking at when thinking about how to use the money is using that to provide rebates or offsetting tax reductions to help offset some of the costs to households and businesses that will be incurred if the program is extended. And, we think that's particularly important in light of some of the uncertainty around allowance prices. And if allowance prices do get significantly higher that means higher energy costs for households and consumers and using the money to offset some of those costs would be an important consideration. We make some other more specific recommendations related to the language that is actually proposed by the administration. For example, we recommend rejecting the language that makes the spending of the money contingent on authorizing the program with the two-thirds vote. Although we think the spending and the program itself are obviously very much related, we think that language unnecessarily ties the Legislature's hands on its authority to spend the money. And we also make some recommendations related to providing more specific program allocations rather than some of the broad categories that are in the current language that the administration has proposed. The administration has indicated that, that's just sort of its opening shot and is willing to engage in discussions with the Legislature around sort of specific program allocations but we just wanted to flag that for you. So I will end my comments there and I'm happy to answer any questions that you have.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ryan Kenny: good morning chair bloom, members of the committee. my name is kenny with clean energy. with the budget allocation proposed of 363 million for low carbon transportation. we are proposing, if there is any additional money that it comes about, or other decisions that might come about, that the committee restore what was in the three budget versions last year for biofuels, and this year it's $20 million, we believe, for production incentives. last year, it was $40 million for arb, $25 million for the cec. we would like, as an industry of the biofuels industry, to see that restored from last year, thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 24, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 63, 'end': 68, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julia Levin: Thank you Mr. Chairman, members of Committee. Julia Levine, with the Bioenergy Association of California. We strongly support the cap and trade program, it is helping to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and other pollutants. I wanted to just give two quick examples among my members, and then make a couple of recommendations to the legislature going forward. So two really important projects that the cap and trade revenues have helped to fund. One is a CR&R waste facility in Riverside County. When fully built, it's going to convert 320,000 tons of food and yard waste to carbon negative transportation fuels. Used in ultra-low NOx trucks, it's going to reduce particulate and NOx pollution by 95%. It's going to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by more than 100% and that is thanks in part to the cap and trade revenues. Another project in the San Joaquin Valley is a dairy digester facility that's being developed by California Bio Energy. This was funding from California Department of Food and Agriculture. Cap and trade revenues are helping to reduce methane emissions from dairies, reduce water pollution and other pollutants, odor and again, helping to produce low carbon fuels in transportation. There are a lot of opportunities like this, so I would say we need more money for these sorts of programs, not less. I do have a couple of recommendations, though, to really increase the benefits from this program. Above all, I agree with the comments of Clean Energy that we need to allocate more funding to low carbon biofuels. According to the LAO analysis, converting organic waste to energy is among the very most cost effective investments that the state can make. In the case of converting organic waste to transportation fuel, it is the single most effective investment you can make, because it can produce carbon-negative fuels in place of diesel. Diesel is the largest source of toxic air contaminants and the largest source of greenhouse emissions and NOX pollution in both the south coast and the San Joaquin valley. So it's very important if you want to reduce toxic air contaminants. If you want to reduce smog in the most heavily impacted air districts and disadvantaged communities, we need to invest a lot more in the production of low carbon fuels from dairies, from divert organic waste, and from forest waste. We have 100 million dead and dying trees in California, and that number is only going up. So we need a lot more funding. I also really encourage the legislature to set a minimum percentage within the low carbon transportation program. Given all these benefits, you would think that the state would allocate a lot more of that money. Right now the proposal is only 5% of the total low carbon transportation program would go to biofuels production. We think it should be more like 20%, given the role that they can play in reducing all kinds of pollutants, and finally, we really encourage all of the agencies involved in implementing this program to set performance criteria, rather than picking technology winners and losers. The reason that biofuels production is getting so little funding is because the air board has had a long and, I think, justified commitment to electric and fuel cell vehicles, but now there are other alternatives that, on a performance basis, actually can produce bigger benefits. So we do think that each of the agencies should be looking at life cycle emissions, and maximizing benefits. Thank you, we do support this program strongly.
[{'start': 46, 'end': 58, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1552, 'end': 1555, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Katie Valenzuela Garcia: Good morning, my name is Katie Valenzuela Garcia. I am the Co-Chair of the AB-32 Environmental Justice Advisory Committee and I'm a resident here in Sacramento, but before I moved here, I was born and raised in Oildale, in Assembly member Fong's district, and I can talk a lot about the people who went to North High School who are working in the oil fields, but first, I want to talk about my dad Vernon, Valenzuela, who was a Vietnam veteran and a tireless community advocate who believed that kids should do anything, but sit on the couch. So when I got to high school, in addition to doing a lot of volunteer work, I tried out for the soccer team, but I was quickly benched, because they found out that every time I ran longer than a mile I would get tunnel vision. Well, it turns out I was having severe repeated asthma attacks every time I ran, but that wasn't even the scariest part, the scariest part to my doctors and to my parents was that I didn't know that I was having an asthma attack. That it was so typical for me when I ran a mile or more to experience those types of respiratory systems, I thought that's just how I was supposed to feel, and my story is unfortunately not unique, it's something that's reflected in the stories of a lot of my family in Kern County right now. My husband's family in Fresno County, as well as thousands and thousands of people from across the state whose health is directly impacted by the emissions of cap and trade regulated entities and their related activities and let's talk about what it means to meet this cap, because it doesn't mean that emissions are going down. With allowances, with trading, with offsets, it actually means, in some cases, that emissions in places like Oildale have been going up, and they've been going up at a faster rate than they have across the state as a whole. Not 10 years after AB 32, it's incredibly concerning to me that we still have communities that are bearing the brunt of California's climate strategies, and as Assembly member Garcia mentioned, we have two California's that are increasingly growing to be further apart from each other. We also know that these pollutants are linked to other pollutants that cause serious health problems and I know the OEJA report was just the first of many, but we'd like to see additional studies done on that. Last month, the Environmental Justice Advisory Committee adopted a resolution that was sent to the Legislature imploring you to consider an alternative beyond cap and trade in the carbon tax system. ARB refers to it as the cap and tax, because you can build a carbon tax system to be functionally equivalent to the cap and trade system when it comes to meeting emissions expectations. We think it gives CARB a better ability to bring emissions down, and that it will still generate revenue, and so this important conversation about where we invest our proceeds can continue. Along those lines, we've talked a lot about just transition. The comments made earlier by Assembly member Patterson, Assembly member Fong, and Assembly member Mullin about economic impacts and cost shift to households. We want to have a real conversation about job shift, about how do we get people job options that increase their health, that increase their income and their ability to keep jobs forever, versus the folks in Kern County that see layoffs pretty consistently as the oil industry continues to see impacts from reduced abilities to produce and extract oil. So, I just want to implore you to really think beyond the cap and trade system. I think there's a lot of options out there, a lot of ways that we can make this work. So that communities like Kern, County, and other communities across the state, don't continue to bear the brunt of California's climate policies. Thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 239, 'end': 243, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 398, 'end': 404, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 406, 'end': 416, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2022, 'end': 2028, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3023, 'end': 3032, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3050, 'end': 3054, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3076, 'end': 3082, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cara Martinson: good morning, cara matt martinson on behalf of the california state association of counties. just a few brief comments with respect to the allocation program. we do agree with the staff comments that state that results from the program should achieve the greatest long term ghd reductions, demand for the funding and the ability to leverage other funds, and i would just highlight two program areas within the 40% annual appropriation that we think meets these objectives. and i think julia levine from the bio bac touched on several of these points previously so i won't go into great detail, but we do see great demand for funding within the waste diversion sector with ab 1826 and sb 1383, and are strive to reduce short lived climate pollutants there's a desperate need for infrastructure to manage the organics portion of the waste stream that is a potent short lived pollutant, and we're trying to divert this material away from our landfills, and then, secondly, also, we see a great need for funding within the forest health sector. there are over 100 million dead and dying trees in california due to the tree mortality epidemic and the bark beetle infestation and really, the emissions associated with catastrophic wildfire in this sector could really devastate emissions reductions in all sectors. so we urge your consideration of these two issues, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 485, 'end': 497, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Julie Morris: Mr. Chair and members, Julie Morris on behalf of the Urban Counties of California. We wanted to note our support for the Transformational Climate Communities Program, the TCCP, which was funded in last year's budget. The Governor proposes 142 million in this investment plan and this provides funding directly to local governments, and specifically in disadvantaged communities. So we just want to note on the record our support for that part of the investment strategy.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Magavern: Good morning, Bill Magavern with the Coalition for Clean Air. I have three points, first I want to thank you for focusing on enforcement, we need to make sure that ARB has the resources not only to catch criminals like Volkswagen, but also to bring up compliance with a whole host of standards that help to clean up our air. For example, about 30% of the trucks on the road in California are violating California's diesel emission standards. So we need to continue to enforce and ARB needs the resources to do that. Secondly, we agree with the staff analysis that we need to get better air quality benefits out of our client programs. Especially in disadvantaged communities. South Coast area still has the worst smog in the entire country. San Joaquin valley has the worst particle pollution in the entire country. Last year the legislature with AB 197 essentially told ARB to do a better job with integrating those programs, and your staff analysis has some excellent suggestions for continuing to do that, including limitations on offsets and on free allowances, and thirdly, we also agree with the analysis comments that there should be more focus on freight and on transit. In transit, we suggest more funding for operations, including transit passes for low income riders. And with freight, we recommend full funding for ARB's programs, which offer funding for vouchers, pilot, and demonstration programs for getting cleaner vehicles onto our roads.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ely Garcia: mr. chairman and members, garcia for the western states petroleum association. as you may be aware our members are major refiners in the state, major oil producers, are some of the largest obligated parties under the current cap and trade program. so we have extensive interest in how the cap and trade program proceeds, we support the program being extended beyond 2020. we also would urge you to look at the design issues that are critically important. some of the design issues are the ones highlighted in your staff report, which we disagree with. we think you ought to be looking at issues like offsets as a cost containment tool that goes right to the point mr. fong and mr. patterson raised about increased energy costs and the lao is raised as well, cost containment will be critically important going forward. offsets play a role in that. allowance allocation plays a role in that. continued protection of in-state industry plays a role in that. i agree with ms. chang's comments on how the board addresses protecting in-state industry and why we need to continue to protect in-state industry. so to the extent that this committee or the budget process will engage in the design elements. we look forward to engaging on those issues with you and look forward to that continue discussion. with regard to revenue, if we're going to continue to use the revenue for reducing greenhouse gas emissions, we would urge you to take a closer look at the report that the air board just released yesterday, maybe for a future hearing. they estimate 15 million metric tons of reductions from the total revenue spent to date. 15 million metric tons, we encourage you to take a look at the numbers, because the numbers matter. our obligations as obligated parties, our commitment as a state is focused on numbers. getting 40% below 1990 by a certain 20/30 is a number. what number is that? and what role is the revenue that we're spending in getting to that number? so 15 million metric tons over what time frame we would encourage you to ask that question. is it over 15 years? is it over 50 years? is it over 85 years? if it's over 50 and 85 years, that's not a very good investment. we would encourage you to ask the question if those are additional reductions and we would urge you to ask that question of anybody who comes up here and says, my program is going to reduce green house gas emissions. is it additional to what reductions will happen under the cap already? what reductions will happen under the regulatory scheme? we don't anticipate that many of these reductions are additional. they are redundant reductions. so for that reason we don't support using our greenhouse gas reductions funds for reducing greenhouse gas emissions instead we think we should invest those revenues in air quality programs. direct air quality programs like the carl moyer program, like the clean school bus program, programs that will yield immediate and near term reductions or improvements in air quality. we look forward to working with you on these issues. if there is going to be revenue, we think it should be for our air quality programs, but most importantly, we're interested in the design element of the cap and trade program going forward. thank you very much.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 668, 'end': 672, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 681, 'end': 690, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 972, 'end': 977, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Coola Coneg: Good morning Chairman, below my Members of the Committee, my name is Coola Coneg. I'm with the American Heart Association, the American Stroke Association. Just here to underscore our support for the $100 million allocated to the Active Transportation Program. That is a program that is overly subscribed and not able to fund all of the worthy applications that it gets to encourage biking and walking. We're an organization that focuses on increasing health, preventing cardiovascular diseases and stroke. We understand the rise in diabetes and obesity, understand on the importance of providing avenues to be active, so that's biking and walking and that's why we support the active transportation program and the allocation and expenditure plan.
[{'start': 69, 'end': 80, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Mason: good morning, chairman bloom and members of the committee, paul cara mason with the pacific forest trust, i wanted to start with my appreciation for the discussion of arb's robust enforcement program. as one of the early adopters of volkswagen's allegedly clean diesel technology, i bought one in 2010. i'm one of the aggrieved parties and i'm really pleased not just to be getting my car bought back off the road, but the substantial investment in remediating that future harm from those cars that are still on the road. if arb was a less robust agency, with a less robust enforcement program, that likely wouldn't have happened. so i think that those ongoing investments are really critical, so thank you to arb for that. with regards to the cap and trade program, pacific forest trust does support the cap and trade program. we think it's early in the system. as the cap comes down, gets more aggressive, many of the complaints of lack of aggressive emission reductions, i think those will narrow some and that continuing with the program that is underway helps maintain some stability there. with regard to the gtrf expenditures, i'd be remiss if i didn't point out that we do have this enormous forest health problem in california. i know the chair is well aware of the 100 million dead trees, that's really a symptom more than the actual problem, which is much more broad based. we have over century of per forest management that we really need to make up for and that's going to require some public investments. the $49 million out of nearly three and a half billion that we've invested is not commensurate with the need there. so we would strongly recommend increased investments there in the future, which i will note based on sort of the whispa comments, those are outside of the cap and are clearly additional reductions. thanks.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 28, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 59, 'end': 74, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Shaw: Thank you, Mr. Chair and Members of the Committee. Michael Shaw with the California Manufacturers and Technology Association, and I want to draw attention to several of the issues that LAO raised, and their recommendations to the Subcommittee here calling for investments in terms of reducing the cost impact of the climate program to California residents and businesses. The cost that we will continue to be exposed to in terms of higher energy prices and fuel prices are important considerations when looking at the leakage issue in the trade exposure, the California companies face. No other state is currently imposing similar costs on their companies. So any costs related to these higher prices is going to have an impact in terms of where businesses decide to grow, expand or site new facilities and that's an important factor when particularly manufacturers are looking at and making multibillion dollar investments in the United States or anywhere in the world for that matter. They're looking at what those costs are going to be and they're watching that very closely. So in terms of utilizing some of that revenue, directing that back to industry to residents in ways to help mitigate some of those higher costs help accomplish our goals of reducing GHG emissions. While at the same time mitigating some of that financial impact that would be a disincentive potentially for California businesses to locate in the state. Additionally though, we would disagree with staff comments regarding looking at reducing allowance allocation to certain industries, because that will increase again, the cost to those industries in terms of their ability to comply with California's climate program, and further increase their costs that would then again, would be a disincentive for operations of the state. We have an opportunity with the re-shoring of many manufacturing businesses from overseas to seize on this, to grow California's economy while at the same time protecting the environment. Reducing our impact in terms of the climate picture, as well. California manufacturers are cleaner and more energy efficient than they are anywhere else in this country and the world for that matter. So to the degree, we can attract more of that here. We have an opportunity to have a bigger impact on the global climate picture, which is really what this program is truly about. So we would hope that they would take that into consideration, as well. We do believe that cap and trade is the most cost effective way to reach that goal, so we would support efforts to continue that program. We'll leave that at two-thirds vote as the appropriate step to take, addresses the uncertainty around the program, the revenue, etc. And then looking at ways we can invest that revenue ultimately again, with industry and businesses or excuse me, consumers in general to help mitigate some of the costs, but also as was noted earlier, looking at investments in air quality in programs as well that can address what is a critical issue in California communities. Thank you.
[{'start': 51, 'end': 63, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 185, 'end': 188, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Emmy Wang: Good morning, Emmy Wang with the Greenlining Institute. I'm going to speak primarily on the revenues collected from the Greenhouse Reduction Fund and California Climate Investments. So we saw in the report released yesterday with the California Air Resources Board that California Climate Investments are already making substantial impact in terms of California's climate goals, as well as real lived impact in communities on the ground. We see that over $3 billion has been already appropriated through California Climate Investments and over $1 billion implemented with over 30% of those implemented dollars taking place directly in the state's most disadvantaged communities. So given the importance of these resources, we would urge that the legislature, regardless of the outcome of a two-thirds vote on a carbon pricing mechanism allocate this year's budget as it relates to the Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund. Secondly, given the uncertainty over the auction returns and the results that we've been seeing in the event that the total pot offending for the Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund is much smaller than we're anticipating. We would want the legislature to appropriate those funds in a way that gives all programs a chance to succeed. I don't think we'd want to see a situation in which a couple programs are given significant allocations at the expense of other programs and other program allocations. And then finally, in terms of a carbon pricing mechanism, we definitely agree that a carbon pricing mechanism should be approved by a two-thirds vote such a carbon pricing mechanism. It's primary purpose should be to reduce pollution, particularly in the state's disadvantaged environmental justice communities and any revenue allocated from those carbon pricing mechanism really should be used to further the state's climate goals and benefit again, the state's most impacted communities. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Leslie Lagunas: Good morning, Leslie Lagunas from the Greenlining Institute. Volkswagen's egregious cheating hit low-income communities first and worst. That's why we agree with ARB's guidance to Volkswagen to dedicate at least 35% of funds to disadvantaged and low-income communities. Further, we emphasize the importance of using disadvantaged community definition as defined by CalEPA in order to create multiplier benefits in communities hit hardest by transportation related pollution. Second, we also greatly support funding for and would really like to see significant investments in EV, ride sharing, electric car sharing, electric van pooling, electric microtransit and e-transit bus and address. That specifically addressed community mobility needs. This will greatly help the state reconcile its GHG and VMT reduction strategies. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Adam Scow: Good morning, Committee. Adam Scow with Food and Water Watch, we and about 20 other organizations submitted a letter to the Committee expressing our concern about cap and trade and opposing the budget trailer processes the venue for this discussion. Thank you for holding more hearings and ensuring there's a full legislative process. I'd like to step back and suggest a simpler approach, let's let cap and trade expire. The legislature did great work last year with SB 32 and AB 197. That is the policy that is going to get us to reducing greenhouse gas emission reductions in California. Cap and trade or any other revenue raising mechanism is intended to raise money. And the purpose of cap and trade is to give polluters flexibility to reducing pollution not to reduce pollution. That is why it was invented in the first place. If we let it expire, we can allow the Air Resources Board to do the good work of mandating pollution source reductions source by source. So, we can clean the air and really lead on climate change. It would be much simpler too. We're going to submit an updated letter. We have more organizations signing on lately. The California Nurses Association is joining us in this effort and I want to note that the South Coast Air Quality Management District just rejected cap. And trade after nearly 20 years of failure that reclaim program has been scrapped by the South Coast Air Quality Management District. So I think we can learn from them and I would encourage the legislature to continue the good work it did last year, and let this program expire. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Vanderwarker: Good morning committee members. My name is Amy Vanderwarker, I'm the Co-Director of the California Environmental Justice Alliance. I want to thank you all for your thoughtful discussion, particularly around environmental justice issues this morning. I want to provide a little bit more information on some of the reports that have been mentioned. There's been a series of reports that are really highlighting key environmental justice issues in the current cap and trade system. One was released last fall by leading researchers Manuel Pastor and Rachel Morello-Frosch of University of Southern California and UC Berkeley, and then there's the OEHHA report that's already been mentioned. Some of the biggest findings, from our perspective, in these reports are that our largest climate polluters are disproportionately located in EJ communities. Local GHG emissions are not actually dropping despite California-wide ability to meet our GHG reduction goals and GHG and co-pollutants that harm health are correlated, especially for industrial facilities like refineries. And offsets are being primarily used by our largest polluters, and are almost all going to out of state projects, exporting our clean air and revenue benefits from California. While there's been some discussion about these issues, including today, we would love to see more solutions crafted, particularly with Air Resources Board and look forward to working with you on those matters. On the reporting and data issues, both these reports highlighted the biggest need, which is to standardize JHG and co-pollutant data from both covered facilities and make that publicly accessible. We also firmly believe that data on how facilities are complying with their cap and trade obligations is critical to understanding whether we are contributing to a localized air quality issues, or benefiting, or local facilities are actually benefiting and helping improve local air quality. We appreciate the LAO's recommendation of exploring a carbon tax. The EJ movement has long preferred a tax as a more simple and clear solution. We'd like to see a full discussion of that option. We also believe that if structured appropriately with a cap, it can actually, you know, deliverable emission and revenue certainty that our communities need. I'd also like to add, in reference to the cap and tax analysis that ARB is doing, we feel like some of the underlying assumptions in that analysis are not necessarily aligned with our equity goals. So that's one challenge that we've been working with ARB staff on. And I'd also like to just put out there that this idea that cap and trade is the system that delivers our emission certainty is a question that should really be carefully explored because it's a sector wide, economy wide cap and it has all these different policy design features, such as free allowances, as have already been mentioned, and offsets that allow polluters to meet these goals. But really are they delivering our localized GHT and air quality benefits is unclear. So, regardless of the pricing mechanism, as has been clearly discussed, we, as the environmental justice community has long said, we want to see direct emission reductions and cleaner air in our communities. And that's a key outcome that we need from any legislation this year, thank you.
[{'start': 43, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 529, 'end': 542, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 547, 'end': 568, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 644, 'end': 649, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Perin Shaw: Good morning, Perin Shaw with Asian Pacific Environmental Network, APEN. Three quick comments. One, just appreciate the LAO report which we very much agree with. And one is, to Amy's point from CEJA, we really do deliver about more than 80% of our emission reductions from what was stated as complementary programs, what I would like to call core programs. These are the fundamental programs that we really, that's what is reducing emissions, so as long as we stay strong in our policy with maintaining those particular programs, as well as advance what was passed last year, with AB 197, we'd be very supportive of that. When it comes to carbon pricing mechanism, for APEN, and much of the environmental justice movement, a cap and tax is the preferred choice. There certainly could be fixes to the current system, but they need to be very significant. A cap and tax, Amy enumerated what it may look like, really does provide a level of stability and certainty for businesses and it's portable. I mean, we already have an agreement with Canada. Canada is exploring both cap and trade and cap and tax. So, it does not mean that we are undoing some of the progress that we have made, we're just sort of joining the rest of the world in what is being advanced. And then finally, in terms of the impact on communities, much has been said about the cost of fuel. A transition is necessary and exploration of some kind of a dividend that is primarily focused on those that are most economically vulnerable is going to be critical as we make the change, as the state has already indicated we're going to do, towards a low carbon economy. So, we encourage members here and other venues to really start looking at what that kind of dividend or what that kind of program could look like beginning with the LAO report but really sort of going deeper than that. Thanks for the consideration.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 120, 'end': 123, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 177, 'end': 180, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 194, 'end': 198, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 869, 'end': 872, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1797, 'end': 1800, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bonnie Holmes-Gen: Good morning, Bonnie Holmes-Gen, I'm with the American Lung Association in California. I wanted to say three points and thank you for your excellent discussion this morning. The American Lung Association is supportive of the cap and trade program as a key element of our state's climate efforts including, of course, our core regulatory programs that help and together cap and trade and our core regulatory programs including our advanced clean car, low carbon fuels that the regulations are driving down greenhouse gas emissions, smog and soot emissions. A second key point is that we are supporting the extension of the cap and trade program to 2030 to meet our 2030 climate goals, But we also support adjustments, and I think you've discussed many of those in the analysis today, to the program to maximize benefits to local communities and especially to focus on increasing the criteria air pollution benefits and we're discussing many of those with you. In April we will be releasing our annual State of the Air Report. Again, it ranks communities across the country according to the number of unhealthy days experienced in each area, and unfortunately California always ranks, Californian cities rank among the worst polluted in the country. We always focus not just on the ranking, and the grades, but the success that we've achieved, and we always push out the message that our successes in California are because of our strong legislative and regulatory programs to control pollution. But nevertheless, San Joaquin Valley and LA area cities, again, will rank among the worst polluted in the country. To address this very serious air quality and health problem we absolutely need the continuation of this funding. My third point, we're especially concerned with ensuring consistent and long-term funding for clean, low carbon transportation since transportation is the majority of our air pollution problem here in California and we are focused on transforming the transportation sector, light, medium, and heavy duty to electrification. And we especially encourage funding for electrification in the freight sector and in disadvantaged communities. Focus also on supporting expenditures for sustainable community programs including transformative climate communities projects, active transportation, walking, biking, that's been discussed as important health benefits, local and regional transit. In summary, ramping up and also ramping up enforcement efforts is critical in light of the VB situation. Over $1 billion in client investments have been made and have made a huge difference in improving air quality in health in communities across California and we're looking forward to working with you to make sure this continues. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Boccadoro: Thank you. Michael Boccadoro with West Coast Advisors on behalf of our dairy and agricultural clients. I want to hit a couple of points. Many of these follow on the conversation, Mr. Bloom, that Jason Bryant and I had with you in your office a few weeks ago, and we did some follow-up with your staff. We are increasingly concerned, as ARB is looking to the dairy industry for significant greenhouse gas reductions, particularly from manure management, that there are biases that are starting to pop up, and many of those are traced back to Assembly staff. Not your staff, but Assembly staff, and I want to be clear about that. The CDFA Dairy Digester Program is delaying the funding, it's supposed to be go out the door tomorrow, it's being delayed because of concerns that are stemming from staff. And there's a lot of misinformation about what's going on with the Dairy Digester Program and we welcome a discussion about that program and the benefits that that program's providing. But there's $36 million that's being delayed for shovel ready projects because of an inherent bias against those projects by some staff in this very building. 1383 had a lot of provisions with regards to dairy methane reduction and a lot of the provisions from regards to removing obstacles and we'll be working with ARB, and we're working very well with ARB, I might add, to remove those obstacles, but rather than removing obstacles we appear to be putting more in place. The budget trailer language that is also being considered by this Committee furthers that bias against dairy digester programs. That we don't think any of that language is necessary because these programs, like all of the alternative manure management programs, will go through permitting for both water quality and air quality. But limiting and biasing that additional mitigation just on dairy digesters is a great example of the bias I'm talking about. So we're very concerned about that. We'd welcome a broader conversation. The EJAC Committee, or excuse me, the Environmental Justice Community that has suggested that we have an investigation. I don't think that's necessary, but a hearing where we can air all these issues, bring ARB in, bring the air district in, and hear some of these concerns with dairy digesters, we would welcome that because these projects have the opportunity to provide significant benefits, they can get to the very criteria pollutant benefits that we hear so much about in San Joaquin Valley. We're trying to move, as Ms. Chang is aware, to transportation fuel. So let's have that discussion in an open and transparent process, rather than having staff continue with this push behind the scenes to thwart the Dairy Digester Program at CDFA. Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 183, 'end': 188, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 195, 'end': 207, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2514, 'end': 2519, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michelle Passero: hi, michelle paul passero, over at the nature conservancy. i appreciate the opportunity to speak. we support the maintenance and extension of the cap and trade program. we think more, now than ever, the continuity of california's climate programs are critical to address climate change and continue demonstrating both within california and beyond our borders that we can reduce emissions and continue to grow our economy at the same time. we also think it's important to have it, to be among a suite of mechanisms, to help reduce emissions. the cap and trade program does also leverage reductions beyond our border, if you look at the linkages and partnerships that we have with canadian provinces it does give us that opportunity to actually do more on climate change, and at the same time we do also think we can build on the program. we support and think it's important to address co-pollutants and find opportunities where we can to address those emissions as well, and reduce them. so we're certainly open and would love to engage in conversations about how do we find other complementary policies, or work on the cap and trade program itself, to deliver those kinds of benefits. with respect to the proceeds from the cap and trade program, we think that the investments have been successful, they're providing returns to communities around california. and helping us reduce greenhouse gas emissions, as you can see from even the weather events of this winter that it's really critical that we find emission reductions where we can to address climate change. it is also important to maintain a greenhouse gas nexus with those investments. it provides an opportunity for us to also grow our economy by doing that. there was an earlier study done for the regional greenhouse gas initiative that looked at the states in the northeastern region and how they used the proceeds from the auction, and it found that where the states actually reinvested in greenhouse gas technologies that they actually grew their economy, whereas where states just put it into their general fund, the economy did not grow. so, we think it is important to really further drive emission reductions and grow our economy by making our investments that way and keeping that nexus, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chuck Mills: good morning, chuck michelle mills with california relief and i'll cut my comment time in half immediately by just saying i want to associate california relief with ms. wang's comments at greenlining institute, and that would include creating, making sure we continue to have a nexus between our revenues regardless of whatever market based mechanism could move forward to reducing greenhouse gases and i think miss passero at tnc summarized that appropriately. the only other thing i would add is i want to recognize the staff analysis and comments that specifically note that there are investments outside transportation that may not be as visible but are equally important, and, of course i have to applaud the example there of natural resources, where wetlands were mentioned along with forest. of course we would add agriculture and urban forestry in there as well. last year, while the legislature was passing progressive legislation on watersheds, for example, including the chair's own ab 2480, these programs were taking significant cuts from what was proposed in the governor's budget. forests, and urban forests were cut by 78% from what was proposed, and wetlands was zeroed out, so this year, in the proposed allocation plan, natural resources as a total represent about 5.8% of all the investments proposed by the administration. so, we appreciate the recognition that natural resources do have a role to play and look forward to the continued conversation. thank you. good morning, mr. chair, members.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 169, 'end': 173, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 416, 'end': 423, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Amy Mmagu: Amy Mmagu on behalf of the California Chamber of Commerce. We really do appreciate the robust discussion today regarding the cap and trade program, the extension of that, and we also do appreciate the acknowledgement that, going forward beyond 2020, our emission reductions are going to be more expensive and more difficult to reach. In order to do so, we do believe that a cap and trade program is necessary and is the most cost effective way for the obligated entities in the state to comply with the programs and to achieve those emission reductions. We look forward to working with the staff and members moving forward on this issue, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Valerie Turella: Valerie Turella... with PG&E and I'll limit my comments to the cap and trade program discussion by conveying that PG&E does support an extension of cap and trade by removing the Sunset date and such a proposal by a two-third votes. We do believe that this is the most cost-effective ways to achieve our green house gas reductions. I want to make a quick comment that PG&E is not aware that a cap and tax program would be portable, and we want to stress that linking a cap and trade program continues California's climate leadership, where we do face some uncertainty at the federal level, and we want to ensure that other jurisdictions that want to join us in our leadership can do so under our cap and trade program. I won't go into them today, but we do, of course, support some specific design elements that can contain costs and again maintain environmental integrity and California's leadership on climate policy. For one example, allowances for our customers, which are critical to cost containment. And finally just want to quickly note, we look forward. Thank you for the opportunity today and I'm glad to hear that it's one of several hearings to take place and I look forward to working with you and your staffs, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeanie Ward-Waller: Good morning, Chair and members. Jeanie Ward-Waller with the California Bicycle Coalition, here as a member of the Sustainable Communities for All Coalition, and also speaking on behalf of my colleagues at Public Advocates today. Really appreciate the conversation today. I think one place where we would like to see more work from ARB and more coordination with other state agencies, such as the transportation agency, is on transportation infrastructure and how that's helping to meet our goals, climate goals. And also driving behavior in terms of how people get around and how much driving people are doing in the state, specifically on the Governor's budget proposal. I think we're seeing an over reliance on GGRF, and creating, investing in sustainable modes, such as transit and active transportation. We would like to see more of that come from traditional transportation funding, though we support certainly, investing in the active transportation program, and also investing in things like transit operations, and transit passes that help, particularly, low income people get around the state more easily. I think we are concerned with the over reliance on GGRF revenues, which are overly volatile for transit agencies to rely on. Thank you.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joshua Stark: stark with transform. first of all, i want to appreciate the work, i also am speaking on behalf of the sustainable communities for all and my comments can reflect those of the other members in the coalition. regardless of the mechanism, we've worked on the uses of revenues for five plus years, and we found the staff to be thoughtful and professional in their dealings with us, and i wanted to make that clear.
[]
Nikita Daryanani: Hi, my name is Nikita Daryanani, I'm a Policy Coordinator with Leadership Counsel for Justice and Accountability. We are a member of CEJA, the California Environmental Justice Alliance, and align ourselves with their comments as well. I lead our climate justice work in the San Joaquin Valley and partner with the Center on Race, Poverty, and the Environment as well as residents in Kern and Fresno counties to elevate resident concerns with the current system of cap and trade, and direct emission reductions are always at the top of the priority list for these communities. These communities are at the forefront of climate change and so many of them suffer or are burdened with some of the worst air quality in the state and in the country. And we feel that the current system does not address their concerns, and a direct fee along with a cap is a much better mechanism to improve air quality, reduce emissions, and improve public health in these communities, thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Phoebe Seaton: thank you, good morning, phoebe, also with leadership counsel for justice and accountability. i want to limit my comments to respond to mister boccadoro's comments regarding the dairy digester program as a signatory to the letter, as a member of the environmental justice community concerned about, about dairy digesters. dairy digesters do increase air pollutants in communities already impacted, as my colleague nikita just mentioned, by air pollution, and the mitigation measures that the legislature placed attached to that language is necessary to prevent, again, the perpetuation of two californians with some californians benefiting, and some disproportionately burdened by our activities. in cap and trade and beyond, in a very odd way, i guess, the environmental justice community aligns our request with mr. boccadoro in that we, too, have requested an oversight hearing to discuss cdfa's manure management program and assess best uses of those funds and look again at how the department is allocating funds in the way to best address our climate goals and environmental justice goals. thank you so much.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 143, 'end': 152, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 414, 'end': 420, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 818, 'end': 827, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brent Newell: good morning, mr. chair. my name is brent, i'm with the center on race, poverty and the environment, and we'd like to join the comments made by ceja, would also point out that cap and trade, as a pollution reduction strategy, fails californians. the communities that live near those facilities are overwhelmingly people of color and cap and trade denies those communities the benefits of direct reductions, which is a health denial or health improvement denial. in terms of pricing carbon, a direct carbon fee with a cap and a facility specific cap is the best way to price carbon, generate revenue. with respect to the dairy digester issue, i only want to point out that digesters that burn methane to produce electricity are 20 times more pollutant intensive than a modern natural gas fired power plant. it makes no sense to subsidize those operations with public money to pollute the most polluted air basin in the country. and we've also signed on to that letter and we look forward to an oversight hearing of cdfa's program. thank you very much.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 144, 'end': 148, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tim Cremins: Tim Cremins in support of all nominees, with extreme support of one of the nominees, Mr. Burns.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 89, 'end': 94, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jeremy Smith: jeremy jonah smith on behalf of the state building and construction trades council, similar to tim, i'm sure you're all great guys but i'm specifically here for mr. burns.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 95, 'end': 98, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 165, 'end': 170, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kim Delfino: Good afternoon, I'm Kim Delfino, I'm the State Director for Defenders of Wildlife, and I personally have worked with Mr. Sklar and Mr. Silva in the past, in particular, in Salton Sea. And so, very much support their appointment. And I don't know Mr. Burns, but I very much look forward to working with him in his appointment, and seat on the Fish and Game Commission. Thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 121, 'end': 126, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 135, 'end': 140, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 250, 'end': 255, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Roy Griffith: Good afternoon,Roy Griffith on behalf of the California Rifle and Pistol Association. We'd like to strongly support all three Mr. Silva, Sklar, and Burns. One thing important to us as stakeholders is approachability and although we don't always agree with these gentlemen's decisions. They are all approachable and give us time on a moment's notice to discuss issues that we share in common. Thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 130, 'end': 135, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 137, 'end': 142, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 148, 'end': 153, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lori Jacobs: lori jeremy jacobs, california houndsman for conservation. and we're here in support of all three. mr. silva, sklar, and burns. and i would also like to add that since mr. sklar has taken over presidency at the commission, the medians are ran amazingly.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 103, 'end': 108, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 110, 'end': 115, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 121, 'end': 126, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 172, 'end': 177, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Fearing: Jennifer Fearing with the Humane Society of the United States concurs with Mr. Gaines, as I do on their behalf. Jennifer Feering. I do commend the Governor. I think he has made some excellent appointments and as a long time kind of usual, a suspect attendee at these Commission meetings. They're a pleasure to attend and the fairness that Mr. Sklar and the other gentlemen and [UNKNOWN] have been performing. It's really changed the whole atmosphere, but an important and a step forward in the professionalism of the stages. And I think you should all vote confidently in favor of all three today, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 79, 'end': 85, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 112, 'end': 128, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 343, 'end': 348, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bryan Cash: mr. chair, this is bryan from the natural resources agency, most of the other programs are competitive, especially within chapter six, so any other funds would be subject to a competitive process.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matt Almy: actually matt, department of finance. since this is kind of a multi-department package, i thought i would kind of give a little bit of an overview of how the different pieces interrelate. just for context purposes, the state has experienced significant rainfall, as a result of several atmospheric river storms in january and february. as a result of these storms, the state's reservoirs are at capacity, and additional pressure has been placed upon flood control systems in the central valley. the significant amount of crs snowpack, also makes it likely that rivers and streams will continue to experience high flows during the spring and early summer months. these significant weather events, as well as the spillway failure at orville, illustrate the public safety importance of investing in the state's water infrastructure an emergency preparedness. consequently, the administration is proposing to enhance dam safety and flood protection, through three specific measures. first, the administration's requesting the legislature appropriate $387 million proposition 1 water bond, for dwr to accelerate a balanced portfolio of flood-control projects over the next two fiscal years. these new funds provided from the flood-management allocation of proposition 1 will complement existing prop 1e and prop 84 bond funds, that have already been appropriated. these funds will enhance flood production in the central valley, the delta, and other areas of the state with significant flood risk. consistent with the system wide approach identified in the central valley flood plan, these funds will help meet the urgent needs of urban, small community and rural areas throughout the central valley, delta and beyond. second, the administration is requesting the legislature approve a comprehensive proposal to enhance dam safety, which includes the following elements. $3 million for dwr to conduct a more extensive evaluations of the appurtenant structures such as spill ways, gates, and outlets, than the current visual inspections. the inspections will include additional geological and hydrological evaluations, as well as updated design and construction standards. also, trailer bill language to require that dams have updated inundation maps and emergency action plans, that are updated every 10 years with limited exceptions for low-risk stamps. and finally $5.3 million for dwr and oes to review and approved, required inundation maps and related emergency response plans. and lastly, and this is under the governor's emergency powers, and isn't requesting any legislative action, is the redirection of up to $50 million of dwr's existing deferred maintenance appropriation for emergency preparedness and response actions. including pre-deployment of flood fight materials, flood fighting levy risk assessments, and increased coordination between state, local and federal agencies. also, targeting flood control projects to be completed within the current flood season, which will address human health and safety issues, flood system convenes some limitations, and critical infrastructure needs in areas at risk of significant flooding. thank you.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sharon Tapia: My name is Sharon Tapia and I'm now the Chief of our Safety of Dams and program. And what it would be is a focused group looking at starting with spill ways, which is in a pertinent structure, actually going into our files and looking at how these structures were originally built. A lot of these dams are 50 to 100 years old that we have in our inventory and what we've historically done is focused on the highest risk for our people of California, and in California that's been earthquakes. So we've done a lot of retrofitting of large dams that are along like the Hayward Fault, San Andreas, Calaveras Fault. And so now, our focus needs to now go to pertinent structures from what we've learned with Oroville. So we would go back through or start with our biggest, largest spillways. Look at the geology that's underneath these spillway shoots and a lot of them were not put on solid hard rocks, because of where they're located. So, a lot of them are on soft rock that can erode and that's what you saw happen up in Oroville. We have good rock up there that you see now, but we have those seams where we have shears going through. So we got to identify the weak link now in those structures and even the structure like the concrete, the drainage system underneath and do an in-depth evaluation and then engage owners into getting these structures fixed.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert Gore: Good afternoon, Robert Gore from the Gualco Group on behalf of the Sacramento Area Flood Control Agency, one of the largest and most active in the nation. We're in strong support of the administration's proposal. It's equitable, it's consistent with various layers of flood control planning. And on behalf of SAFCA I'd like to offer our significant expertise to work with Members of the Committee as we proceed.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Lange: Good afternoon, Mr. Chair, Karen Lange on behalf of the San Joaquin County Board of Supervisors. We have a lot of concern with potential expenditures of some of the Prop 1 money that as part of the negotiations on Proposition 1 was very clearly earmarked for delta levees. They have about $2 billion worth of work in the county to reach the standard of 200 year level of flood protection. That's state law, it's not federal law. Redirecting those funds for habitat, which is, I think, something that's been discussed, is of grave concern to them. That was a hard won concession to get delta levy money into Proposition 1. So they have a lot of heartburn with that. They'd like to see the Legislature ensure that delta levies get funded with delta levy money. The second thing which your staff hit on in the staff report is the two year time limit is sort of ludicrous. It takes seven to 10 years to get through the federal process and get the money in place to do the levy work that we're talking about. Even though it's a state law we still have to get federal permits to make the changes to the 200 year level. So the two year limitation is just unmanageable for San Joaquin. So the two concerns we have we don't want to seem ungrateful. We're thrilled to see the Governor try to move money forward. But the pot that is being redirected from Proposition 1 is of great concern. So we would encourage you to potentially direct the Prop 1 levy money goes to delta levies, thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cynthia Vitale: Good afternoon. Cynthia Vitale on behalf of the Nature Conservancy. I'd like to echo the comments made by my colleague Chris Unkle with American Rivers. We'd also like to add another note. We're particularly supportive of language in Prop 1 requiring the flood management dollars be spent on multi-benefit projects that include fish and wildlife habitat enhancement. And we look forward to working with the administration to ensure that strong multi benefit projects are implemented.  Thanks.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 119, 'end': 130, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Pablo Garza: Good morning. Pablo Garza with the Environmental Defense Fund also here in support of the administration's request. I understand the questions about what projects are going to be funded, but the Central Valley Flood Protection Plan is a good framework to use and a lot of work had gone into that. And so we encourage community to move forward with the request and I just point out the broader context, this is just a small down payment on much greater need. The Department of Water Resources and US Army Corps of Engineers in 2013 identified about a $50 billion need for flood risk reduction infrastructure. And we're looking at a billion to a billion and a half capital investment every year. So this is really just a small down payment on that much greater need. We'd be interested in engaging in a bigger conversation about how to meet that need, that's probably for another Committee, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Croyle: Thank you. I'm going to jump in. My name is Bill Croyle, acting Director of the Department of Water Resources.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amanda Martin: amanda jonah martin, department of finance, these are general fund resources and this only the second year, so we want to make sure everything is effective and it works, in conjunction with all the activities. and we're happy to come back and give you our results next year, because i'm sure they will very positive.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Leslie Gallagher: Correct, good morning. I'm Leslie Gallagher, I'm the executive officer of the Central Valley Flood Protection Board. And the reason I'm here alongside Director Croyle is that the board is an independent agency that is housed administratively within DWR. So we do have our own requests, we have our own obligations, we have our own statutory mandates. We do appreciate your staff recognizing the importance of this proposal. And just to give you a little bit more context of where it's coming from, this is one of the board's core functions is to oversee and to enforce encroachments on the state plan of flood control. We have recently received the latest data from the US Army Corps of Engineers that tells us that 91% of the 1,600 miles of levies that make up the state plan of flood control are out of compliance with Federal Safety Standards. And the number one item that shows up on many of those reports is the illegal encroachments or encroachments, which are out of compliance with their conditions of approval. This recommendation and this proposal is meant to address that. That is within the board's authorities, and we are looking to improve and enhance that program that currently exists to help deal with this situation.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 160, 'end': 166, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Gary Bardini: yeah, gary amanda bardini, im deputy director. just maybe add to toms comments, we do have some experience on the department. in forming maintenance areas for flood management. and through the process when we go through a fee assessment to the land owner process. typically we see that there's a desire to move to local management and not to state management just in that act.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert Gore: robert gary gore from the gualco group on behalf of modesto irrigation, kings, kern. imperial irrigation, united water, and the california association of wine growers, regarding intervention fees and fully appreciating that enforcement is a vital tool. we urge careful oversight of this particular tool. and very cautious implementation as we proceed, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Regarzo: good morning, paul with environmental defense fund, and just here in support of the administration's request and staff and lao recommendations. as was said, this is really, we're starting to see the deadlines under segments, a really critical time. and it's really important that both the department and the board have the staff they need to fulfill the duties assigned to them under sigma. and i just would be remiss if i didn't say that so far they have done just a fantastic job, we've been tracking the implementation, and a lot was put on them and they've stepped right in there and cranked out regulations, reports, and other guidance. so i think the legislature can feel really confident giving them more funds to continue doing the good job they're already doing.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 123, 'end': 126, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sean Martin: sean robert martin with the legislative analysts office, we didn't raise any issues with this proposal.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Casey Shenkey: senator again, casey sean shenkey with the department of water resources, if you don't mind we didn't actually have the appropriate staff here for these questions, but i am pretty familiar with the programs. so, i will do my best to give you a brief introduction of them and then answer any questions to the best of my ability and then be responsive if we can do that. the first one on the vote on the calendar is the san joaquin river water quality improvement program. what this request is, this program was an existing a prior appropriation to provide grants to try and control ag drainage in the san joaquin to prevent the drainage going into the san joaquin river. the grant program exists. the program has taken a few more years to come to fruition than planned. so this request is simply to revert and re-appropriate the state operations money. the state's staff funding to implement those grants that are going out to the locals. so that is what this proposal is about. or you did have that drought for five years, but let's ask senator neilsen if he has a direct question.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1045, 'end': 1052, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Joshua Nelson: joshua with the department of finance. those options are explored throughout the dgss process, they send us some of the initial estimates when they're reviewing these things. and that's definitely part of their process when they're scoping out locations.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Pointer: thank you, mr. chairman. my name is john jonah pointer, i'm the chair of the joint rules committee, california senior legislature. i'd like to thank you, and the committee members, for the opportunity to speak to you today. i'm here today requesting your approval of the budget change proposal, and the advocacy request for appropriation of $375,000 over the next two fiscal years. the bcp would permit re-appropriation of any unexpended balance from our original temporary funding of $500,000. this re-appropriation would permit carryover funds to be expended through the fy 17-18, excuse me. the advocacy requests for 375,000 would fill the remaining shortfall over the next two fiscal years, as csl works to regain the status of tax check-off. let me give you a little background please, in 2016 csl pursued two financial courses of action, one involved the tax check-off program. in 2014 the california fund for senior citizens, code 402, fell below the $250,000 minimum contribution level by $20,000. sb 997 returns csl to the form 540 using the new name, california senior legislature fund and code 427. this choice of fund names resulted in a revenue declining by over 70% in both 2015 and 2016, in spite of a robust promotional campaign around code 427, lesson learned. we discovered that the public is reluctant to donate to an organization associated with the state legislature and made up of retired legislators, as potential donors erroneously assume the composition of the california senior legislature to be. we attempted to correct our funding through ab 2497, which was intended to return csl to the tax check-off program under the fund name california senior citizen advocacy fund. ab 2497 passed unanimously on the assembly floor, but was placed in suspense by the senate appropriations committee and never made it to the senate for a final vote. we are pursuing reestablishment on the tax check-off program during the 2017 legislative session via ab 519. again using the funding california senior citizen advocacy fund. the second involved 500,000 in temporary funding, as previously noted, csl saw its revenue from the tax check-off decline by 70%. csl requested approval of 500,000 in temporary funding to continue operations. during the 2016 legislative session, 500,000 in temporary funding was approved by the governor. in june 2016 these funds were approved to continue csl operations, while we resurrected our revenue stream via the proposed name change outlined above, as well as develop additional revenue streams. i will come back to the additional revenue streams in just a moment. original instructions were that this temporary funding was approved for the 2016-17 budget year. in late august we learned that we would not be on the tax check-off, in the coming year began to pursue approval of any remaining funds that were not spent during the 2016-17 budget year. our efforts have resulted in the pcp before you today, and the advocacy request for an appropriation of 375,000 to fill the funding shortfall, as we work diligently to regain our tax check-off status and pursue other funding options. excuse me, let me go now to the revenue streams, or funding sources, that i mentioned earlier. csl has been pursuing a variety of additional revenue streams this fiscal year, one involves rfos. with the approval of temporary funding csl began to aggressively pursue ways to expand its funding sources. they focused on the development of a donor database using email blast to a targeted population of californians. improving the presentation or promotion of csl, a fundraising campaign, and finally, our focus also included updating our website to make it more user-friendly to receive donations. so we had approximately four rfos out there, however we had to place those on hold because of our financial constraints eliminated our ability use temporary fundings to pursue those various options. another approach, since we're now faced with a a financial constraint, was to seek no cost approaches. one such approach involves finance, excuse me, physical sponsorship and in this process, again, what we're attempting to do is fund the cost at the back end. so if we use a fiscal sponsorship program with another 501(c)(3), their expenses would be funded once revenue streams began to develop from that. so let me walk you through that for just a minute, using a 501(c)(3) gives the csl another avenue for donors to make contributions. so rather than just a state agency, you also have another avenue outside the state agency platform. it also eliminates the reluctance on the part of donors to make a contribution to a state agency. something that, once we step outside the tax check-off, we again get pushed back in terms of, why am i donating to a state agency, you're already funded. it also gives us, and probably one of the hidden benefits that is really exciting to us. it gives us access to that 501(c)(3) donor base, so that we can pump out requests using that 501(c) donor base as well. this will prove invaluable as we continue to attempt to build, and our goal, a donor database. let me stop for just a minute, when we use the tax check-off program we don't have a clue who the donor is, because under the privacy act that information is protected, rightfully so, by the franchise tax board. so there is not going to be any information shared with us in terms of who made a donation. so we're constantly marking blindly to a population, hoping that we're going to get some donations. so if you send out 100 letters, you hope you're going to get perhaps 10 responses that would, in turn, turn into a donation. ideally, we hope that through this fiscal sponsorship, it might turn into a prototype that we might approach other 501(c)(3) throughout the state as well to participate in. so we're working with one organization, it's taken too much, almost three and we're still not approved yet because, again, they're limited in terms of what kind of legislative action, the mainstay of what we do, what they can do. so they're researching it with their legal staff at this point in time. another approach involves crowdfunding, we have a crowdfunding project ready to release. we are pursuing a fiscal sponsorship relationship because the state. does not accept electronic transfers or deposits. excuse me, so in closing. what's so special about the csl? the csl is a product of the legislature. it was founded primarily through the efforts of state senator henry mallow and has established the state statute. csl has a 36 year history of legislature in support of seniors in the state. over 210 proposals drafted by this organization have been signed in the law, 210. no other organization in the state has such a historic past in support of seniors. senior issues are we've witnessed this today. senior issues are growing at an alarming rate. i reference our service to seniors over the past 36 years. however, the future presents some very, very challenging times for seniors, and the organizations that serve them. we only have to look to the changes proposed at the federal level, to see potential changes awaiting us. we've heard about the population growing. we've heard concerns about the longevity of seniors continues to improve is growing, is increasingly concerned about their fiscal, their financial security. so as you live longer the question is, do i out live my finances? or with my cost of living increased, i'm i going to continue to be able to pay my expenses or are my expenses going to outgrow any amount of cpi that i get over the course of years. in 2009 for example, the median household income of orange county's older adult population was $47,992. approximately $24,000 less than the county medium of $71,865. financial and physical abuses against seniors will continue to grow at an alarming rate. one in 10 seniors over the age of 60 is a victim. in the area of long term care over 70% of seniors over the age of 65 will need ltc, long term care and it represents the largest unfunded liability in the state. of the 25,000 people assisted through the orange county housing authority, rental assistance programs, 69% are elderly and disabled. so with the above challenges in mind, who fills the legislative void of there's no csl? knowing what the future holds for seniors in this state, can we afford to not have a csl advocating for seniors and working with the legislature to find legislative solutions to the challenges in your space? so in conclusion, i urge you to support our bcp, that request a roll over of the remaining funds approximately 175,000 from the original 500,000 temporarily funding the approved by the governor in 2016 and the approval of the funding request in the amount of $375,000. in doing so this enables this great organization with over 36 years of service to seniors to continue funding this mission of advocating for seniors and working with the legislature to tackle the very challenging future seniors and native california faces, thank you very much.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 6495, 'end': 6507, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Justin Freitas: Justin Freitas Department of Finance. I was asked earlier by the Committee to give the proposal. Last year the Legislature provided a one year funding in general fund dollars $500,000 to Senior Legislature to assist them with operations where they pursued a different revenue source, or an ongoing consistent revenue source. Included in the Governor's Budget proposal is the BCP request to allow any unspent funds, general funds to be re-appropriated in this upcoming year at the time the Governor's Budget proposal is $250,000. And we're again encouraged that senior legislators continue on looking for additional revenue sources at this time, out of respect for the Chair and Assemblymember Rubio. The advocacy proposal, being that it's not included in the Governor's
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 693, 'end': 698, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ian Lou: thank you, mr. chair. ian john lou, department of finance. on the staff's recommendation, i will note that given that the senior legislature is a product of legislature would also would like for the lao to be part of this consultation to look at a feasible path forward for the csl.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lauren Rolfe: Lauren Rolfe, Senior Assembly Member, California Senior Legislature. This organization is probably one of the only organizations that brings to you legislated proposals that were generated at the source. There are people who are senior legislators all across this state. We listen to the seniors in our organizations. We don't come to you with frivolous proposals. 210 proposals over the course of our existence is pretty good record. But what we come to you with is we come to you with the current and changing needs of the seniors. We find ways to help them through the legislative activity. And so we think that you need us, and we need you. So please support our proposals.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anne Loren: I'm Anne Loren. I'm chair of the Legislative Committee for the California Senior Legislature. And it's been an honor to work with the members of CSL and the legislators, because not only do we bring proposals where we've researched the needs of the seniors throughout the state, but we get a chance to listen to the legislators and what they think the needs of the seniors are. And we can take that back and incorporate that. But we need the funds to do this. We have asked our members to come and spend their funds to come to Sacramento, as we've done today, to meet with legislators. And we've done this often, but we cannot do this always for people throughout the state, because our members are seniors also. And they have the same needs that you've heard here today. As we look at what are the needs of seniors throughout the state, we hear the same things that you've heard today. Assembly Member Rubio says, this is an eye opener for us, to know what the needs of seniors are throughout the state. We hear that all the time, and we try to sever that down to a place where we can write proposals that explain that need so that legislators can take action on that need. We hope we've done that well. Over 36 years, we have tried to do it well with 210 proposals that have been legislated into bills. And we have five this year that are being authored, and we're proud of that too. Thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 903, 'end': 908, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ellie Block: ellie ian block again, from csl. over 12 years ago, i joined the csl. i have one of those proposals that was chaptered into law. i found a little spot within the emergency plan that didn't address the needs of seniors when they were evacuated in the event of a terrible storm, or more problematic is if we have an earthquake. i have one right now that hasn't been picked up this year, but it addresses the fact that a lot of seniors are getting rent increases they can't afford and have no place to go. we're fighting in marin county right now for 54 units of affordable, low and very low cost senior housing. and i was trying to find a way within the landlord tenant law. i wrote something that would give seniors a little bit more time to find another place. it doesn't solve the issue of housing, but we're out there, we're listening, we're hearing. and i hope you will look at our proposal and have it go on, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rex Whisniand: Thank you, ma'am. Hi, I'm Dr. Rex Whisniand and I'm Chairman of the Housing and Transportation Committee for CSL. This morning at 9:00 o'clock, I started my research for this year. And it's all volunteer. And it's going to two straight months to get this research done. And we don't have time to goof around with this. It's too important. And I'm doing it on housing for seniors, and I'm working very diligently. I've got a lot of good sources, and I want to get some information out. So if you cut off our group and my Committee, it's done. We can't do anything. So please, support our President and Chairman's recommendation. We need it now. We can't wait, thank you. Thank you, sir.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Perrera: My name's John Perrera of CSL. I represent the northern part of the state. Five counties up in the rural areas. I'm fairly new at the CSL. Flabbergasted me when I figured out what was going on. What a dynamic organization. I've given about 25, 27 presentations on CSL for various groups of senior citizens throughout the five county area that I handle. And nobody even knows about CSL. I mean, that's a well-kept secret. So we need to get the word out. We need to get things out. Now I have asked every group that I give a presentation to, hey, we need funding. We got one check out of the 27, and I matched that check, and my partner matched that check, the senior Senator from my area. It took us four months for those checks to clear through the state. Do we have a funding problem? You better believe we've got a funding problem. Okay, help us out here, okay? We're a bunch of seniors out here trying to have fun and make a difference. Help us out, thank you.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeannine Fenton: Sorry, I thought it was on. I'm Jeannine Fenton, Chief Deputy Director of the California Department of Aging. And before we begin, Lora Connolly, our director, has sent her regrets for not being able to be here today.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 131, 'end': 144, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dean Fujimoto: hello, i'm fujimoto, cda.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 19, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Clay Camp: Clay Camp, Executive Director of the Area Agencies on the Aging of Santa Cruz and San Benito counties, and I'm representing California Association of Area Agencies on Aging.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joe Rodriguez: good afternoon, mr. chair, committee members. i'm joe ellie rodriguez, california state long-term care ombudsman.
[{'start': 50, 'end': 69, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Justin Freitas: Justin Freitas, Department of Finance. We have seen the proposal from the advocate, but we haven't seen any of the backup documentation to assess any of it. What I will say is that the Governor's Budget does include, I believe, it's roughly 8.3 million General Fund for senior nutrition services. So at this time, not withstanding the merits of the proposal, I would like to comment that the Governor's Budget proposal prioritizes protection of significant accomplishments made over the past four years and has put an emphasis on minimizing the negative impacts of California residents. So as such, at this time, Finance would be opposed to any proposal that's not included currently in the Governor's Budget proposal.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gary Passmore: Gary Passmore with the Congress of California Seniors. And I want to thank you, Assemblymember, for the question you were just asking about our plans. I think you probably heard where California is in some of the introduction or overview of the Department. The report showed that through the Department of Aging we spend $33 million of General Fund money, if I understood the Deputy Director, and I think it's important to recognize that we have about 5.5 million seniors in California today, up over a million, about a million and a half over the last six years or so. But the more important point, and it's the one you were driving at, is that over the next not quite two decades, decade and a half coming up, we're going to go from 5.5 million to 10 million seniors. And that $33 million that they talked about, imagine if we took the rest of California and multiplied it by something reaching equivalents of spending to that $33 million and the results would be laughable. We spend $125 billion through our General Fund, compared to this 33 million for the segment of the population that's doubling. So I mean, I'm delighted to hear the emphasis in the questions you're asking because the reality is, we are living through our second governor who has ignored seniors and their needs. The idea that seniors, we can ignore their nutrition needs is an outrageous position that we've put the state in, or that the state has put seniors in. I mean, we see 12.5 million as a partial solution to the needs for nutrition which are, in fact, critical to seniors and people with disabilities. So my comment here, I guess, is that 12.5 million, I think we could justify three or four times that, but we're also realists and know especially this Governor will never commit resources to provide sufficient nutrition on that scale. So that's my first comment, I'll wait for the next section and I'll get up again. Thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laurel Mildred: laurel on behalf of the california collaborative for long-term services and supports. we represent 32 statewide organizations, all of whom work on, or are concerned with the ltss system including insurers, providers, consumers, and labor. we are here in strong support of this augmentation. this is a critical service in the system of care and it touches many people who are quite invisible. i have to say i have worked as a social worker in meals on wheels and this is the program that touches and finds the 92 year old who's climbing on her roof and fell off and has gash in her leg that's been untreated. the couple who, both of whom have dementia who take care of each other and now are experiencing their stove being set on fire, and people who have hoarding problems and little tiny paths through their house. this program delivers a meal, it touches them socially, and it activates emergency services on their behalf. thank you.
[]
Carol Sewell: Carol Sewell from the California Commission on Aging. We are in agreement with all of the things that have been said so far, and what's going to be said behind me, I'm sure. I just also want to make the point that the congregate meal program has enormous value as well because part of the purpose of congregate meals is to allow people who are widowed and isolated to have a place to go every day. And the socialization, and the chance to look forward to seeing friends helps people stay healthy and independent, and that's a critical need. And so, we strongly support this increase, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Jones: Karen Jones, Long Term Care Ombudsman Services of San Luis Obispo County and a member excuse me, of Cal CoA, and we support this.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Derrell Kelch: Yes, Derrell Kelch, with the California Association of Area Agency. The funding for this program over the years, has been dismal. There was no increase in nutrition funding on the part of the state for a number of years. And then if you remember back, Congress a few years ago did sequestration, remember that great word. I never even knew what it meant until it happened. But in California was cut several million dollars in nutrition. Fortunately, Speaker Bustamante came forward and did some backfilling. The next year the Speaker did some backfilling. It was nothing in the budget, and then while we finally, after request here in front of this Committee for a few years, finally, Governor Brown allowed for 2 million last year. But one time only. Every year, we're forced to come back and beg for additional money for this program. Meanwhile, our cost of our meals are going up, meanwhile, we get greater numbers on our waiting list. Local programs are struggling to fundraise to help support this program and so we really need this funding very bad, thank you.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 458, 'end': 468, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 694, 'end': 699, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
David Morikawa: Hi, I'm David Morikawa, the director for the Meals on Wheels here in Sacramento and Placer counties, as well as the chair of the Senior Nutrition Network of providers here in the State of California. I just wanted to endorse and support this proposal. I've been with Meals On Wheels since we started here in Sacramento in 2010 and there has been more years in decreased funding than there has been in increased funding, just to kind of give you an idea. We serve over 2,000 meals a day, and we haven't missed a route. We have a dedicated group of volunteers that support our efforts and it's because of them that we're able to continue to serve a growing number of seniors. And we're actually seeing more and more homeless coming to our congregate meal sites because that's the only location they can get a meal, a nutritious meal for them to survive on. So we strongly support this request.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kurt Child: child, disability rights california, we also support the augmentation, thank you.
[]
Kelly Block: kelly from the california senior legislature and the myrna county commission on aging and i want to share with you something i received from joe kennedy the third. mercy, it's about how we care for the least among us, not those we treat, the powerful. it calls on us to feed the hungry, clothe the naked, and comfort the sick, it is kindness, it is grace. there is no mercy in a system that makes healthcare a luxury. and he goes on about this, but he's talking about we have to give people basic needs, who can't do it themselves, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 141, 'end': 152, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lauren Rolfe: rolfe, california senior legislature, and i support this augmentation to the funds. it's a very good program, it reaches a lot of people, and remember, it uses a lot of volunteers so you're maximizing the dollars, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Pointer: Hello, John Pointer, California Senior Legislature. Nutrition is a cornerstone of successful aging. As someone with firsthand experience as a volunteer at the city level, I see the importance of the congregant meal program, as well as Meals on Wheels. I strongly support this augmentation, thank you.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dean Fujimoto: Good afternoon again. I'm Dean Fujimoto, Deputy Director with California Department of Aging. Let me first by start by giving a brief background of MSSP. Currently, we have 30 MSSP sites statewide that provide social and healthcare management to frail elderly individuals. On average, the average MSSP individual is about 85-years old. And these individuals are all certified for placement in nursing facilities, but wish to remain in the community. Services provided with MSSP funds include, but are not limited to, care management, adult social daycare, housing assistance, personal care services, respite, transportation, etc. Through an interagency agreement that our department has with the Department of Health Care Services, CDA oversees the operations of the MSSP program and contracts with local entities that directly provide MSSP services to up to 12,000 individuals annually. As it pertains to the community care initiative the budget proposal extends core elements of the CCI program for two additional years such as Cal Mediconnect, mandatory enrollment of dual eligible and integrating long term services and supports except for IHSS into managed care. With this in mind MSSP sites in the Cal Mediconnect counties will continue to contract with managed care and CDA and DHCS will work on the state transition plan to ensure a smooth transition of MSSP into managed care. This transition would occur no sooner than January of 2020.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Denise Likar: hi, good afternoon. my name is denise and i am here, no worries, i am here representing the mssp site association. i am also a site director for scan health plan mssp site los angeles county. we are an original contractor. this is the 40th anniversary of the original mssp contract 1977/78, the first demonstration began and so we have being doing this service ourselves, boots on the ground in southern los angeles county for 40 years. echoing some of the description of the program, i do want to highlight a few major components of our program. we're the only program that does what we do. we address bio, psycho, social needs of the individual. these are very frail, very poor population. a lot of them, monolingual in a language other than english living alone and very isolated. our nurse and social work team go out into the home, spend all of their time in the field, boots on the ground. they see it first hand and deliver, and help them coordinate all of their care and their needs. with the coordinated care initiative coming on board a few years ago, this was a major change to our healthcare system in california, and us being included in it as a major part and major, needed service for this, it was also recognized at the time, that health plans didn't do what we do. so, that part of this transitioning would be a learning process. for the health plans as well to understand what it really takes to take care of this frail and very fragile population. not all seniors need our service. this is that upper about 20% of the population that are one step away from something bad. whether it's institutionalization or being lost through the cracks and dying alone. or homelessness even we see that as well. we have been part of the fabric it has not been a smooth launch into cci. we've been working very diligently with department healthcare services and the california department of aging in implementing this for our population and there's been bumps but we've kept at it. the bigger piece of it are some of the pieces of transition, so this is our second delay and the delay is timely and needed because the program is not ready to transition. what we've been doing over the last few years is heavily working on implementation and understandable that the coordinated care ownership is much bigger than just our program. so there have been a lot of other launch pieces that have had to be addressed and had to be worked on. so with this delay, we come to you with a request that this is a good time to strengthen the transition planning process. because even over the last few years, we haven't had a lot of stops and starts and we do not have a transition planned today. we have a lot of questions unanswered that go back to 2015 to a convening with the department of healthcare services, the health plans, and cda, that really could help uplift our transition planning and we've also asked for assistance from you today in order to keep our progress moving forward by helping support maintaining communications and the planning. the department has stated that they would be discontinuing the planning until early 2018. we don't think that's wise because of the complexities of this program. and because of what it takes to serve this population, we would like that to continue. we would like additional reporting language added in order to help open up the transparency to this critical benefit transition. having you included in it, ensuring that stakeholders are included in it, and that there is clear communication amongst all and agreement on what the path is forward. we also are looking for support in enhancing the trailer bill language. we have a moment here where we can add, to make sure that a service such as mssp, that there are standards of care in place in order to use as the basis of the plan for transition. a good transition plan in a business model would have, here are the things that you're going to make sure you're going to achieve and make sure that you maintain when you move forward in the future. statute has stated that the efficacy of mssp should carry forward. and so to do that, principles and standards need to be developed. and the sight association back in 2012, when this all started, actually drafted some standards. and we're happy to work with the department and cda on those, as well as have those support the trailer bill language as well. so that there is a nice platform that everybody knows of what we're going to use as the guide to plan and make sure this fragile and frail population doesn't fall through the cracks. we can't get this wrong, we can't get this wrong. there's lives at stake here, and there are people that are depending on us. they've already had a hard time navigating the healthcare system. they've relied on people like our workers in the community to help to be there for them, to translate, to help them through that. we owe it to them to get it right. and we want to partner and work on that and continue that process forward. and so we ask for your support today.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gary Passmore: Mr Chair and members, Gary Passmore with the Congress of California Seniors. I would have to try to argue, I guess, I hope I wouldn't have to convince you that the MSSP program is one of the most important and under recognized programs available within the ageing community. MSSP is a weird kind of Soviet era sounding abbreviation, I've never gotten it, and most people couldn't tell you what it's about. But it is a program that's aimed to a small number, but it is aimed at the highest acuity individuals that fall within the ageing community. I think it goes without saying that some people at 75 or 80 seem to function pretty well, either on their own or in a family or a context of friends. And there are others who don't, they have all the same characteristics of age and whether they're involved in relationships and so on. But they simply are very high acuity people, who have all sorts of both health conditions and long term service needs. And this program is the one program in the state that focuses on, identifies what those needs are, focuses on how to connect people to services that are available. And Ms. Liker is absolutely correct. This program probably pays for itself many times over by keeping those clients out of the nursing home, it's much, much more expensive. So it's a program that we strongly support. And I think we have been very frustrated by the state's inability to figure out what to do with MSSP and this new coordinated care initiative without realizing that they are designed to coordinate care. And it is at the very heart of what the initiative is supposed to be about. And they've simply pushed to the side. So we urge you support the notion that it should be extended. And during that extension, we need to work very hard to recognize the principal role that they play and how important that role is. Thanks.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1123, 'end': 1128, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Janet Heath: Good afternoon, again, Janet Heath, MSSP Site Association. This model, which has been around 34, 35 years, is remarkable. And I think there are a few things that weren't mentioned that I did want to mention about the program that we bring into the CCI. And that is that we provide, the MSSP case managers are providing the eyes and ears for the health community. So they're in contact with the doctors and nurses and following patients when the patient has gone back home. This is the resource of last resort for these seniors. Often, they come to us as there's no other place for them to receive services, and people have thrown up their hands and given up. I can't tell you how many calls we've gotten from hospitals saying, we gotta get them out of the hospital, but we don't know what to do with them. These are the poorest community dwelling individuals you will see in this community, they are making approximately $890 a month. And as you heard SSI discussions today, SSI SSP, it's not enough. They are heavily reliant on overwhelmed family members as caregivers, and often, they are living alone at danger to themselves. This model lowers the cost of health care, and these are patients that have chronic multiple conditions and function impairments. These studies have shown that these patients are at the highest risk and highest cost to the health care system. We help patients identify and advocate for critically needed services in a fragmented and shrinking world. We maintain a network of providers through contracts with hundreds of small businesses throughout the state. So, I'm representing the 38 sides today, who have all agreed that this is an important proposal, and we hope that you will support it, thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laurel Mildred: mildred on behalf of the california collaborative for long-term services in support. we're in strong support of the association's proposals to strengthen the transition by the specific and practical means that they have suggested. this program is almost the jewel in the crown of community based care. the very vulnerable individuals i referenced before, what do they need? who do you call? you call an mssp program. they are the people that can respond to those high levels of needs. it's essential that this program have a successful transition into california's new system of long term services in support.
[]
Nancy Volpert: nancy joe volpert, jewish family service of los angeles again. we are also an original provider and have been doing this for nearly 40 years. we were a pilot site, and we still, 40 years later, consider it in part of our dna to help our seniors. and this group, i mean, these are old, poor, and sick, so they suffer from diseases of age. and diseases of poverty. and this is really one of those but for programs. these are people who have already been nursing home certified. so, but for this program, they will be in nursing homes if there are nursing home beds. and right, that's a whole separate problem. but we know this works. we've had to prove to the federal government for 40 years, this is a cms waiver. we had to document and prove every five years for waiver renewal. we keep people safe at home in the communities that know them and that they love. and we do it at a way that improves quality of life and saves costs. and we know that. and yet, as denise mentioned, there was a meeting in october 2015. that's 18 months ago. with the department of health care services and health plans, where we went through a long discussion. here are our questions, here are our challenges. health plans raise their concerns. we raised ours. health care services was there. there was going to be this report that came out of it. here are the questions and let us answer these to help with the transition and integration. it's march 2017. in theory, our transition should have happened three months ago. they still haven't answered those questions. we are turning to you at the legislature to say, help us. we need to, these are frail seniors, many have cognitive impairments. they can't protect themselves, always. and it is our obligation to do so. and so we are turning to you to help us do that for them. to pay back what we owe them as a society. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 960, 'end': 966, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rob White: Rob White, citizen of West Sacramento, citizen of America, of course. And this proves how great our country is. That we can have this hearing and have everyone come and be heard and that's what's so important. There are many people on my Meals on Wheels route in West Sacramento. I've been doing for three years. And also, people who I associate with that do Meals on Wheels, and we see that people are afraid to reach out for services. They're afraid to be denied and turned down. And it's really kind of sad. That sometimes I don't know exactly where to tell them to get help. And I think that we should take a page from a gentleman who lived in 400 BC by the name of Diogenes. He lived in 400 BC and he said that, I am near to finish, it is exactly the time for me to speed up. Not slow down. Because people asked Diogenes to slow down. To slow his role in the community. And this man was basically a homeless man who lived on the charity of others. Now, this great nation should be more charitable than the people who were in Greece in 400 BC.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 670, 'end': 678, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 817, 'end': 825, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Carol Sewell: Carol Sewell from the California Commission on Aging in support of the MSSP Site Association's proposal to extend their time so that they can transition effectively into the Coordinated Care Initiative, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Darrel Couch: yes, darrel with the california association of area agencies on aging. we are definitely in support of this proposal.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Clay Camp: Clay Camp, Triple A of Santa Cruz and Santa Benito County, speaking in support of the program and of the proposal and just testifying to the effectiveness of the program. One thing I would encourage in the discussion of its future is to consider expanding the program into the 12 counties that currently do not have MSSP. In that we know it works, let's have it working in all 58 counties in the state, rather than just 46.
[]
John Quinner: John Quinner, California Senior Legislature. I'm going to keep it brief. We support this legislative proposal. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joe Rodriguez: Good afternoon again, Joe Rodriguez, California State Long Term Care Ombudsman. Authority for the Office of the State Long Term Care Ombudsman is found in the federal Older Americans Act, as well as our state's Older Californians Act. The office develops policy and provides oversight to 35 local long term care on ombudsman programs statewide. As independent advocates for residents of long term care facilities, ombudsman representatives promote residence rights and assure those rights are protected in federal and state law. As the California State Ombudsman, I analyze, comment on, and monitor the development and implementation of local laws, state laws, federal laws and regulations, and other governmental policies and actions that pertain to the health, safety, welfare, and rights of residence of long-term care facilities. I also recommend changes in such laws, regulations, policies, and actions as I determine to be appropriate. Approximately 740 certified ombudsmen volunteers and 150 part-time and full-time paid staff in local programs identify, investigate and resolve complaints and concerns on behalf of about 300,000 residents in about 1,250 skilled nursing facilities and about 7,500 residential care facilities for the elderly, assisted living, board and care type homes. Last year local Ombudsman programs investigated 41,788 complaints that affected the health, safety, welfare and rights of these residents. In fiscal year 2015 and 2016, 1.4 million in addition funds were allocated to provide increased support for the long-term care ombudsman program. This was part of a partial restoration that the Legislature made to restore funds that we lost in 2008. In 2008, we lost 3.8 million in general fund dollars. That was about half of the money we had in local assistance contracts. With that illumination of general fund dollars, we lost 76 of our 183 paid stuff, and that's have a riffle effect on the number of volunteers who work in the program. When I started as California State Ombudsman in 2002 we had close to 1,300 volunteers, we're now down to about 740. So the loss of staff has affected our ability to recruit, retain and keep volunteers. In addition to the 1.4 million in additional ongoing baseline funds for the program we've also received 1 million in one time only funds in 15-16 and 16-17 from the state health facility citation penalties account. With that additional one time only, we're at about the level of funding that we were in 2008 when we lost General Fund. So if that funding goes away at the end of this fiscal year, we'll be about a million below where we are now. This additional funding that we received has directly led to an increase in long term care ombudsman visit facilities to provide assistance to residents. Comparing fiscal year 15-16 to 14-15, we saw a 9% increase in the number of information and consultation sessions with individuals. During these sessions, ombudsman representatives provide information about long-term care and answer questions about residents' rights and other issues that residents, family members and friends may be concerned about. Those opportunities often empower residents, families, and friends to resolve issues on their own with the facility. We've seen an increase of 24% in the number of consultations to facilities. These consultations can resolve issues even before they become complaints. We've seen an 18% increase in the number of residential care facilities that were able to visit each quarter of the year, not in response to a complaint. Just to go in check on the condition of residents looks at what's going on, the facility, is there staff, is there food, is there supplies. Introduce ourselves to new residents and explain how our programs works and if they have problems, build relationship of trust with them so they know they can confide in us. We've seen a 10% increase also in the number of skilled nursing facilities that we're able to visit on a quarterly basis. We've seen a 3% increase in the number of complaints investigated by ombudsmen representatives in one year. And at 13% increase in the number of paid staff working in the program, boots on the ground, we can go into these facilities on a regular basis to resolve issues and problems for residents. We're fortunate in that we have the ability to get out there if we have the resources to fund the positions. We often prevent Complaints from going to the more costly regulatory systems to be investigated by the licensing agencies. We're able to keep those complaints, many of those complaints, out of public health and out of community care licensing and social services. You also asked, what we did with this one time only funding that we received. In fiscal year 1617, the most common use of one-time-only funding, was for temporary increasing staffing hours and to our limited term positions that we know will expire at the end of the fiscal year. The funding also supported volunteer coordinators, and paid ombudsman representatives. Local Ombudsman programs also uses funding for expenditures that are one time in nature, long delayed equipment purchases, reimbursement to volunteer mileage, volunteer recognition activities and infrastructure improvements such as increased Internet bandwidth for local ombudsmen program offices. And I welcome any questions you have Doctor, community members, about our program.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joseph Grace: joseph nancy grace, department of finance, just to add on to that, any discussions we wish to be included on any of them moving forward on any potential budget bill language [unknown].
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gary Passmore: Gary Passmore with the Congress of California Seniors. You may have noticed I've stood up here a number of times this afternoon in support of a number of the programs that you folks have gone through. I can promise you that this is our highest priority. The ombudsman program in California in my view of the world, makes it possible for us to have people in nursing homes. And they fundamentally do something different when they go into a nursing home than what state employees of the Department of Public Health do. The inspectors and surveyors from the State Agency of Public Health will go look at records. They will look at time sheets. They will see if all of the rules and regs that are written and in place have been complied with. Generally speaking I think it's fair to say the Ombudsman do something totally different and extraordinarily valuable. They will stop and talk to the patients, to the people who are there. They'll develop a relationship. They'll eke out of those people how their lives are in this facility, are their needs being met. And so it's just a fundamentally different approach to the task, both valid. But my view, the view of my organization, is that the Ombudsman Program is essential for us to be reassured that the patients who fill these nursing homes are being satisfied. That they are not only showing up on a time sheet or a meal schedule. But they're actually having needs met. They're feeling okay. They like the people that are taking care of them. And that's so critical to someone who really has no choice, other than to be in a nursing home. I think there are a lot of discussion that we ought to have. And I've heard some openings, even this afternoon, that we ought to look at. But I think we need to do everything we can to make sure that every Ombudsman organization around the state has maximum flexibility in using the dollars that we make available, so that they can serve their population. From all of the ombudsmen that I've talked to, and I've talked to a lot of them, there has been real frustration that there's this million or more than $1 million sitting there every year. But they can't go out and organize to do the work. That we Californians expect them to do. And we need to figure out a way to resolve that because it seems like we're We are, not taking money out of one pot and using it someplace else. What we are doing is tying the hands of some really good people who are wanting very much to improve the lives of the people that are in their facilities. And feel like this bucket of money is sitting over here that they can't use to accomplish that task. So I appreciate your spending the time you have and I want to restate. This is the most important program that an advocacy organization looks at through all the senior funding and all the senior activities. Because this is the one I have seen has a real personal touch to people that improve lives. Thank you. Thank you, sir.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rob White: Rob White again, AARP Capitol Response Team. At AARP we've researched this and we fully approve of that a million being allocated from this citation fund. When we have vulnerable people and situations especially with the administration over their heads. And they have no voice, they need this imbursement there to provide that voice for them outside the facility because they area captive audience. And any of us could end up in one of these programs ourselves one day. So we may not be looking to help others as much as we may be helping ourselves, our family members, our own grandmas and grandpas. I see so many mothers here today that are away from their children. So many fathers that are away from their children in order to make the state better, make it a better place. And when I stated the statement about [INAUDIBLE], I am near to finish, it is exactly the time for me be speeding up. What I mean is that if we take some of the strain and load off of our seniors' minds,they can begin to let their creativity flow again in life. Doctor Marian Diamond, the greatest brain researcher on the planet, said, your brain is plastic, and you can develop new skills at any age. Thank you for your time and devotion.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1047, 'end': 1061, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
David Beverage: My name is David Beverage. I'm a Program Manager for the Long Term Care Ombudsman Program with five counties in rural Northern California, Plumas, Glenn, Tehama, Colusa, and Butte. And I've got about 90 facilities, and I currently have about 25 volunteers. 2008, I had 62 volunteers and four employees. Right now, I have me and a 15 hour week assistant. And we're managing still to have a preventive presence in most the facilities in our program service area. I would like to be able to pay my folks mileage, because some of them drive hundreds of miles between facilities, especially up in the mountains to get the protection that those folks need. That makes a difference to me and I'd also like to have a little more of my budget for recruiting and advertising. And I endorse this as heavily as I can. I've been doing this for a long time and I want to keep doing it for a longer time.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tracy Barber: hi, i'm tracy joseph barber. i'm the program manager for the ombudsman program in lassen, modoc, shasta, siskiyou, and trinity counties. our program covers roughly 23,000 square miles of rural state. with 65 facilities ranging up to about three hours apart when the weather's good and the roads are clear. our allocation of this 1 million amounts to 10% of our program's total federal and state funding. last year, our volunteers drove over 21,000 miles. our program works hard to recruit and retain our well-qualified and dedicated volunteers, but i would lose them. most likely, if i ask them to absorb the cost of travel along with their time. please keep our funding in place, thank you very much.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicole Wordelman: wordelman on behalf of the ventura county board of supervisors in support of ongoing funding for the ombudsman program. and you know, a lot of these people in long-term care facilities don't have family or friends to advocate for them. and the ombudsman at least partially fills that role.
[]
Karen Jones: karen tracy jones with the ombudsman program of san luis obispo county. what i'd really like today is a couple of hours of your time to show you all of our clients. but i can't bring them. i'm a little jealous of people who can bring clients to these places and tell their stories so much better than even we can. but because we all eventually would like to go home today i'm not going to do that to you. i will remind you though, because i think some of you are newer to our program, that of all the agencies who've touched care facilities, who'd any contact in facilities, regulatory or whatever they may be, the ombudsman program is the only one that is there for the residents. the licensing agencies are wonderful, they're incredible partners, we need them. but they're there to make sure the facility is compliant with regulations. and we love that. but at the end of the day, we're only ones who are there for the people. the actual human beings who reside in those facilities who are not always very able to do their own advocacy. and their families are not always able to be advocates either. so anything we can do to protect these funds to make them available to our programs, so that adequate funding to all the programs in the state available would be really amazingly helpful thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kurt Child: thank you. kurt karen child, disability rights, california. the work of the ombudsman is critical for protecting persons with disabilities that are in long term care. and for that reason, we support the staff recommendation.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carol Sewell: carol kurt sewell from the california commission on aging, in strong support of this augmentation on an ongoing basis.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tom Pointer: tom carol pointer, california senior legislature. i'm now speaking now as the chair of the aaa for orange county. and one of the members of my organization, jim levy, has been an ombudsman, and i have first hand knowledge from jim. because he's always promoting the ombudsman programs. so again, as the representative for the county of orange, we strongly support the ombudsman program. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 157, 'end': 165, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 227, 'end': 230, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Callie Freitag: hello, mr. chair. freitag with the county welfare directors association, in support of this proposal. our county aps programs partner with our long term care ombuds at the local level, to make sure that seniors are not suffering from abuse and neglect. we do a lot of prevention work together. their partnership is invaluable. but i think the $1 million proposal might do the trick, thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Will Lightbourne: will tom lightbourne, the director of the california department of social services and i'm joined by pete charvanka our chief deputy responsible for the service side.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 20, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 101, 'end': 115, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Margot Kushel: okay, chair and arambula and other members of the budget subcommittee. thank you so much for inviting me to speak with you today. my name is dr. margot and i'm a professor of medicine at the university of california san francisco. i'm a practicing general internist at zuckerberg san francisco general hospital, which is the public hospital for the city and county of san francisco. and i'm also an nih funded researcher with substantial experience researching homelessness and health. the county welfare director's association asked me to present on the issue of elder homelessness. to help explain the importance of the home safe budget proposal. i come to you today to share what i've learned in my 20 years as a researcher and practicing clinician in a safety net hospital, about the toll of homelessness in older adults, and to speak about the urgent need to prevent homelessness among these vulnerable elders. in my research we've found that half of single adults who are homeless are over 50. our work in oakland has found that among those who are homeless and over 50, 44% had never experienced homelessness prior to the age of 50. many of these individuals, left vulnerable by illness, job loss, or loss of a family member, became a victim of elder abuse. and it was that abuse, physical abuse, financial exploitation, that led directly to their becoming homeless. being victimized either financially or physically. either through overt action or through negligence can precipitate homelessness in these vulnerable elders. and as you know homelessness leads to devastating consequences for health and safety. adult protective service workers interact with vulnerable elders at moments of crisis. these crisis if acted upon presented enormous opportunity to prevent homelessness. i have seen this in my research. one of our study participants whom i call jay moved in with his daughter in oakland when his kidneys began to fail. his daughter then took all of his money and told him he could not stay with her. so he became homeless three days a week he went to dialysis. each night, he slept on the ac transit bus, carrying all of his belongings with him. after months of sleeping on the bus, he obtained temporary shelter in a winter shelter. and after months of that, he gained temporary housing, and transitional housing, but passed away before he could obtain permanent housing. jay's situation unfortunately was not unique. there are well-known and severe consequences to homelessness among older adults. our research found that homeless adults aged 50 and over had health indicators. things like cognitive function and physical function, like the ability to walk across the room, that was worse than adults 20 years older than they, in the general population. homelessness ages people. when older adults become homeless, they have difficulty accessing their primary care providers and their mental health providers and rely instead on expensive emergency care. in the prior six months, one half of the older homeless adults we studied have visited an emergency department. and 11% have been hospitalized for a physical health problem in the prior six months. homelessness is catastrophic to both health and well-being. as a physician, i can say that the single most important step i can take for patients, is to retain their housing. there is simply no medicine in the world, as potent as housing. and no threat to health as significant as homelessness. adult protective services workers come into contact with the older adults at a time when they're highly vulnerable to homelessness. a recent study in chicago demonstrated that relatively modest assistance on the order of about $1,000 at a time of high risk for homelessness had lasting impacts on reductions on homelessness. they found with these small, one time payments, a 76% reduction in homelessness at six months. aps workers are well positioned to intervene to prevent the onset of homelessness and the devastating health consequences that follow. so i urge you to consider the enormous toll of homelessness on older adults, on their health and on societal cost.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 24, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 145, 'end': 151, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1863, 'end': 1866, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2391, 'end': 2394, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Frank Mecca: Thank you Mr. Chair. Frank Mecca, Executive Director of the County Welfare Directors Association. And we're pleased to sponsor this proposal, the home safe proposal, to prevent the severe consequences that you just heard Dr. [UNKNOWN] so soberingly describe. We're requesting a $10 million, one-time appropriation. To establish a three-year demonstration program. A grant demonstration program that we're calling the Home Safe Program. We hope to demonstrate how intervening at the time of crisis can prevent homelessness among elder abuse victims. And save the horrifying effects on those individuals, but also save the state money from downstream costs associated with the homelessness of older folks. The proposal is modeled after the Coworks Housing Assistance Program that was conceived by in the Assembly. And enacted several years ago. And also modeled after the Bringing Families Home program, which was actually first adopted in the Assembly two years ago. It didn't make it into the final budget that year, but it was enacted, last year, into law. And the rapid re-housing proposals aimed at, in those two cases, moms on CalWORKS, or families trying to reunify with foster children. In this case, we've tailored the proposal toward particular population which are victims of elder abuse and neglect. With the program, we envision that the Adult Protective Services Programs in the demonstration could provide short-term rental and utility assistance, heavy cleaning, connections to mental health services, legal assistance for eviction prevention, more intensive case management. So that people can stay safe or be safely rehoused. The program as we've envisioned it would require partnerships with local providers so that we're not reinventing the wheel. And we would envision a dollar for dollar local match. So, for the $10 million that we're requesting in state general funds, there would be a like amount of money in either cash or in-kind match provided by the demonstrating county, or cohortative counties. It could be a regional group. We know from very small demonstrations in a couple of counties that programs like this can be effective. In San Francisco they piloted an intervention strategy that was aimed specifically at hazardous living conditions for people with hoarding disorders. Through a pilot, this particular subset of vulnerable people received those services that I described before. And the county found that those services were effective in helping that small subset of recipients maintain their housing. Dr. Cushelle told us that there's no medicine as powerful as housing. And our APS workers see that every day, and we know it to be true. What we're finding is that we're not able to provide those types of services with the baseline APS program. The baseline APS program never really grew into what the Legislature envisioned when the enacted it in the mid 90s. It provides Shorter term less intensive case management. We provide referrals to services. We don't have a lot of resources to provide the intensive services. And we do a great job in this program. But for people who are experiencing a crisis that's affecting them to the point of homelessness, there simply isn't a program as it's currently constructed that gives us the tools to provide the depth of intervention, the intensity of the case management, and the tangible support. Like short term rental assistance. Or assistance to get utilities turned back on, that we know from research are the things that help unhoused people become housed. To give you a sense, the APS program is about a $126 million program. It investigates 150,000 referrals, provides short term services to 25,000 clients per year. In contrast, the child welfare system serves a population four times larger than APS, and with funding that's about 40 times the APS program. And that's not to say child welfare is adequately or sufficiently funded. But it's to give you a sense of just how sort of bare bones that adult protective services programs are. And it's actually quite remarkable the return on the investment that we get from this very lean program. So with the home safe proposal that we'd urge you to adopt, we want to show the types of interventions that the state and the counties would partner in funding. And partner in developing can help people be house and avoid the horrors to human beings of homelessness. But also to save the state money because remember things like skilled nursing facilities stays or emergency room visits or in-patient stays. The state largely bears the cost of those. There are local cost certainly associated with homelessness. But we share those costs, the states and the counties. The effects of homelessness particularly on elder abused victims, we share. And we think that this proposal demonstrates a partnership for the state and the counties to develop evidence-tested models to be able to prevent the problem. So we appreciate the time that you've given us and urge your support.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2546, 'end': 2554, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tiffany Wrighton: tiffany with the service employees international union in support of the home safe proposal. i would just echo the comments made by my colleague from cwda and urge your support for the proposal as well. thank you.
[]
Joshua Golka: good afternoon, mr. chair and members. golka with the american federation of state, county and municipal employees. on behalf of our county aps workers, we are also in support of the home safe proposal.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicole Wordelman: Nicole Wordelman on behalf of the Orange and San Bernardino County Board of Supervisors also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rosanna Carvacho: Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and members. Rosanna Carvacho here on behalf of the Alameda County Board of Supervisors, also in support of the home safe proposal. Thank you.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Martha Guerrero: Good after Mr Chair members. My name is Martha Guerrero representing the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors and we are in a strong support. Also, as a licensed clinical social worker, I worked with the elderly population. This proposal makes a lot of sense. The have a lot of demands on their life to meet, make appointments for their medical needs and other things. So this proposal would really come a long way for them.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Jones: Karen Jones of the Long-term Care Ombudsman Program in Saint Louis municipal county and also a member of Cal COA State Ombudsman Association. We strongly support anything that helps keep seniors off of the streets and into housing. Briefly, I'll tell you, I've had a lot of struggles lately with our managed Medi-Cal organization in our area, trying to move seniors who were into nursing homes, into homelessness, like truly moving them into the shelters and there's no housing in San Luis Obispo County for low income. So anything that can help them keep out of those homeless shelters and out of the nursing homes when they don't need it would be really welcome. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Derrell Kelch: derrell will kelch with the california association of agencies on aging. we are also in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marty Moto: marty derrell moto, california disability senior community action network and the california person centered advocacy partnership strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Janet Heath: Good afternoon. I'm Janet Heath from the Multipurpose Senior Services Program Site Association. And we're in strong support of this proposal. Thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alicia Smith: Hi, Alicia Smith with San Francisco Central City SRO collaborative. Strong support for this. I'm one of those people over 50 that ended up homeless. I was assistant to Dr. Diana Farmer at UCSF for 10 years. And due to a very, very abusive divorce after 25 years of marriage, I ended up homeless and lost my job, because I didn't have a place to stay. So definitely in strong support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 172, 'end': 184, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Pointer: Mr Chair, John Pointer California Senior Legislature, we strongly support this bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Iliana Ramos: iliana marty ramos, department of finance. during this time we've definitely assessed the budget annually to determine the fiscal priorities at the time. i believe my colleague can speak more to the specifics of that.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pete Chernenko: thank you again mr. chair and members. pete iliana chernenko with the department, i have another powerpoint, the sergeant's making his way around, and another housing fact sheet that goes with it. once again, i'll read them to you as the director said. there are a lot of people served by this program on page two. about 1.3 million people in california receive ssi/ssp benefits. we have 20 different payment categories, depending on living situations, couples and individuals, and various statuses there. page three conveys that we've been roughly at that caseload level for quite some time in california. in the annual budget, we've budget only the state general fund portion, and those are called out in parentheses, as roughly $2.9 billion in the budget year, as proposed by the administration. the total budget though is $10.2 billion, the difference being the federal funds that go for ssi, that don't pass through the state budget. this is one of the program that's vital for californians, and yet there's a very limited state role in this program. we have 0.7 py at the state department. we don't even have a full person equivalent, dedicated to the administration of this program. in that, we pay this federal social security administration to do all of the work on california's behalf on this program. and we pay them $11.68 for every benefit issuance. and that covers, not just the cost of issuing a check, but eligibility determination, over payments, program integrity, everything that you would expect in the operations of a program is funded at the federal, we pay the feds to do on our behalf. and the amount proposing the budget is the last bullet on page 4 at the $189 million, that's the administrative cost that we pay. because we're occasionally asked about this on page five, the federal government offers states two options for the ssp portion of the program. there's a maintenance of effort obligation that says that we cannot reduce the payment standards, or payment levels method, requires us to maintain our individual payments to an individual or a couple at there 1983 levels, and that we can't go below that with the cola that was annualized in this years budget, we're slightly above that level. but in the tough budget times, we took individuals down to that level. the other maintenance of effort of obligation, the federal government offers the states is what's known as the total expenditures method. we don't use that in california. but it would be a way of aggregating all of our state spending on that program, and saying that we can't go below that amount. we're occasionally asked about that, so it's a point of information, and there's no proposal to change what we've done in the program for the last 40 years. page six shows you two looks at our grant levels that, as i said, we have 20 payment standards, we're just giving you the figures here for the most commonly used payment standard. the maximum grant is $895.72 in that payment standard, and is projected to grow to $915.72, those are the maximum grants. average grants based on actual data, for 2015-16 are provided in the table below. we serve aged, blind, and disabled people in here in this program, and you can see the average ssi amount, the average actual ssp amount, the actual 15-16 amounts, and then the estimates for the current year and the budget year. and we just know, the budget proposal from the governor this year does include an ssp state grant cola of 2.76% that took effect in january of this year. that's the information, again, just for individuals. we didn't provide you with an analogous chart for couples, but we'll get to that in just a second. on page seven, we're also asked how those grant levels compare to federal poverty, and that information is provided on page seven. it provides both the poverty standards, and you can see that for individuals were around 90%, and couples at around 111, 112% of the federal poverty guideline. and that's the federal measure that doesn't adjust for things that we're familiar with in california, like higher costs of living and those kinds of things. another piece of information that we're always asked about, is the cola history and the grant levels, and that's provided on page eight for individuals and page nine for couples. we broke in in these tables, the ssi piece from the ssp piece, and provided a total. and we show you at the federal level, and the state grant level, what happened on the colas in those years. and it goes back a little bit more than a decade on both tables. page 10, i don't think i'm going to cover today, but it's also provided for the committee's information. we're often asked about ssi/ssp and its relationship to the federal snap program, known as calfresh in california, or colloquially known as food stamps. if you are receiving ssi/ssp, you don't receive food stamps in california. we're the last state in the country, and there's some description of that on page 10 for the committee's information. again, tried to be brief and happy to answer any questions. thank you very much.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 60, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Herald: Thank you Mr. Chair. Mike Herald, with the Western Center on Law and Poverty. Thank you for allowing us to testify on this important issue today. I have a witness here today, that I wanted to save the bulk of my time with, but I'd like to make just a couple of opening remarks on both SSI, and I would assume that you'd like to hear a little bit about HNAP at the same time. So, in addition to the remarks that were made by Mr. Cernenko, all of which I think were factual and accurate, but one thing that I would point out for the Committee, is that beginning in 2009 we reduced the SSI grant for single individuals by $77 a month. We took it from 233 a month to $156 a month, the federal minimum, as Mr. Cernenko noted.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 428, 'end': 436, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 705, 'end': 713, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Desiree Martinez: Hello, hi, I'm Desiree Martinez. I just wanted to say really quick, my story goes, is that I was in a domestic violence abuse, and I had emergency surgery which left me disabled. In the State of Texas, we're given food stamps. I was able to go into a housing, affordable housing, and stuff like that. I moved to California, I was given SSI. SSI doesn't allow me to have any food stamps here in the State of California, so therefore, I don't have enough funding for anything really. For housing over there, I've been on the waiting plan over there for Section Eight for about six years now, and I went to them before I became homeless. So I became homeless while on SSI and of course, disability too. During that time, I actually found I was out there on the streets, Fresno, for a year and a half. I had found a room for rent which I still can't afford. I can only afford my room for rent. I still can't afford food. I can't afford transportation. I can't even afford a bus pass. I can't afford any of that. And bus passes usually runs people like me $34, I still can't afford that. So I'm very hindered from a lot of things, and it's due to me being on this program. While out there in Fresno, I have come across a lot of people out there. I started going out advocating, raising awareness in my county, because there's so many people that are homeless. Being out there for almost every single day for 365 days straight, almost on April 9th, I have come across several, several people out there on disability and SSI that are homeless, and there's no reason that I feel that they should be homeless at all. A lot of people are getting these programs, like Section Eight and stuff, and they're not on disability, they're not on SSI, they're not veterans, and we need to start protecting them. Because I'm finding a lot of people, hundreds of people on the streets of Fresno, that are on these programs. And I don't see any case managers, any case workers out there following up. I don't see anybody taking care of them. I try to take care of them as much as possible, but I'm one person in that whole county. So, we need help. I don't know what else to say.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anthony Faber: hello, i'm anthony pete faber. and i, after paying my rent, i have about $30 left, okay? and essentially, i now have, i mean, it's one of those things where, before all these cuts happened, i was actually getting $936 a month. which is 40 some odd dollars more than i'm getting now at whatever, eight years later. i mean, anything you can do to raise ssi would help. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Charles Minster: thank you, my name is charles anthony minster. i'm a member of senior disability action of san francisco and a member of the national active and retired federal employees. i hear the word priorities as it comes to the state budget, and according to governor brown that's $60 billion for the bullet train. it's 35 billion for sending water down to los angeles county, while we got people dying on the streets. in my neighborhood in san francisco, there were three people living in the vestibule of the post office for nine months until they came by and they put a metal gate across there so they can't live there anymore. that didn't help the guy who was living behind there at a church, because he died. and all these people were seniors. so that's the kind of situation we face in san francisco with the cuts in these funds. and it's happening more and more. there's more homeless people in san francisco and around this state because there's been a reduction in the farm community, because of the drought they faced. so there's been in the last 10 years, the homeless population in the state has probably increased by a 100%. so they need a lot more money than what was taken away to cut back on this homeless situation. so i stand here in support of an increase in funds for the people that are disabled and in need of this money. thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 258, 'end': 263, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Fred Main: Mr Chairman, Members of the Committee, Fred Maine on behalf of CalPACE, the program for the all inclusive care for the elderly. We support the proposal to restore the SSI/SSP cuts. To be eligible to participate in PACE, you have to be able to live safely in the community and that means having housing and a way to provide meals. And the SSI/SSP grants are a key part of that. So we strongly support the restoration.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 49, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Clay Kempf: clay charles kempf, executive director of the area agency on aging of santa cruz and san benito counties, and california association of area agencies on aging legislative co-chair, speaking in support of the proposal. i just would echo everything we've heard already and add that the fastest growing age group of the homeless population is 60 plus. so aging communities really see a huge need in this arena and any income supplement that the most vulnerable seniors can get is just critical to their well-being.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tessa Navarez: Thank you Mr. Chair and Members of the Committee. My name is Tessa Navarez on behalf of the ACLU. We support efforts in this year's budget to raise SSI and SSP grants to at least the federal poverty level and to restore annual cost of living adjustments. Thank you.
[{'start': 61, 'end': 74, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marty Moto: marty, california disability community action network and also the california person centered advocacy partnership. first of all, support the sub-committee staff recommendation to reject the reduction to the housing disability advocacy program. and also strongly support restore the reductions to ssi/ssp. my sister when she was alive depended on ssi/ssp, as so many people with development disabilities. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bruce Alison: Bruce Alison, Senior in Disability Action, Cara. I am presently on SSI, after I finish paying my rent in San Francisco, I got $200 to live on. I use that to pay pink stuff and elephants and the rest my utility and food. I did something stupid because I got tired of waiting for low income medical care. I cut my own, did my own surgery because it would cost me $300 for, to medical costs. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 43, 'end': 47, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Lions: michael, senior disability action. i support, strongly support any efforts to make ssi up to poverty level. i can't begin to say how ashamed i am to have to beg to bring people up to poverty level. what kind of system is this that's willing to let people's lives just rot away, after they've spent their whole lives working to make this system rich?
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carly Finkle: Carly Finkle from the Food Bank of Contra Costa and Solano in support of increasing SSI benefits to 100% of the federal poverty line, and restoring the annual cost of living adjustment. The Food Bank is very concerned by the number SSR recipients that we serve who have no other source of food besides our distributions. And also very concerned that the number of SSR recipients who report rationing out their food, so that they can eat a single meal each day. So we appreciate everything that you can do to support them.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lisa Lopez: hello, i'm lopez from contra costa bay point, i'm on ssi and ssp. i can't get food stamps, i can't pay for my medication, and i barely really can't survive. i pay my rent, which is $750, which has now been bumped up to $800 for a studio apartment in bay point, california. i don't have enough money to pay my bills. i don't have money to go to the doctors when i need to, i'm diabetic. and i rely on the food stamp only. the food banks only, because i can't get any other help. so i have to rely on them every month, all month. so all we're asking is just to be brought up to a humane level to be able to survive, and be able to walk out, and to be able to walk to a store. and if you want to buy a bottle of water you can. i can't even afford my prescriptions, and they're $6.00 a month. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Emily Wilson: Hi, my name's Emily Wilson. I'm from Alameda County, and I'm here with Californians for SSI. So, as the cost of living continues to sky rocket in California, people receiving SSI are still reeling from years of cuts. We must support a meaningful increase, or rather, restoration of SSI. We should not be complacent with seniors and people living with disabilities living in poverty. We are talking about hard working people, veterans, people that worked their whole lives for this country. One SSI recipient told me she had to stop taking some of her prescriptions because she could no longer afford them. She said that some of her medications make her ill and sick, and she has a hard time eating. So she would like to take Ensure protein drinks, but she cannot afford any of those. So make a difference in real people's lives, and please support the restoration of SSI and SSP, and of course, the cost of living adjustment. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Becky Gershon: hi, my name is becky clay gershon. i work for the san francisco and marin food bank. we serve about 30,000 families a week through our various food programs. and as you've heard throughout this meeting, folks on ssi can't get food stamps. and so that means that the non-profit food safety net programs are really the only option for folks who are looking for such a simple thing as food to eat to support themselves. so we strongly support any effort to increase the amount of funding and grant levels given to these folks, so that they can lead really healthy, nourished lives, thanks.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Judith Moore: I'm Judith Moore, and I'm representing Interfaith Council of Contra Costa County, and the Multifaith Action Coalition Food Security. In support of AB796, to increase SSI. I also volunteer for the Food Bank in Cal Fresh. Cal Fresh, you qualify if you make the maximum of $1,945. SSI get between 800 and 900, and cannot get Cal Fresh.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Felicia Smith: felicia becky smith, san francisco sro collaborative i'm on ssdi, and when my rent is paid and my student loan is paid, i have $38 to last for the month. which means that every night, i go out in the middle of the night and pick up cans and bottles just to make ends meet. i'm 55 years old, i shouldn't have to do that. i've worked since i was 14 years old. we need help here. we're not making it. i get food stamps because it's ssdi. i get $6 a month on my food stamps. i'm not making it. we need you guys' help here, okay?
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ledna Cromp: hi, i am ledna felicia cromp, and i'll let you know i'm on ssi. and we're not getting our whole benefits, there's not enough money. i'm saving cans and bottles just to eat till the last month before the money's over with. all i'm saying is that we need more money.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrew Shane: Andrew Shane with the California Association of Food Banks representing all the food banks, including the Community Food Bank in Fresno. You've already heard more than I can say, but obviously, we're in strong support of restoring the grants and the cost of living adjustment. But also urge you to follow the Senate action to reject the proposal on the Housing Disability Action Program. What sort of investment is there to have matching state and county resources based on proven models that retain more than 90 odd percent of the dollars to continue to help folks get on the program, as we obviously are working to restoring those grants. It's one of the best investments we can make. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nancy Volpert: Good afternoon, Nancy Volpert with Jewish Family Service of Los Angeles. We serve about 100,000 people a year in Los Angeles County, 30,000 of whom are seniors, 10,000 who go through our food pantries every month. I will do a strong me too to our colleagues in support of increases and rejecting the governor's proposal. Thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tiffany Wayne: tiffany ledna wayne with the service employees international union in support of the proposal to increase the ssi/ssp. and would encourage your support as well, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michele Stillwell-Parvensky: michele tiffany stillwell-parvensky, children's defense fund-california, here in support of efforts to increase the ssi/ssp grant levels. over 100,000 children with disabilities or recipients as well as we know that children are part of families and have parents and grandparents who are receiving these benefits. and we need to make sure that they aren't living in poverty, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lori Knove: Lori Knove I'm with the California Senior Legislature and I also chair the local Solano county Senior coalition. Seniors are some of the primary recipients of SSI, and they're hurting, they're really hurting. So we urge you to reject the governor's proposal and to increase the SSI, SSP.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mel Beetle: My name is Mel Beetle, I am President of In Home Support Services Public Authority governing body in San Francisco. I'm also a consumer peer mentor, which I train people on how to get support. And I'm also the tenant organizer at the only senior SRO in San Francisco. I am tired of seeing my fellow tenants having to make a choice between eating, paying their medical bills or paying their rent. Don't make them continue to have that choice. SSI must be increased. And we must get back what we lost, eight or more years ago, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Harim Jacobs: my name is harim michele jacobs. and i'm homeless. and i became homeless when i tore my right lateral meniscus in my leg, right here, when i was at work, due to the fact workman's comp totally disabilitied me. now i'm homeless. but there is an organization out there, st. mary's, that's been helping me and i appreciate that. and which has been helping a lot of people that's homeless. i wish you guys could do to something to right this, because it's getting worse and worser. the people are fighting it's madness out there, please help us. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Martha Guerrero: Good afternoon Mr. Chairman and members. Martha Guerrero representing the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors. And we thank the Committee staff's recommendation. We support the rejection of the administration's cut to the Housing Disability and Advocacy Program. The reason is this program is modeled after what we've implemented in Los Angeles County and found over a 95% rate of approvals. These individuals are homeless. We have a homeless crisis in Los Angeles County and they do need the SSI. With that history we have in Los Angeles, we are positive that they'll be able to go through that thick stack of an SSI application while they're stable, thank you.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maureen Surhall: hello, my name is maureen harim surhall and i'm a volunteer with the alameda county community food bank and a voter. and like all of you, like all of you, i have enough to eat, which is something that all residents, citizens of california have a right to have as well. i fully support and vote for the increases to ssi and ssp, thank you. thank you, mam.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 350, 'end': 353, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Retentia Colby: Hello, I'm Retentia Colby. I'm an advocate of Hope and Justice at St. Mary's, and I'm on SSI. And I came here to see If I just could get a little more help. I'm 86 years old, and I know how to budget, I know how to cook, I know how to do everything. But this year, when I opened my check, and I had a raise of $1, and then I opened my envelope for my utilities, it was $104. And I think what am I going to do? Pay the utilities, or pay my food, or what? If it wasn't for this food bank, I really won't have much to go on, because I'm really tight. Everything is going up, and my check is still the same thing. Yeah, I thank you very much for listening to me.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Curtis Henry: Hello, how are you? My name is Curtis Henry. All cuts for SSIP and SSI should be rejected. I would consider it to be a crime against humanity if any further cuts are made on these particular programs. It is unconscionable, thank you very much.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Theresa Irving: Hi, my name is Theresa Irving. I'm a homeless senior at West Open at St. Mary's Center, and I'm here to support this.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Keith Davidson: my name is keith maureen davidson. i'm in support of the increase in ssi, ssp bill. i think it would make a considerable difference for us, i really do. i'm a senior citizen at st. mary's and it's tough, it's just tough. i mean, i think it'd make a difference, please consider that. help us.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jerome Macintosh: how you doing? my name is jerome and i'm 60 years old. and man, when i hit 60 i was so happy. i'm a senior citizen, you know? then after i hit 60, then economics, i wound up being homeless. and now i'm on ga. and i used to think that social security would really help me, until i came here today. and it don't seem like it's going to help me. so i'm hoping that you do give a raise for social security, thank you. thank you, sir.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Beverly Westbrooke: good evening, my name is westbrooke, i stand ...across from st. mary's. my rent is $661, and that comes out of 891.72. and i have my pg&e to pay, and by the time i do that, if it wasn't for saint mary's or the food bank, i'd probably starve to death. then i have not enough money to pay for my medicine. so i'm here to support the system. so i'm asking you to open up your hearts and support the budgets with us. thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lenard Jones: How you doing? My name's Lenard Jones from Memphis Tennessee. I came up here on a job, lost my job. Got put out, on GA, homeless. Could you all please pass the bill? Thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Miles Margrave: My name is Miles Margrave, and I intern at St. Mary's center and I'm here to speak in support of restoring SSI. Because, these are my friends and your neighbors, and we of all demographics, can appreciate what you're having to do with budgeting and deciding where you're going to put your relatively limited funds. But when you budget and prioritize, you always have to prioritize life. Whatever else we have to cut, or adjust, or move, in order to make room for this, California is going to survive, and thrive, and be wonderful. There are so many of my friends and your neighbors who will not, if we do not fix this, thank you. Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Zack Hollander: hi there, thank you very much for having this hearing. i'm zack keith hollander, on behalf of the st. anthony's foundation in san francisco, in ardent support of increases to the ssi and ssp funding. and also, simply as an advocate, to the thousands of faces we see on a daily basis in the dining room. as a dining room that is dependent on these many food banks for all of our provisions, and as a dining room that is averaging about 2,500 meals in a span of three hours, the need is incredibly great. and it is appalling to see the percentage of those who come in who are on ssi, and we are their sole provider of any sort of provision and produce. thank you very much.
[{'start': 59, 'end': 79, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Gonzales: Rebecca Gonzales, National Association of Social Workers, California Chapter. We support the increase to SSI SSP, the restoration of the COLA, and we also want you to reject the cut to the H-STEP program. I think you can see the need, all these people travelled here today from various parts of the state. And as social workers, see this need every day, also. So we please ask for your support of our proposals. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
William Collins: good afternoon, i'm william zack collins with st. mary's hope and justice. i worked all my life, and i finally joined the hope and justice. i just don't know what is justice. and sometimes you look in the crowd, i see everybody that's going to age along with us. and hope you would remember where you sat to help open justice, because that's our country. thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Yolanda Williams: Good afternoon, my name's Yolanda Williams. And I'm bringing the waterworks, because then you hear the stories of all the people that's suffering out here, and you guys don't want to give us the money for it. We are struggling. All these people here that are crippled, can't walk, don't have food. I have a church where we serve food. It's not my church, but I serve food there. And we have the people that come through, those seniors that come through, that don't have anything to eat, don't have anyone to take care of them. I was laying on a couch for 30 days, I couldn't walk, I couldn't get up, I couldn't eat, and I had no one to help me. I'm at St. Mary's right now. And I'm begging you guys to please pass the bill so we can have some money. So we can live civilized, like people. Thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Chavez: My name is Richard Chavez. And I represent Central City SRO Collaborative. And I'm also a senior citizen. So please, everybody's had their sad stories here. I have one too, but I'm not going to mention it. All I want you to do is remember the baby boomers. because we need help. Thank you sir.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Curt Child: Curt Child, Disability Rights California. We strongly support the SSI coalition's efforts to get the SSI-SSP grant levels to the federal poverty level. And ultimately to ensure that we get back once again, an effort for those levels to keep pace with inflation. We also urge the adoption of the staff's recommendation on the HDAP program. I can say from over 25 years looking at those application assistance programs, they've been immensely successful for getting individuals onto SSI and literally off the streets. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Loretta Mahone: yes, my name is loretta william mahone. worked all my life. i work, just like you all do, come to work too. so, what gives you all the right to take my money and want to issue out my money and want to take it. just like i want to get paid, just like you all do, thank you and have a nice day. thank you again.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jenny Castillo: Thank you, legislators, I'm Jenny Castillo, Hope and Justice Coordinator for St. Mary's Center. I was very privileged to be able to accompany my seniors to the state capitol today. There's only two points I want to make. $10 for someone who is living off of $500 or $800 is like $200 to some of us. Can you imagine what $80 would be if we were to restore this? The other thing that I would like to mention that is, when we help each other we all are improved, our community improves. And so I just really want to urge you to do whatever you can over and above to make this happen. Thank you so much
[{'start': 28, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rob White: yes, rob loretta white and just a west sacromentan. i'm here to speak on several other issues but this compelled me to come up and speak about my service on meals on wheels for rotary club. in the last three years, i've seen a lot, learned a lot. i've seen people who were former staffers here, that are getting one meal a day. the meal that i deliver to them when the meals on wheels program, so it may not affect you now. but it may affect you in the future. now i do understand that ssi is calculated on the 40 unit basis. a lot of seniors have put their 40 units in, put it in the 70s, or put it in the 80s. and i hope that there's a future plan in order to offset the budget increases for the people put in the 40 units at a different level of income, than what is 30, 40 years later when they go ahead and retire. thank you very much. i realize your job is very difficult, i don't envy it.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Pointer: Hello, John Pointer, California Senior Legislature. The compelling stories that preceded me I think speak much more eloquently than I can to the issue. And I'm sure that like me, you were moved emotionally to tears after hearing this testimony. I endorse the passages of this proposal, and I'd also like to thank all of you on the frontlines attempting to deal with this issue. Thank you very much for your efforts. Thank you.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carol Soule: Carol Soule from the California Commission on Aging. We are doing a lot of work on elder poverty right now. We are in strong support of restoring the SSI SSP cuts and implementing the COLA. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Scott Gannon: hello, my name is gannon. i'm on the council of elders at saint mary's senior center in oakland. and i'm an ssi recipient. in 1979, i became a peace corps volunteer. and after i did my service i stayed overseas for 30 years and taught english in developing countries. and my students would come up to me from these poor countries and they would say teacher, is it true that in america, millions of old people are forced to live in poverty? and i was so ashamed and embarrassed, i would evade the question by saying, well i haven't lived in america for many years, so i don't really know. but now i've come home after 30 years to america and i found out that the reality is true. i'm 70 years old and i'm forced to live in poverty. and i would encourage you to use your power and your position to eradicate this condition. so that you can say to your grandchildren and the next generation, we did something to restore the dignity and quality of life to the seniors who live in our community. thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lovely Yang: i'm senior senator lovely with the california senior legislature. and i listened to these stories today and it reminds me of my late uncle amond. uncle amond had a cabinet shop right next door to loaves and fishes. and there began to be a controversy over loaves and fishes. and uncle amond went to the county board of supervisors. and bless his little heart, he stood up and he said, and i quote, the shame is not that we have loaves and fishes, the shame is that a country as rich as america, we need loaves and fishes. that's very true then, it's very true now. the shame is that not we have seniors that they're living in poverty, but in a country that is as great as america, we have seniors that are living below poverty.
[{'start': 139, 'end': 144, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 146, 'end': 157, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 285, 'end': 290, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Evelyn County: Hi, my name is Evelyn County. I'm a long-term advocate for the Alameda County Community Food Bank, and I am actually homeless. I am not living on the streets, I'm living with family, which was a temporary condition. It's now gone on to three years. I just want to say simply that we don't ask a lot. We want pride, we want dignity. We just don't want to have to be begging for things, and we don't want people to have to dig through garbage cans at night. We don't want people to have to make those hard decisions every day. One thing I just want to leave you all with is just there for the grace of God go aye. It could be any of us. Thank you. Amen!
[]
Frank Mecca: thank you mr. chairman. mecca and the county welfare directors would like to add their support for the staff recommendation to restore funding for the hdap program. getting on ssi for people who are eligible is an arduous process, it's burdensome, it's difficult, and that's for people with needs and people with support. for those who are experiencing homelessness, or are at risk of homelessness, i can't fathom how they can get through that process. the vast majority of people are denied the first time that they apply, they have to reapply. and the hdap program is very well conceived to help people get the federal assistance that we bring into california that they're eligible for, so we support that recommendation.
[]
Nancy Bargman: Hi, I'm Nancy Bargman, Director of the Department of Developmental Services, thank you.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Doyle: doyle, developmental services.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jim Knight: hi, jim jonah knight, developmental services.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Newton: mark jim newton, lao.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sonja Petek: Good morning, Mr. Chair and Senator Monning, I'm Sonja Petek from the Legislative Analyst's Office. I just have a few comments about the second piece on the program, the Fiscal and Program Research Unit. The LAO believes that the Fiscal and Program Research Unit can really play a critical role in informing policy choices that both the Legislature and the department have. Particularly, as they move to an ever more person-centered approach And as modes of service delivery change, we do recognize that this overarching goal is already laid out and statued, and we know that the unit was only recently created. And this is sort of a delicate analysis because this is by no means criticism of what the department is doing, they have some very worthy goals already. It's more a recommendation, stems more from wanting to protect them from getting overburdened with the myriad requests for information that come into the department. We're concerned that they will not have the opportunity and time to look at some of the deeper research questions that could really inform policy making. And so, to that end, we suggest that the Legislature might want to consider setting some more specific goals for the unit. So for example, as Director Bargman already indicated, there is work being done in the area of racial-ethnic disparities, when it comes to purchase of service funding. We think that the department could also take a look at some of the root causes of these disparities and we note that in the hearing the other day, the Human Services Committee hearing, informational hearing that occurred the other day. That there are still several unanswered questions when it comes to disparities, for example, why do the disparities exist, how severe or how big are the disparities, once you control for other factors. And then, what are the interventions that really can successfully reduce disparities? So, at the same time, the state is making significant investments to reduce these disparities. So we think that this type of research could help inform future funding decisions. A couple other examples that we provided, and again, these are just examples. One would be assessing gaps in service and provider capacity in delivering services in the community and a second might be identifying alternatives to the regional Senator core staffing formula. There've been some long-standing concerns that that formula is outdated and this effort could potentially compliment some of the other financing reforms efforts that are being made when it comes to service provider rate reform, thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 43, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 49, 'end': 60, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1236, 'end': 1243, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Doyle: Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator Monning, John Doyle, Development Services. As you heard, the Department of Rehabilitation's budget, there are 12 state departments that are pursuing similar type of proposals we are one of those departments. We're requesting three positions in 398,000 total funding to provide the support needed to comply with both hipper regulations and hi-tech act. We're asking for three system software specialists. Two of those specialists are going to provide assistance and support to our headquarters unit to the developmental centers, and to the Regional Centers. The third position will be a technical expert that will be dedicated full time to monitoring security risks, providing information to, again, both the developmental centers and Regional Centers And to service providers as needed information on security monitoring tools, vulnerability scanning, anti-virus monitoring, things like that.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 37, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 39, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sonja Petek: Sonja Petek, LAO. We don't have any particular issues with this individual concern and I would just reiterate what my colleague, Ms. Bella, said earlier that we do recommend that the state take a more strategic approach to identifying the states most significant vulnerabilities and most sensitive information going forward.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 133, 'end': 138, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tamara Armstrong: and thank you, my name is armstrong with the california department of technology, and the state of california does, our state information security office, does publish policies that are required for all state departments to follow. one of the reasons why department of technology is supportive of this bcp is because two of their positions are to work with those regional centers in terms of security compliance. so we're very interested in making sure that that outreach and compliance monitoring is occurring. i can't speak specifically, too, on their compliance at this particular moment in time, but we absolutely can work with the department to make sure that the understanding of the requirements with the federal state guidelines in these areas are followed and departments are required to complete privacy impact assessment, which would address these vulnerabilities that you mentioned with these outreach centers. so we'll follow back up to make sure that we have that addressed, as well.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rick Rollens: Thank you Dr. Pan, Senator Monning, distinguished staff. Rick Rollens representing ARCA, the Association of Regional Center Agencies. I want wanted to assure you, Mr. Chairman, that scattered throughout the Lanterman Act there are requirements on Regional Centers on these privacy issues in current law, and we're working closely with the Department as mentioned, to deal with the HIPAA compliance issues.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 17, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 27, 'end': 34, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 57, 'end': 69, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sonja Petek: Sonja Petek, LAO. The BCP actually notes that in 1516, that particular information services division had 61 authorized positions.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Aaron Carruthers: Thank you, Senator Pan, Senator Monning. Aaron Carruthers from the State Council on Developmental Disabilities, rising to speak about self-determination. The State Council wants to thank the department for their continued focus in giving the self-determination waiver a priority, also appreciate the director's comments about the need to create continuity among training, among the Regional Centers. Just as there's different approaches among Regional Centers about the training, there also seems to be different approaches about the commitment of self-determination, really rolling it out in the community. Each Regional Center has a community Advisory Committee just for self-determination. The State Council brings the chairs of all of those locals to one statewide self-determination Advisory Committee. We've heard timelines of when this will roll out and the question is, what happens in the meantime? What happens in the meantime, from the council's point of view, as there's a need to make sure the community knows this exists and what's going to happen, so that once we get the waiver, we hit the ground running, and it's a successful program from the beginning. We've heard push back from different Regional Center leadership. What we hear is that the community is saturated. We've told everyone we can tell. There's nobody else who doesn't know about self-determination and until the waiver is actually approved there's nothing we can do. The council doesn't see it the same way. The report back from those chairs of the local self determination advisory committees, is that there's still many, many people in the community who need to know about that. The council's producing a report of what their chairs are telling us, and once that's done we'll be happy to provide it to the department, to the Regional Centers and to the Committee. Thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 22, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 32, 'end': 39, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 41, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nancy Chance: Nancy Chance with CD Can and the California Person-Centered Partnership. We want to thank very much, the department for reaching out and working with stakeholders. The department's been very responsive and helpful and we appreciate that. We support strongly the self determination program and we urge anything that can be done to be done to get this program started as soon as possible.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Roth: Hello, my name is Kevin Roth. I'm Director of Manos and I work with the California Respite Association and the California Supported Living Network and I would like to comment on the causes of disparity of purchase of services and the role of technology in that. I believe that one of the ways to address, one of the solutions for that, is to create a directory of service providers that are by cultural competency, and by disability service, and by where they work zip code. If we were able to actually do that and if they were listing whether they were taking new clients or not, then we would be able to find out what the root cause is. Because we serve over a 1,000 people of color in respite care in the East Bay through Manos and we've been talking with other service providers that primarily serve people of color, and we believe that a directory like that would really allow us to target, or understand where the lack of vendors are, and it would also allow case managers, support circles, people with disabilities, to access the directory themselves, and see where they can get services that can match their cultural needs, as well as their disability needs. Thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katherine Blakemore: katherine mark blakemore, disability rights, california, and as the organization that was the sponsor of the self-determination bill, we want to add our appreciation for the department's dogged determination to get federal approval. it is in the end, a program that will provide increased choice and flexibility, and the data over time shows that it can be a less expensive way of providing services, when you look at the experience of the pilot recipients, and i think all of those are important things to consider, as we're facing kind of federal looming changes and funding difficulties. so thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nancy Bargman: Thank you, Mr. Chair, Nancy Bargman. Been asked to provide just a brief update on the progress towards closure. And as the agenda notes, a little bit of the history as to the announcement of the closures. And the history of the process in which Some of the developmental centers have closed over time. So, right now when we take a look at our closures with the Sonoma Developmental Center Porterville as far as the general treatment does not include the secure treatment of Porterville and then Fairview. When we look at the number of individuals that were a part, that were residents at each of those developmental centers in those general areas in May of 2015 and we had a closer population at that time at 886 individuals. We have since that time, placed and transitioned two 233 individuals into the community. You take a look on your agenda on page 13. There's a chart in there and I'll just provide you a little bit of an update related to the chart. Just so, you can see where the population is. We have the total population as of February 28th. For total developmental centers as well as our state run facility, we have 868 individuals. The closure population, so individuals that would be transitioning within the general treatment areas is 605 individuals as of February 28. That breaks down to Fairview we have 185 individuals at Fairview part of the closure and at Porterville 126, and at Sonoma 294. Of interest to many, with in each of those developmental centers is the intermediate care facilities. The units there that are part of the CMS agreement for the federal funding for Fairview and Porterville. And then, also with Sonoma, upon the announcement of loss of the federal funding. So, I just will give you that breakdown really quick to that population. So, for Fairview of the 185 that we have residing there, 108 are within the ICF population.  For Porterville, of the 12685 are of the ICF population. And of Sonoma 162 individuals are the individuals that don't have federal participation at this time. We've done a significant amount of work in making sure we can be very aggressive with the development of resources. We can make sure the homes we had talked about earlier, are being developed. We've very much focused on the closure of Sonoma Developmental Center because the date for the closing for Sonoma is December 2018. So, we really needed to make sure that we were focused on the development of the 119 homes. I had established very clear markers to make sure that we were achieving these milestones as far as the development. So, we had set a March 2017 date, that every home had to be acquired or an escrow. As of today, we have 12 homes that are not, of the total of 119 that have not been acquired or not an escrow however, there are folks who are actively looking for properties. We anticipate that all but maybe two or three will actually be in escrow, because we have a number of offered that have been submitted. And so, we'll see as to the responses. Some of the challenges in the acquisitions, we had to work through the high market geographic areas, and the Bay Area that was a significant issue. We're seeing a little bit of that in Southern California, and some of the other markets. But we're continuing to focus the work. We've had Regional Centers that have used different strategies to make sure the renovation is staying on, they have particular consultants that are monitoring the development of each of the homes to make sure that they're staying of target and they're not delaying the development. We did have, as everybody knows, a substantial rain season, that slowed down some of the development And that has also impact some of the transition of the individual set more moving out of the developmental center. So current population as far as current year we had a total of 199 individuals that were supposed to transition from the developmental centers for the closure. As of the February 28th we had 87 individuals who transitioned. We are projecting another 84 individuals by June 30th, so we're looking that we're not going to make the 199 by about 28 individuals. When we look to the next fiscal year of 17/18 we had a projected number and what we'll do is go ahead and make sure that we're working because the 28 individuals are actually in active transition, and would anticipate that they would transition in the next three months after the fiscal year. I just do want to make one side note though. While we may be very aggressive in the development, we're very mindful and safe in making sure that each individual's transition is very person centered. And so each individual has a very comprehensive transition plan that is engaging in every aspect of their life and making sure that looking at where the residential options are making sure that looking at the day options and any other support that needs to go in transition with individual. So those are the things that are discussed on ongoing basis and want to be really clear that we're very careful in making sure that people are receiving support as they transition to the community understanding that challenges that they face.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sonja Petek: Sonja Petek, LAO. Just one quick comment. We noted in our analysis this year that the significant per person cost to serve people at the developmental centers. And also, the loss of federal funding means that the developmental center budget is increasingly reliant on the state's general fund. And in fact, the state is now spending roughly what it did a decade ago in real dollars. And they also have the additional cost of serving the former DC residents in the community. So we just want to emphasize the importance of keeping the transitions on track.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dwayne LaFon: good afternoon, dwayne katherine lafon with department of developmental services, regarding the retention stipends. in the stipend, this is a little confusing. sometimes, people confuse it with the recruit and retention bonus. this is a retention stipend, which is a little different. it is for employees going through the closure process. we do expect a on place that are subject to closure would be covered under the retention stipend once we're done with the remaining collective bargaining agreements. we're still in the midst of collective bargaining. we have some tentative agreements and some not in yet. right now, we have tentative agreements though that would cover the majority of our level of care staff at the developmental centers, and we're actively working to complete negotiations for the staff and the remaining bargaining units. all of the developmental centers have established staff supported advisory groups and they're helping us address some of the other retention issues. one of the things we're doing is helping people who are employed by the dc now to develop their career ladder further. so we're taking, for instance, a lot of entry level people and providing them training to get their cna and then hiring them into new positions at the developmental center as ptas. in our system, there's cna's in the community, so that we continue to keep our staffing levels, especially in the level of care up and that ability would allow them to have a job in the community later when the dcs close, as well. so, it helps people give career ladders. so, that was the suggestion we got from our staff support advisory groups. htc has a career center, or staff support center now, where staff go to receive information on the state's staff program, different benefits and trainings that they can have, so they're doing more local training support to help retain staff, and that's it for the retention.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barry Jardini: Thank you, Mr. Chair. My name is Barry Jardini from the California Disabilities Services Association, we're also members of the Lanterman Coalition. So definitely echoing strong support for Mr. Londons comments regarding item 13. And I also appreciate your thoughtful comments and concerns about this issue. As we look to where our next source of funding might be as we're closing the developmental centers, it's interesting going back to point nine, we talked about pulling money, a shortfall in the DC budget out of the community budget. And there's the capacity for the department to do that, there's that authority. Well, it shouldn't just go one way, certainly if it's really one budget we would hope that the money's going to come back the other way. And we know that, although there is money in the community budget, it doesn't fully provide all the services everyone needs at this point. We know that there are a shortage of qualified providers in certain services, so, pulling money that's out of the community budget for the DCs, we feel like is an inappropriate use of that, because we know that there is a need in the community. So, thank you for your thoughts, and I appreciate your time. Thanks.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 194, 'end': 201, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Coby Pizzotti: mr chair. coby dwayne pizzotti with the california association of psychiatric technicians. just to the point that mr. london made about the transfer trauma of those previous facilities that closed, in those facilities that did close, the movers also had staff move with them, because the facilities were closing down. it was important that the staff did get out there and move with them. currently we have movers going out into the community. so, into the community we would love to have more community state staffing involvement. however, we believe that that program is being dramatically under utilized. and we believe that, it needs a state subsidy in order to make it sufficient. otherwise there are very few providers that are wanting to participate in a program where they have to pay full state employee price for their wages and as well as benefits, so that's one issue that we like to bring up, and then we also wanted to touch on the stipend, the retention stipend. the $250.00 a month for, or $250.00 a quarter and then $500.00 for the whole following year a quarter until the facility closes, or reaches a half way point. my members are leaving in droves. the amount of overtime is going up. this $250 is not, it's simple not enough. it is quite simply not enough, and it is basically a thank you for staying instead of staying instead of a retention. it's not doing anything to retain people. we actually had people that wanted to stay on if we could do something in terms of a service credit match. when we proposed that idea, we were told that, because of pepra we can't. so, thank you.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 118, 'end': 124, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rick Rollins: mr. chair, members, briefly, rollins with arca. we're here again to support, as a proud member of the lanterman coalition, the idea and concern about retaining funds in the system as the developmental centers close. and just as sort of a point of information, all folks who live in developmental centers currently are regional center clients, and will remain regional center clients moving forward. it's just the fact they live in a developmental center, and we're committed to their health, and safety in that transition. thank you.
[]
Jami Davis: hi, my name is davis, i'm the executive director of marin ventures, a community-based day program in marin county. to give some context of my remarks, i also have a doctorate in special education from the university of wisconsin. and i first started working in the field in 1987 in a 12 bed icf in novato, california. and i still know some of the same people that we served then with that agency that are in our day program today. so, i've known some people a long time. doesn't just happen in state developmental centers. we're also members of the california disability services association. i want to echo mr. london's remarks with a little vignette of a client, but first i'd like to say when my clients and staff had to leave, because someone was having an allergy attack, my staff vented to me in the hallway, when is the state going to care about us as much as they care about the state staff. they were appreciative of their raise this year, but that was the first one they'd seen in many years since starting working with us. and, so my staff fear as shes like my blood pressures going up over all this concern over very few people, there's more people served in the community. we have someone i've known since about 1994, joey. i observed part of the meeting. joey is someone with very complex needs, has a vegal nerve stimulator for his epilepsy. he's profoundly affected by his disabilities and his parents, he's about 55. his parents are facing the difficult choices of. joey's abilities are changing, and how are we going to address that. joey throughout his life, has been served in the community. i know families have to make difficult decisions of whether i can keep someone at home, or use the option of the state institution. joey's family chose to keep him at home in spite of his complex needs. and he is being served successfully in our program, where he comes every day, and he has fitness and hydration, things like that. people are being served in the community that are as difficult to serve in the developmental centers, and you can see them at marin ventures, if you'd ever like to visit us.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 612, 'end': 618, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1231, 'end': 1235, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1269, 'end': 1273, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1483, 'end': 1487, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1552, 'end': 1556, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1744, 'end': 1748, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Katherine Blakemore: Katherine Blakemore, Disability Rights California. Just briefly, thank you for your focus on healthcare, and your view of it being both a community and a transition issue. Among the things that I think are worthy of a conversation are. The adequacy of the networks, within the managed care plans, specialty care in a whole variety of areas, mental health in particular and occupational physical therapy is quite difficult to get, and families are regularly sent off to a managed care plan to get the service and they can't. And although the Regional Centers theoretically should be the backstop against that. That's very difficult to get, so I just, among the issues, urge consideration of that as well. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marc Victoria: Good Afternoon, Mr. Chair, and I was going to say Members of the Committee, but Mr. Chair. Marc Victoria with AFSME local 2620. I just want to echo the comments of my labor colleague over here regarding the state staffing program, and I'll keep that one very then we need to look into an expansion of that. Primarily for us, because we are the psychologists and the social workers, we don't necessarily have that same ability to follow people into the community like some of the other classifications do. We though are really focused on what is it going to take to retain our members. We're losing members significantly, a fair view at Sonoma. I don't know who's going to be left, especially if we're talking about the $250 per quarter as my colleague said, that's not a retention program. That's a thank you very much, and we're going to run into some very severe problems as all of our staff starts moving over to other facilities. Thank you.
[{'start': 91, 'end': 104, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Adrian Mohammed: adrian coby mohammed with the union of american physicians and dentists and i, too, just want to briefly echo the comments of our labor colleagues in regards to the state's staffing program. it's imperative that we adequately fund it, that way we can assure the efficacy of the transition of these clients. and it was brought up earlier, the need for specialized dental services. and that's something that our members provide. we want to make sure that these clients are taken care of in the community. and that they have this longevity, that they get to live with dignity in the community. as stated, it's possible. and we want to ensure that that happens. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Canmer: Good afternoon Chairman. My name is Tim Canmer. I'm with SEIU Local 1000, representing over 96,000 public employees across the state. I also just wanted to echo the comments of my labor colleagues. One, we appreciate the administrations efforts regarding the Community State's Staffing Program. We think it's important not only to take care of these patients, but to ensure their transition is connected with those that have been working with them since the beginning to deal with the kind of services they need. Second, just want to echo the iteration that the stipend is just too insufficient. We've spoken with our members, and while we understand that the state has financial things they need to look into, we should be concerning ourselves with the members, not the cost. And we're not going to be able to keep the providers and the people that are there protecting them, if they don't feel like their financial stipend or compensation is sufficient for their own livelihoods. In fact in a lot of instances, we've been putting our own members in a position where even though the stipend is not sufficient they have to ask themselves if they want to stay because they do care about these patients. They want to be there for them. They want to ensure a proper transition. So I think the state should make sure that there is a compensation level that ensures they can. Thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nichole Buslock: My name is Nichole Buslock. I am here today to talk about affordable housing.  I have Section 8. And my landlord won't accept Section 8 anymore. So, I had to move. I lived there for 15 years. It took me almost a whole year to find a place. So I'm asking when you'll take the people from the developmental centers. Sorry. Sorry.  We need more housing for people coming out and people in the community already. Thank you. Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Aaron Carruthers: I'm Aaron Carruthers with the State Council on Developmental Disabilities. The State Council supports the position that the dollars being used to support people in the developmental centers goes out into the community to support them in the community. This position would seem antithetical with issue number nine. And it would also seem that with issue number 10 that it would support those dollars going into the community. Thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nancy Bargman: No problem, Nancy Bargmann, Department of Developmental Services.
[{'start': 12, 'end': 26, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Doyle: John Doyle, Developmental Services.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Winfield: Brian Winfield, Developmental Services.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sonja Petek: Sonja Petek, LAO.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Newton: Mark Newton, LAO.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kris Cook: kris, department of finance.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tiffany Raine: thank you mr. chairman and members. tiffany with the service employees international union. we represent service coordinators at 10 of the 21 regional centers and our request today is here for $34 million to address the caseload ratio that was just described by director bargemen. based on the conditions of the hcbs waiver and current state law, the ratios for service coordinators to consumers have been established in regional centers, currently are not meeting those. i actually had a meeting last week with one of our service coordinators in valley regional, valley mountain regional center and their case load is between 80 and 85. so their ratio is 1 to 80 or one to 85, so slightly above the one to 60 or the one to 66 that they should be having. so again, our request would be for the $34 million. we definitely appreciate the $17 million that was in the budget last year. again, it would get to a roughly 200. according to arc in 2015 that did an analysis, we need roughly 600 to meet compliance, 600 service coordinators. so, the 200 is, again, it's wonderful, but we'll need about another 34 million so that we can hire an additional 400 to get us to that 1 to 66 ratio. it's essential that we meet this case logos, we're finding in these regional centers is that. they're oftentimes trying to figure out how to compensate their employees a lot better, so they tend to pay them above what they actually receive in order to be competitive within the market. so, we definitely look forward to the may revise and the updates, that will be coming from the department on this survey, so that we can see how the 17 million has been spent, and if it has not been spent in some regional centers. we would definitely like to know why, because we are hearing that they have the ability to hire, so we look forward to that information come may revise. thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nancy Bargman: thank you mr. chair, this is nancy adrian bargmann. as the agenda outlines for you, that we have a proposed trailer bill language regarding reporting employment outcomes in the performance contract for the regional centers. just to provide you a little bit of a background into performance contracts. in 2002, the department began transitioning to an outcome based performance contract with regional centers, and it focused on public policies, compliance measures and then also afforded opportunities for regional centers to address local measures. over the few years from 2012 until moving into the point when the original pilot project for the performance contracts was six regional centers and then the broadened effort to all regional centers was in 2006. when the transition to performance contracts and outcome measures occurred, it originally occurred with sitting down with regional centers, identifying what those measures were, and coming to an agreement as to how we're going to be able to move forward with these compliance measures. it hasn't been since 2002 when the original compliance measures had been identified, that changes were made in to those measures up until 2015. in 2015 we were including as an option for the regional centers to add a compliance measure for competitive integrated employment for employment measures, recognizing this is a priority to the department and certainly to our community as well. we also had in 2016 that moving forward with the performance contract needed to also have compliance measures related to disparity measures. as we move forward to the important policy measure for employment, and as i think it was, we've heard prior testimonial in other hearings, is that there's a competitive integrated employment priority. there's a blueprint as demonstrated by shared agencies agreements with department of rehab, department of education, and department of developmental services, and we want to memorialize the efforts of competitive integrated employment, and by doing so, we can have it into the statute, and so every regional center can standardize measures and we have an area in which we can measure state wide that's consistent with the data that we need to collect. we certainly could move forward without statute, to be able to get to an agreement for the measures with the regional centers. working with 21 regional centers, as wonderful as each one is, there's times when there's a challenge to be able to get a full agreement as to what those measures would be. in the spirit of time and also to really communicate to our community the importance of competitive integrated employment, we have elected to ask to have the statute modified and make this a requirement within the performance contract.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 50, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sonja Petek: Sonja Petek, LAO, we believe that staff has raised an important point and laid out a possible alternative to changing the performance contract through statute, and namely that is that the department could issue a new guideline under its own authority. We took a look at the current statute. We also took a look at the current performance contract guidelines and we also talked with the department about the history of the performance contract development process. As Director Bargmann mentioned, the current guidelines have been in place with all 21 Regional Centers since 2006 and has been largely unmodified since that time. And those guidelines were developed in negotiation with the Regional Centers. So there is precedent for changing the performance contract outside of the statutory legislative process and we agree there's no real legal requirement that the department go through statute. Yet there is precedent for changing the performance contract through statute as Director Bargmann mentioned when it comes to disparities. So ultimately there are pros and cons to both methods. So I thought I'd just briefly describe the pros and cons of each method as we see it right now. So to change the performance contract outside of the legislative process, the pros would be that the department and Regional Centers have discretion over what's in the guidelines. The cons would be, so one, if the performance contracts are negotiated with the Regional Centers, the department risks not actually getting what they want from the employment measures, and they also potentially open up negotiations on all the other points in the performance contract guidelines and delaying the process as Director Bargmann noted. If the department simply issued a directive, it might risk sort of tarnishing the good faith that it's built up with the Regional Centers, on this issue since it developed those in concert with Regional Centers in the past. And the second option would be changing the performance contract through statue. So the pro on this would be that the department is assured of getting the information that they want. Out of the employment measures and this may be particularly important as the state moves forward with the employment blueprint and recent state and federal policy promote employment for people with developmental disabilities. The con would be In our mind that, by making a second change to the performance contract guidelines through statue, it could create a precedent, whereby it's difficult to make any changes to the performance contract guidelines without going through statute. So this remains an open question for further discussion.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 13, 'end': 16, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 476, 'end': 484, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 986, 'end': 994, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1698, 'end': 1706, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Will Sanford: Will Sanford, Features Explorer. I apologize, I actually out trying to get people jobs for the last hour and half. So I missed this, but this is really important employment outcomes has been one of our battles for the last 30 years. We know we don't do a very good job. Our employment rate's really low but we say that but we don't actually know what that means. We don't actually measure that very well. So we agree the department can get data from EDD that gives us more detail would be very much helpful. I've looked at the data they do get and went at one level it was helpful, but if you go one step lower. It's not, so we'd better detail to really make some good decisions. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barry Jordan: Barry Jordan from CDSA again. I'm just going to echo Will's sentiments there on reporting. We'd love to see just more detail about what's going on in employment to make sure that we are affording people the full opportunity to work and seeing where people are. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 53, 'end': 57, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nancy Bargman: nancy nancy bargman, developmental services.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jim Knight: Jim Knight, Developmental Services.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Greg Bezier: greg, the arc and united cerebral palsy california collaboration.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Newton: And Mark Newton, LAO.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 17, 'end': 20, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kris Cook: kris nancy cook, department of finance.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jim Knight: thank you, mr. chairman. jim with the department. so this issue is related to proposed trailer bill that's related to the home and community services federal regulations that came out in january of 2014. just briefly, those regulations set new requirements and expectations for how and where services are provided that are funded through medicaid. along with that it gave the states the federal government gave states the five years in order to make necessary changes. so over the last two years we've been working with the stakeholder advisory group to help go through this process and very helpful in a number of areas. and one i'd like to point out that's addressed in the agenda is that we worked very closely with the adviser group in developing the process for providers to request a portion of the $15 million that's in the enacted budget as well as the proposed budget, in order to make changes as necessary to move towards meeting the new federal requirements. we did receive 900 proposals from providers this year asking for some of that money and while we had hoped to get the responses back on which were approved, with 900, it's been quite a process to go through that. we will be getting those responses out shortly. so moving on to the trailer bill language, so with the expectations from the federal government, and like i said, we're required to get to meeting those requirements within five years. we as part of a plan that we submitted, the transition plan, which goes to the federal government, which outlines the steps that we need to take, we had to do an assessment of how our state laws and regulations align with the new federal requirements and regulations. so we identified in there a number of areas in that transition plan, a number of areas where we just didn't have the specificity within our statute regulations, and that we would need to make some changes in order to meet the federal regulations. so what the proposed trailer bill does is it allows us to make those changes more quickly through policy directives and those would be in advance of, and not in order to replace the regulatory process and the reason for doing this and what we want to do is again to be able to move more quickly to set those expectations and requirements and so that we can then move towards meeting the federal requirements sooner. thanks.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sonja Petek: Sonja Petek, LAO. We have some comments today not so much about the Trailer Bill proposed this Trailer Bill language, but about the department's progress in meeting the HCBS deadline. So Home and Community-Based Services waiver funding of $2 billion currently comprises about 30% of the total DDS budget. It's unclear right now how severe the consequences would be if the department misses the March 2019 compliance deadline. The state could potentially lose some or all of its funding, we do note that a letter was sent to Governors by Secretary Price. And CMS Administrator Verma two days ago, that indicates that this deadline may be extended, but it's unclear right now how much additional time would be provided to states and some of our concerns about current efforts remain. So we have concerns that the department has not given enough guidance to service providers, both about what compliance means and what they have to do to get their programs into compliance. We recognize that the department does need to collaborate with the Department of Health Care Services in these efforts, and that the revised state wide transition plan was just submitted last fall, or late November last fall. Still, we are concerned about some of the timelines that are detailed in the statewide transition plan. So, for example, the department and DHCS propose requiring service providers to submit a provider self-survey and this will happen hopefully in 2017, and then the department will do conduct some additional on sight assessment of a sample of providers and the timeline for that is beginning in 2017 and then completion by the third-quarter of 2018. If that March 2019 deadline stays in place that really leaves a very short window for remediation if there are potential problems. As Mr. Knight noted, there was this 15 million in additional ongoing funds that the legislature appropriated last year to aid service providers and their compliance efforts and the department did receive more than 900 requests for funding and the total request for funding was more than 130 million. The department in previous discussions noted that not all of the requests were actually specific to compliance. So, this leaves us with a few concerns. First, the rule was passed in 2014, and as policy stands today, compliance must be met by 2019. Yet it is now 2017 and the requests indicate that many providers still don't know what the rule means, what the compliance rule means. Second, 900 requests is an impressive number, but it's really only a small fraction of the tens of thousands of service providers around the state, and furthermore the request for 130 million that's nearly nine times the amount that was appropriated last summer. So further, we don't know among the providers who were not sophisticated enough or for other reasons didn't submit a request for funding. We don't know what's going on with those providers and how far out of compliance and in compliance they are. So ultimately, we wanted to raise our concerns about this issue and suggest that the legislature request from the department as much additional information, as is available about the requests that were made by providers for this funding just to get a better sense of the extent of the potential non-compliance problem and to provide any sort of opinion about how much additional funding might be needed to get service providers into compliance.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 13, 'end': 16, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 547, 'end': 552, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 576, 'end': 581, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1787, 'end': 1793, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Marty Omoto: Marty Omoto, California Disability Senior Community Action Network in the California person-centered advocacy partnership and also family member. I wanted to thank you, Senator Pan, for doing this hearing and also welcoming as chair. Just want to mention really quickly, speaking here in memory of a good advocate. His first hearing was in this room, 14 years ago. He passed away February 21st. He received services from Tri County Regional Center.  They did a wonderful job and a compassionate job in providing home care services during his final months. And one of the things about Nick, Nick Bain, is that and I think this will make you happy, Kurt and Senator Sonos, he was a proud and very vocal Republican. And what Nick said, and has always said, is that he can stand for disability rights and still be a Republican. And his parents would be very proud that I mentioned his name today. And I think it goes back to what home and community-based services and compliance is all about, is about people. And I just want to commend the department in making some good steps. And I join with the LAO and also Catherine Blakemore, DRC, is that there's gotta be more clarity and direction and outreach. And I think that the department or the state needs to define the consequences. If we do not comply, meaning if providers do not comply, what are the consequences? It is said that the state has March 29 not tip for compliance, but no one's talked about consequences. If a provider and the people they serve are going to program that is not compliant, what happens on the next day? And people need to know that. And also, the other thing that's critical, and again, we've talked about this in stakeholder groups. So I think you've been good about this, I'm looking at Jim here, is outcomes, towards whatever we move towards compliance. The second thing is, or the third things is, outreach is so critical. Not only for providers who are actually just like everyone else, they don't have enough information, but equally important are the people who receive services, like my sister when she was alive, like the tens of thousands of families who have no idea what is happening. And maybe the department can organize regional stakeholder groups in meetings like they did successfully on some other issues in the last couple of years. Bringing people together, think of new ideas and that was successful. And safety net, and I can't remember the other issue but it was a good start. Number four, it's critical that the state, meaning the department, posts information on the DDS website on the policy directives if they're given that authority in the trailer bill language, which we do support. But it's important they post the guidance so that everyone can see them and that everyone can be held accountable to that. Also, we would urge that the state, meaning the department, post all the approved funding transition proposals, the HCBS transition funding proposals, on the DDS website. Again, so people can hold each other accountable for good outcomes, but more importantly, people can use what they see and start replicating on their own and not wait for the state. Numbers five, and I think there was a proposal, or CDSA has mentioned this too but we've talked about it, is the state needs to move or provide the authority to suspend certain types of licensing requirements. So that programs and providers can actually start changing on their own without having to wait for the state. But they can't do it because they're restricted by licensing requirements. Six, put in statute, and I think, I don't know if DRC is actually pushing this, the requirement that person centered planning is the foundation for home and community based compliance as it is for the competitive, integrated employment blueprint. That's critical. Number seven, and tied to that, by the way, is urging the DDS for the HCBS funding but also the persons that are planning it, is to urge DDS to, for the next round of transition funding, that first of all, it begins early, like as soon as possible in July. And second, that there's a requirement that the providers who are critically important for this transition, but the providers will be required as a requirement for approval of any transition plan to collaborate with families and people they serve in their communities.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 177, 'end': 180, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 583, 'end': 587, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 589, 'end': 598, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 646, 'end': 650, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 663, 'end': 668, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 721, 'end': 725, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1094, 'end': 1097, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1107, 'end': 1126, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1765, 'end': 1768, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nancy Bargman: Thank you, Mr. Chair. Nancy Bargmann, and I'll give you a little bit of background and certainly commitment to continue to work with our stakeholders and then if Mr. Knight has anything else to provide, certainly as our resident expert on HCBS.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 36, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 166, 'end': 172, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Barry Jardini: thank you mr. chair, barry from cvsa. we understand and agree with the basic premise of this to start capturing those aged 18 to 22, but we think that the proposal should be expanded to include job support services for those consumers who are successful in their internships and then need a competitive integrated employment. so for example, now under the proposal, if you're 18 or 19 and you have the successful internship, you want to continue working, you can offer this competitive integrated job. well, you wouldn't be able to get job supports that would be necessary to support you in that position. so we think that it would make sense to modify the proposal is to allow regional centers to authorize those job supports services if needed and consistent with the individual program plan. the second concern we have is a general concern about school district's using this money. and potentially pulling their money out of their workability program and simply using this internship funding which is designed really for the whole community system. workability, the school districts use it as an ineffective design because once the school year ends, the job stays with the school, and it doesn't continue on with the consumer, so we don't want to see that sort of process put in place here. so, we're hoping for some more clarity from dds to amplify what this proposal really is, how regional centers in the school district's are going to work through this, how it's going to lead to real jobs and if there's going to be any limitation on school district use to ensure that the community system can fully implement the program. thank you.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Aaron Carruthers: thank you, mr.chair. you asked that as aaron kris carruthers with the state council and developmental disabilities. you asked that as the sponsor of the employment first legislation, how does the state council see it's role in measuring progress? the state council publishes the california employment data dashboard, which measures progress in employment for people with intellectual and developmental disabilities. we look at measures such as the employment rate. and what types of employment people are in? what's hourly rate people are earning? what's the monthly total wages people are earning? and through these measures we can still tell you the situation is dismal. so far, we would not expect the needle to move yet. the employment first wioa, the other improvements that are happening at a policy level, the blueprint, we wouldn't expect to see them to move the needle just yet, but we do expect them to move the needle. here's what's the most exciting, the most optimistic piece about employment that i would say we can't measure it, but we actually measured it, which is that attitudes have changed. and the state council does it's work with a five year contract. and in doing that, we ask the community. you tell us what the state council should be working on. for the first time, the number one answer was employment. when you talk to benefits counselors it used to be that families would come in and say, how do i keep my child on benefits? now, people come in and say, how do i get my child a job, and how do i make sure that they don't lose those benefits? so the change in attitude from a family. what's possible for their loved one, and what's possible for myself being employed is what's going to make the biggest difference in employment.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 60, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marty Omoto: Thank you. Marty Omoto, CD, California Displace in your Community Action Network, California Person Centered Advocacy Partnership, first want to commend the administration and also the Department of Developmental Services, also Disability Rights California for moving forward and developing the competitive, integrated employment blueprint. So it's a remarkable piece of work along with the California Department of Education, and also commend the Department for putting forward the incentive payments and the internship program, which is innovative because they are tied to good outcomes. But that leads to thing about whether or not this works. And that's based on good oversight and accountability, which I think you've talked about constantly during this Subcommittee process. And that's very very important because the oversight needs to really make sure that person centered planning, person centered thinking was the process used to place people in good employment situations that they choose. Secondly, that's tied to good outreach to families and areas of the state to reduce disparities. Disparities should not be a separate program in and of itself. It should be a part of everything we do. And part of these efforts should be outreach to those communities of color, and secondly, also those communities where people are not being served now and want this to happen. Families are really desperate and really want this to happen. So, but I really want to commend, again, the Department for really putting this together.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jim Knight: hi, mr chair, knight with the department. the agenda does a good job of laying out the very significant investment that was, for your system, especially for service provider rate increases that was enacted as far as special session. the vast majority of it as outlined in the agenda was specific rate increases for certain providers, supported living, transportation and some others that got 5% increases. supported employment, 11.1% increase. one of the biggest dollar amounts was a set dollar amount that was going to be up for a targeted rate increase for directs to increase the wages and benefits of direct service staff. and in addition for an increase for administrative expenses for providers. that required the department to conduct a survey of a random sample of providers to determine the actual percentage increase that that set amount of money would allow. so we were able to do that by june 24th, or on june 24th. we were able to send out a letter that informed everyone of what those exact rate increases would be for all services. in addition to the 5% and other targeted rate increases that were in here as well. so those increases were effective, july 1st and the funding for that was allocated to the regional centers in august 2016.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Winfield: winfield, developmental services. so you asked the department to explain the difference between the health and safety exemption requests and the unanticipated rate adjustments. so health and safety exemption requests are a statutory provision for the department to increase a rate for a service that a consumer is receiving if there are the potential for consumer health or safety risk. and the department does receive requests from regional centers on a regular basis. the request must be consumer specific and they must justify why the rate is insufficient to meet the consumer's needs. so we received those and we provided you with that data to show you the volume at which we received those requests. the unanticipated rate adjustments, they are allowed for in state regulations. they are only applicable to community based day programs, and in-home respite agencies. and the regulations state that rate adjustments can be provided only when a change in law, or regulation, or a court order mandates an adjustment in services. or also in an emergency relocation is needed to protect the health and safety of consumers. so the scope of the unanticipated rate adjustments is more limited, but it's specific to providers versus consumers.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Greg De Giere: De Giere. Greg De Giere, The Arc and United Cerebral Palsy. First I want to thank you for a very thorough and probing hearing. It's been worth missing lunch for. I don't usually say that about anything. The proposal that I'm planning is from the Arc and United Cerebral Palsy, is It's not on behalf of the whole coalition, but it attempts to do what the coalition wants to do. We would say that if a community service organization notifies the Regional Center that a program is going to close within six months. Solely because of inadequate rates, it's not because the powers that be have decided it's a bad program, they want to get rid of it. That all the targeted rate increases haven't worked, it's just going to close. And that if the Regional Center and the department determine that yes, it is closing at that time. And that is the reason. That then the Department can raise the rates up to the amount that it would cost to have some other organization provide the same, or similar, services. We argued that this would be a net savings for the state, because The programs that the people would be moved to are almost invariably have higher rates. That's why they're still surviving while the ones with lower rates are not. And plus, with the cost of transportation and so forth, we're going to be meeting with the Department tomorrow and hope to meet with the Department of Finance soon to try to convince them that we're, not only that our ideas are brilliant, but it will save the state some money. I do have to say though, that in some cases, it will cost the State more. In cases where, there's a program that's closing and there is no place else for the consumers to go to. The happened to the Len Center for Children in Contra Costa County, couple years ago. Children simply went home when the program closed, which save the state money. They don't have to pay for providing services. That's not the kind of savings we want but I have to admit, that that happens, although we think that there will be a net savings. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 10, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nancy Bargman: Mr. Chair, this is Nancy Bargmann, no, we don't have anything that is included in the budget for the health and safety, and for the years that we've been working within the health and safety and the approvals, it's been able to be managed within our existing budget.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 33, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Doyle: mr. john aaron doyle, as mr. knight mentioned, we do have estimates that we're working on what the, we don't don't have the full impact of those yet. as the chart indicates, we do pull that information together, and we can summarize what the fiscal impact is of unanticipated rate increases, but we don't have full estimates now for the year.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 29, 'end': 35, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nancy Bargman: mr. chair, bargmann, just wanted to verify that the number that's in the budget in the agenda on page 44, is, there's a correction that needs to be made to that number.  so, if that's the reference that you're looking at, because on the reference on the $75.4 million, i'll have mr. knight come up and address that for you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 19, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 282, 'end': 288, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kris Cook: Kris Cook, Department of Finance, nothing further to add, but just want to note pending the final outcomes of the rate study, there may be additional requests made for any additional modifications necessary as the administration sees fit.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marty Omoto: marty, cdcan and the california person centered advocacy partnership. first i want to do commend the department and the individuals, too, in the department, who have really worked hard to address this issue. i think they've been sincere, but like everything that's good, more needs to be done, so, and i just want to also say i was on one of the panels in the disparities hearing by the senate human services committee and they did a great job in terms of hearing out the issue. and one of the things i just want to mention, though, in saying the department has done a good job and i think there's good people, is that every family who was there express pain and harm and despair and that was all real and that's ongoing and for every family of color so many families of color, including my own, we've experienced those barriers over the past. my sister died 14 years ago, but i keep hearing the same stories since then. but i said then on tuesday, but i say it now is that we need to work together, not by choice, but out of necessity perhaps, in large part because what's going on in washington dc with proposals that are seeking to divide our community even more in different ways. so we can't afford not to work together, but in working together, that means that we have to impose stronger oversight, and accountability that is ongoing and not intermittent. oversight hearings that are done every five years is not oversight and it's not accountability. departments that don't post good information is not accountability, but we all have to do better. one of the things is outreach and it's posting the proposals approved by the department by the regional centers to reduce disparities to post the measuring outcomes and actually, the actual proposal itself on the dds website so everyone can see it and hold all of us accountable. not just the regional citizens, but all of us in our communities accountable, and this has been done by the department of health care services with their whole person care pilot project. 18 counties posted the department posted all 18 approved proposals so that everybody can see it. also, you can replicate the practices. secondly, we need to get the department working with stakeholders to do outreach with the other advocacy organizations who promote the rights of communities of color. i've been parts of those groups on health issues and the issue of the access to good healthcare, to long term services and supports for people with disabilities is not on the agenda. it is seen as more of a person of color issue and not a person with disabilities. so, we need outreach those groups to really push this issue. and look at other issues, i think someone mentioned issue about directories and there is a lot of good issues out there. lastly, we need to, as i mentioned before, make the issues of disparity a part of all we do, so it's not a separate thing. so part of the effort to expand the community placement plan, part of the effort to hcbs transition. part of the rate study, so that whatever rate study is actually agreed to or ends up being what we, the state imposes is reflects a reduction or an effort to reduce disparities. support completely the arca and drc proposal to restore a recreation in camping. also, the issue of waving medium rates by maybe tying it to or looking at the issue of reducing disparities, and also support strongly, a proposal that we've been pushing too, but others have too, to restore new program start up funding and looking at how that can reduce disparities.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Aaron Carruthers: mr. chair, aaron from the state council on development of disabilities. the issues of disparities is very complex and we know this, but at the same time, it's also very simple. as the council talks to families and communities throughout california, we hear the same things over and over, and it was interesting because it showed up again at the senate hearing this week, and heard it in the director's comments just now. people need information and they need it communicated to them in a way they can understand. people who don't have a basic information, imagine yourself hungry. you actually may be hungry right now, but imagine you're hungry, and you go into a restaurant, and there's no menu. how do you know what to order? how do you know what you can get? that's similar to what families experience when they go into a regional center. so the council's addressing this by making a list of services of what's available and we're going to do it first in english because no family, whether you speak english or any other language has access to this information. create it first in english and then do it in spanish and we'll have it done by september of this year to continue down the threshold languages as much as we have resources available. information's important. regional centers are publishing their pos data, but the average family doesn't know what this information means. we show it to them, they can't make sense of it. so what the council is doing is that we're taking the data, we're putting it into graphs. we're analyzing it. so we're pre-analyzing it for families. we're using a template that usc developed. we're taking it for every regional center and we're then going to, it's great what the department's doing with their dashboards for regional centers. if you go there it's a really good concentration of information, but the information we're going to have regarding disparities is going to be more robust. specifically, the informations available right now on dds's website is 14/15. we're working on 15/16 data. so it's updated. we're going to have more data points and then specifically, the graphs that we're producing are going to show deviations. and they're going to point out where the deviations are, because if you just visual look at where the deviations are. you can then see where are the disparities and then once we're done we're going to post them to our website. we're going to provide them to the department, to the regional centers, to orca, to drc, to our user partners, and to this committee, but most importantly what we're going to then do is go back and train the communities. train families, train regional center clients, as to here's the information because, regional center can have a meeting, but if the people coming to it don't understand the information, they're not going to get good feedback. especially if it's the first time the participants are seeing the information. so we get the information ahead of time, we analyze it, we get it in a way where the disparities are clear, present it to the families and then they come to the meetings, but there is co-problem that we will like to address. that issue is that the intellectual development of disability terms do not translate very well and i mean legally translate. we hire, we did materials, we do them in 15 threshold languages, we hire professional translators and we find out later that our terms don't make much sense to people. for example, there's a family in sacramento who thought i was the person who wanted to put their child into an airplane. once i figured out, they showed me a flyer, and it was for the self-determination pilot program, pilot airplane. so, if a term as simple as pilot can get so confused, imagine what can happen with terms like self-determination, which are concepts. imagine with independence and integration, which really have different cultural expectations and values around them. if the ab2x funds were available to entities outside of regional centers, the council would have applied for it because what we'd like to do is create a style guide. a style guide that, in our threshold languages, that would then be made available to all regional centers and school districts. so that when we hire and pay dollars there's 11 regional centers who were granted funds for translation services. when we hire professional translators they will have a common style guide. so that when we get translations back they're quality, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sonja Petek: (LAO?) Thank you Mr. Chair, Sonja Petek, LAO. Although we do not disagree with the department that increased funding may be required to develop resources for people already living in the community. We just want to note that this was not the intended purpose of CPP funding. We believe that the Legislature may want to consider the issue on its own merit separate from CPP funding, which was designed by the Legislature for people transitioning from the developmental centers. In addition, Director Bargeman just noted that Regional Centers would be required to provide justification of the unmet need for using these dollars. But there's no formal assessment to understand what the overall unmet need is in the community around the state at this time. We'd also like to note that if there is in fact excess CPP funding, the Legislature may want to way in whether that extra funding should stay in the DDS systems, or revert back to the general fund. So in essence are concerns and recommendation are not so much about the idea of developing resources in the community, which there may very well be justification for that. But it's more about using a deliberative process to decide how to strategically fund community resource development. And whether CPP funding is the proper mechanism by which to achieve those goals.
[{'start': 1, 'end': 4, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 28, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 41, 'end': 44, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 498, 'end': 506, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nancy Chance: hi, nancy john chance, choices person centered services, i'm a family member. i'm also a member of the california disability community action network and the california person centered advocacy partnership. i wanted to say that we support the trailer bill language, allowing the department to provide directives regarding compliance with home and community base services in order to provide people receiving services, their families and providers with some guidance and some really specific ways to become compliant. we support expanding the community placement plan funds to support people that are in crisis in the community. i think that's extremely important and we believe that we need a more fully developed safety net. i really appreciated the efforts on behalf of the department to work with stakeholders on that and we made a lot of progress i think, but it's extremely important, so we support that. thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Doug Pascover: doug nancy pascover with imagine supported living services and a partner in the person centered advocacy partnership. we've covered a lot of ground. i did want to report, since the lao brought it up, that the pass through wage increases have an enormous difference for us and how much time we spend trying to staff our services versus how much time we can now spend thinking about better ways to serve people and pursue better outcomes so i want to thank dds and this body for that. and then, to go back to a point 
catherine and marty were making two, three hours ago about the clarity of the self-assessment tools. we really appreciate how much the department has worked with us to clarify what we were unclear of, but i still think it's really important to keep moving in that direction of being able to explain to agencies what will or will not. and actually if i can add one thing to that, i think catherine alluded to this earlier, the final rule may not last as the final cms rule and i think the suggestion that she and marty both made was a good one, that maybe california should try to have our own version of that rule to move forward on whatever the fate of that particular federal regulation would be. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 181, 'end': 184, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 515, 'end': 524, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 529, 'end': 534, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 902, 'end': 911, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1027, 'end': 1032, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kevin Formanos: thank you. this is kevin again with cra and and csln. thank you again for the rate increase. now on to the next crisis. i just want to read this because this is about the minimum wage. the state acknowledges minimum wage costs are actual costs because they fund it for the state minimum wage. a service provider costs go up with the minimum wage whether the law is federal, state or local. the department set out guidelines for recuperating local minimum wage through the health and safety waiver in 2015. we also understood the department was strengthening the health and safety waiver by streamlining the health and safety waiver as recent as two months ago. now, the department seems to be backtracking on the guidance. if there is a backtracking by the department, and this looks as if the department has decided not to use any mechanism for vendors who can't use the unanticipated rate increase for local minimum wages. yet the costs are real. is the department suggesting that just because a vendor serves a person under a different service code that doesn't get the unanticipated rate increase that the minimum cost go away? if a person is being served loses their service would that affect their health and safety? what is the rationale for changing the guidance? the department needs to adjust rates using the health and safety waiver for local minimum wage increases until there is a better mechanism in place. we urge the legislature, the administration and the department to figure out how to use the health and safety waiver until the issue is addressed by statute, which hopefully will be done this session with ab 279. i'd like to add two other things. this is a disparity issue too because the local minimum wages are being increased where people of color live. and that means that if you don't adjust those rates, it's going to make the disparity worse. and i thought we were trying to change that, and i know we all want to change it. so please, figure out a way. the other ironic thing is that the state minimum wage allocation for funding the state minimum wages has always had a surplus in it and it's been returned to the general fund. all you have to do is take the surplus and apply it to the local minimum wage and you'd be fine. i believe in my calculations it wouldn't cost, it would be fiscally neutral if you just did that instead of dumping all the minimum wage stuff back. and the last thing i'd like to say is that there is a legal problem with the department forcing a particular group, which would be these agencies like my agency, to fund a cost that is incurred for delivering a social service. so it's illegal and there's case law behind this around forcing a particular group to shoulder those costs. in effect, if the department and the state does not fund the local minimum wage it's forcing a particular group to bear a partial cost for servicing this. and that's illegal and there's case law about it. thank you very much.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jami Davis: Hi, Jami Davis, Executive Director for Marin Ventures. This afternoon we seem to be grappling with the problems of the past while trying to anticipate solutions for the future. And we have many limited resources, we're a finite system. I urge the Legislature and the Department to look to the future as we prioritize those resources, and one example is the survey for the vendors in the fall. I was talking with Will Sanford and he suggested that we have 25,000 vendors. So, providers are different than vendors. I have two vendor codes for my one program, one agency. Other providers have many codes. So, we're going to have 25,000 surveys to figure out, how for example, like, we spent $163,000. How the state spent about 300 million I guess, I'm not sure of the exact number. While more than 2 billion is at risk if we don't meet the HCBS settings rule. As it stands today, we have to meet the rule, we don't know what the future is. And so I think that we have to look at our resources and look ahead instead of trying to figure out what went before, and just keep putting one foot in front of the other and live in the moment. Thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 412, 'end': 424, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Will Sanford: will doug sanford at futures explored. i will try and be brief and i'll try and hit the issues as i got them. issue 20 which was really about compliance issue, hcbs, and giving authority to the department. we've been pushing for the department to give us direction. i mean, that's been true in every meeting, i've been in many of them. one of our challenges we face in that is terminology. they only got 900 submissions, because they asked, are you in compliance? and many people in the community say, if i'm not in compliance, licensing fines me $250 a day until i am. versus transition funding. we have to become compliant in 2019. we're not out of compliance today, so i mean that's just sort of a way to look at it. so really, as the new staff that they've been able to hire at the regional centers come out, and alta did a great job, they went out in the collegial, how can we help you get there approach, versus saying, you're not doing this right and really being prescriptive, how do you work in your community? related to issue 21, which is the paid internship program, very supportive of that. i think it's going to open up some great opportunities that really encourage us to allow folks who get a job, who are 19, to be able to go into the adult world and get adult services versus being required to stay in education. which is sort of where we are currently. i concur with jami's comments. you expressed concern about that $1.8 billion hole in two years. we're going to ask people to do compliance for 169 million. 25,000 surveys, or whatever the number is, for every vendor. i have 40 vendor numbers. so i don't get to fill out one survey for my agency, i have to fill out 40 for every single one. some programs i actually have two vendor numbers for the same program. i have clients who receive services in the same day program, so it's going to be complex and difficult. 23, we have a long term solution, which is the rate study, which we all hope will be positive and we have a series of short-term requests. the things related to program closures, that would be a short-term way to get us till that point with the rate, start to kicks in. same things with crisis, same thing with the median rates. all of those would allow us to sort of get to the rate study, which hopefully addresses the long-term issue. we're sort of in that tweener stage. and finally on the last one, really support the concept of the community placement plan funds be more flexibly used in the community. that money, almost $70 million a year, is spent on between 2 and 400 individuals. we, as a system, add 10 to 13 thousand people in the community. we have a significant unmet need in every community across our state. i don't think it'll be very hard for regional centers to come up and say, here's our list. here's your increase in autism for youth, and all of our folks are living a normal lifespan. great news. we don't have a lot of services for seniors. that's an unmet need that we don't have right now, so thank you.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 17, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1386, 'end': 1390, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Joe Xavier: there we go. joe will xavier, director for the department of rehabilitation.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kelly Hargreaves: Kelly Hargreaves, Chief Deputy Director.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Irene Walela: Irene Walela, Deputy Director for Independent Living Community Access Division.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Justin Freitas: justin, department of finance. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barry Smith: My name is Barry Smith, Executive Director of Disability Resource Agency for Independent Living. One of the three that's not going to be receiving the 235,000 baseline funding. As I was looking at statistics, and based on population, during the allocation of the 7C funds, all three of us were the first three centers to receive the 7C money then others follows. As I look at the statistics nowadays as compared to another center in the Bay Area, where we see, we work with a larger population. We work with a million 300,000 compared to a center in the Bay Area that's working with 500 and 80,000. And they're receiving even more, they're receiving the base funding and we're not. So there's gotta be some issue with the formula in there somewhere that makes the baseline funding allocations to us. It makes us wonder how come we can't continue with this funding. So I just want to hope you support to continue the funding, bring back the funding that was actually promised by Governor Brown, and help us serve people with disabilities. I hired three people with disabilities and so I just want to thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 987, 'end': 992, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tink Miller: Thank you. And I'm Tink Miller, Director of Placer Independent Resource Services in Auburn. We're the ones serving Placer, El Dorado and Alpine which is very rural mountains 4,000 square miles and not very well connected with public transit. So this is an issue for us because people can't get to us. We have one office in Auburn and very small staff, so this is very critical to us. And we have been able to improve our presence all ready in El Dorado County with this year's money. The county terminated its own registry services for personal assistance that people have in their homes. And they now refer all applicants to be providers and all consumers who need providers to us. So it's starting to work. We're having more of a presence in El Dorado and this money is really critical for us too, thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Teresa Favuzzi: good morning, my name is teresa. i'm the executive director of the california foundation for independent living centers representing 21 centers throughout the state who are in strong support of this effort. i also want to say that we really appreciate the opportunity that this funding allowed for us to continue a dialogue with the department of rehabilitation about the funding formula. and we have a bill moving through the legislature to address the larger formula issue. thirdly i want to make sure that people understand that with the uncertainties that are happening at the federal level these three centers if federal funding was reduced or completely eliminated. e-centers would be highly at risk, because they do not have access to that base funding in california. thank you very much.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marty Omoto: Good morning, Marty Omoto, of California Disability Senior Community Action Network, CDCAN and the California Person Center to Advocacy Partnership, in strong support in restoring that funding, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Harvey Clowers: hi, i'm clowers with the independent living center in kern. county. i've been with the ilc there in kern county in bakersfield, california for about 13 years. and it was quite a drive to get up here today, about four and a half, five hours. but i'd like to really ask you guys to really restore the funding for this 17-18 season, or year, coming up. it's really helped our center to be able to get to our outlying areas. we're like the third largest county in california roughly about 834,000 people in our county with limited staff. with this funding we have been able to take on a few more employees, which is helping us get to our outlying areas and our underserved population. so please respectfully we're asking to, your story that's funding for the 17-18 year. thank you.
[]
Jenny Snyder: hi there, my name is jenny joe snyder and i am a disabled individual. i also work for an independent living center and i wanted to speak strongly in favor of restoring and sustaining the funding for our independent living centers. they are necessary.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joy Clary: hi, i'm joy and i just wanted to read something. i'm a tbi survivor i guess you would call it. first, i want to thank you guys for listening to all of us. my experience, and i know this is real brief, i'll just read this so i don't get messed up. on september 16th of 2015 i was in a car accident. i was a driver to avoid a head on collision i swerved to the right, he hit anyway behind, right behind my door, driver door, totaled my car. it was taken to the emergency room. my sister jane came to get me and i'm still living with her after a year and a half. even though most of my life i've lived by myself, been very active. there's been times when, because of my tbi experience and what not, she's wanted to kick me out, because it's been so devastating. but we've managed to hang in there. and i just want to say that jane was also recovering from chemo and radiation. so she had her health issues aside to take care of me because i wouldn't have made it a week. i was like in a coma, but i was able to barely move around. a week after i went to my doctor and he knew right away that i had a tbi along with other issues. when i was at the did not even occur to them that i had a tbi and boy, that would have made a difference. and so i'd like to know if more funding and whatnot will help the health centers and the doctors and everybody else talk about the tbi and what it does to all of us, and how important it is to get diagnosed immediately. so i was lucky, i started going to the tbi support group at the freight center just recently. and my gosh, i'm in heaven because after a year and a half they're the only ones who have all this information and a place for us to go every week and be around other people that, have similar looks or issues just because of their tbi experience.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 485, 'end': 489, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 823, 'end': 827, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Evelyn Abouhassan: one more time. one second. evelyn with disability rights california. we're a cross-disability organization here to echo support for restoration of the funding. less funding for the ioc means less services for people with disabilities. and we know that, during these challenging times, people with disabilities can really use the services from these organizations. thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Justin Freitas: justin jenny freitas, department of finance. i would just like to comment that the federal 7c dollars are determined by the federal government. so there is a much bigger, as has been agreed, discussion to go on potential questioning, whether population, geography lead into an inequity, but the original base funding that was established to provide equity to those independent living centers that were not established or maintained with federal 7c dollars. so we'd just like to comment that the three independent living centers that we're discussing today, the percentage of their overall funding, they have a higher percentage of 7c funding, so we don't believe that this will provide any sort of resolve to the inequity claim, we do agree with the department on this. and at this time, just we'd like to request, before making any proposal or going further on any proposal, you consider waiting til the may revision to make any decisions on adding additional funding because at this time, finance would be opposed to providing any additional funding to these iscs.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Justin Freitas: justin, department of finance. i just wanted to clarify that the governor's proposal's providing an $800,000 one-time fund for this year. the agenda does say down here, so we just want to correct it, for this year it's an appropriation of $800,000 from the state penalty fund. and again, we do agree that there's going to be a larger discussion. and i believe it's ends and it's sub five.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katie Shinoda: Hi, my name is Katie Shinoda. I'm from Mercy's Home and Community Program for Traumatic Brain Injury Survivors, one of the seven sites that receives this funding here in Citrus Heights, and I wanted to support the inclusion of this money in the budget to continue TBI services because they're so critical for our participants. And the need for services really over a life time for a survivor of traumatic brain injury is really what's needed. What happens in rehab is just really insufficient for meeting the needs of a person and a family that go through such a traumatic event. So I would like to ask for your strong support for this funding. And I have several of our members who wanted to attend today, but were unable to. Very quickly I'd like to share just one short letter. I have several others. But of someone who wanted to attend with us but who was unable to attend today. In August of 2000, I was vacationing with some neighbors in El Dorado Hills and ended up in the SUV of someone who had been drinking. As a result, we ended up crashing and I was left in a coma that persisted for 28 days. After awaking from the coma and spending three months in acute coma rehab in Marin, I was sent home to Sacramento and the Mercy Rehab Program. Acute rehab was great for teaching me to breathe, eat, and talk again. But I was an active 21-year-old college student with a 40 hour a week job when I was injured. And this is not the me who returned home. Through the Mercy Program, I Learned that I had new limitations, and to use tools to help compensate for these. I also learned the strategies that would help me return to college, driving, and eventually work again, which is thankfully where he is today. He's at work. Perhaps most importantly, I met others who shared similar deficits from TBIs and Learned how to be a friend again. And ultimately I was able to become a husband in 2014. To this day, I still attend the weekly Bridges Support Group at Mercy. I do this to visit with my friends, but also to help give friendship and help newcomers to the group. Thank you so much.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anna Acton: Thank you. Hi, Anna Acton with FREED Center for Independent Living. We're also one of the seven traumatic brain injury sites. And I'm also the Chair of the California Association of Traumatic Brain Injury representing the seven TBI sites. We wholeheartedly support the Governor's proposed budget that includes keeping us whole at our current funding level. This program really does, I've actually worked for the Department of Rehab on this program on an administrative side and now am implementing it on a local level. And the realness of the gaps that people fall into post-injury is real. These people are not well served by other state-funded programs, and this program really provides this really important service that really doesn't exist anywhere else for these individuals. So we're really happy to be partners with the Department of Rehab on this program. I want to thank the Department of Rehab for their leadership and also for Senator Monning. Monning, you have been a champion on this issue and we are so thankful to have you here and understand the value of this program. This is really a program that brings people, creates a path out of poverty, out of segregation into full integration and community participation, so thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 947, 'end': 954, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 956, 'end': 963, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dan Clark: This is Dan Clark. I'm actually retired from the State of California. I worked for the Department of Rehab for about 35 years. I was a rehab counselor, and then before retiring I worked in the independent living center around the TBI program. I want to ditto everything that she just said, and that's what I'm about to say. As a rehab counselor I worked out at UC Med. I was involved with a lot of individuals, TBI. The community integration component is very much lacking in our community here, but also statewide, and it's a very important component. We do a lot to keep people alive. We need to have the services there where they can continue to thrive and live independently. Again I want to commend the Committee here, Senator Monning, Pam, and Mr. Stone, and also the Department of Rehab. I know they're here fighting like everybody else who tried to help keep this program going, so thanks.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 732, 'end': 739, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 741, 'end': 744, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 754, 'end': 759, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nancy Chance: Hi, my name is Nancy Chance and I am a member of CDCAN and the California Person Centered Partnership, but right now I'm here as a family member. My husband suffered a traumatic brain injury 10 years ago while he was working on the job. He was in Stanford for 29 days in ICU and then was transferred to an acute rehab hospital. He receives no services at this point in time, none. He's in the worker's comp system, but he receives no services. These kind of services are so important. And I want to say that I support the funding, but I support additional funding for this because the gaps people are talking about here are so true. And my husband couldn't be here today because he couldn't get up here and talk to you like this because of the traumatic brain injury, and the anxiety, and the fear, so I just urge you to please, please, please find whatever dollars you can for this because it's so important. Thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tink Miller: thank you. tink justin miller again, director of placer independent resource services. pardon me, in auburn. and we of course, support sustaining funding for the tbi program. it is absolutely critical. we do see people at our office, which we refer to the closest tbi program in our area because of the complexity of those services is really intense and needs special focus, more than what we can provide at our independent living center. in terms of the overall department budget, i'll just reiterate that the funding formula for the independent living centers needs to be corrected, redesigned. and specifically in regard to core services, the federal money is tied to the rehabilitation act, which lists five core services that centers are required to provide. on top of that, the state welfare and institution code adds another four services that we're required to provide in addition to the federal. so there's really two funding sources and two sets of core services to be provided. and that needs to be taken into consideration when you're looking at equity of funding. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Teresa Favuzzi: good morning. favuzzi from the california foundation for independent living centers representing 21 independent living centers throughout the state and we strongly support this effort to maintain funding for the traumatic brain injury sites and we really believe strongly that we need to get rid of that sunset and we feel like there needs to be an ongoing commitment on the part of the state, and our community at large, to support people with traumatic brain injuries. thank you so much.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Evelyn Abouhassan: abouhassan with disability rights california, echoing the comments of ms. favuzzi and others supporting funding for this program. i'm looking for mechanisms for ongoing funding so that people with disabilities can be served. thank you.
[{'start': 74, 'end': 81, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lourdes Morales: Lourdes Morales, LAO.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tamara Armstrong: sorry. i'm tamara with the department of technology with our statewide project delivery.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrew Warden: warden, department of technology, project approvals and oversight.
[]
Rob Trojan: rob tink trojan, department of finance, it consulting unit.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tamara Armstrong: thank you. so thank you for the opportunity to speak, and again i'm with department of technology, my name is tamara rob armstrong, and-
[{'start': 110, 'end': 130, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Will Sanford: only one, will, futures explored, here to support bcp number 4 which is to, as a community we have a partner who does both department rehabilitation, and dds fund and support employment. if there were two different rates, i would shoot myself, and actually my staff would shoot me, so that is awesome. but i also want to do a shout out to the director of the department of rehab, who has been helping to implement sb 644, which would be an internship to state employment option. and he's taken a leadership role with his executive team and we're hoping, in the next month or so, to have our first internship placed and going forward, that's very exciting. i want to thank him for his help.
[]
 : All members vote who desire to vote.
[]
John Roth: thank you mr. chairman, members of the committee. so i am john jonah roth, i'm the chief executive officer for the california pharmacists association. cpha or the california pharmacists association represent pharmacists working in all practice setting throughout california. i appreciate the opportunity to be here at the hearing and i appreciate the invitation, particularly during the time when we are really talking about pricing and transparency throughout with respect to the entire healthcare delivery system. as californians we wrestle with some of the new fundamental shifts perhaps in the state and federal relationship. we support open and detailed discussion on the supply chain regarding consumer access to medicines that they desperately need. i was asked here today to talk about one specific aspect, the prescription drug benefit program. ironically, as mentioned previously in this hearing, so far, many consumers know very little about, and yet has the single most influential role in the supply chain and that is a pharmacy benefit managers. pbm's largely operate in the background, as you've heard, out of sight from consumers, however, they play a crucial role in establishing the ultimate cost of a prescription paid by that consumer. as you've heard here today also, the role of pdm has evolved significantly over the years. initially just being claim to adjudication companies between lays on, between the flow of dollars, between health plans and providers, for the benefit of the patient. however they've grown substantially, and are now ubiquitous role, involved in everything from price negotiation with pharmaceutical manufactures, to drug placement on the formularies, to contract with health plans for administering the prescription drug benefit, to directing consumers where, how and who they get their medicine from. now the challenge in having a detailed discussion about the role pbm is that the relationship and business dealings had become very complex, and as i've mention are out of the sight of regulators, consumers on just about every aspect of the prescription drug process. it really creates a web of contracts, agreements and negotiations that are heavily intertwined. add to this complexity the fact that pbm's largely operate in the shadows and are nearly unregulated and you can begin to see why hearings like this are so important when legislators, regulators, and the consumers begin to ask for transparency regarding the prescription drug system. now unfortunately time doesn't allow us here today to unravel every aspect of this complicated system. however i would like to note that the background materials for this hearing, i think presented a detailed and compelling set of facts with regards to pbm industry, its relationship with other entities. and ultimately a call for the legislature to address potential market failure system that could harm consumers. i would also like to just make reference since dr. jones had made it part of his commentary to the committee that calpers itself had these very questions back in 2011 when they dropped a multi-million dollar contract with the pbm for allegations of impropriety that involved the securities and exchange commission and the california state attorney general's office. in any market, as senator pan was referencing, where a few companies control the majority of market share, as is the case with pbms, where the three largest companies control 78%, or roughly 180 million lives, we're concerned about the potential negative impact on consumers. that concern and protection of consumers is magnified in health care of course, for regulators need to ensure that the care and fiduciary oversight of the market is the best interest of patients. now, as the state wide association for pharmacies, the number one complaint we received from our members is in regard to pbm practices and to be clear, our members routinely call and complain on behalf of their patients not on behalf of themselves. the typical scenario begins with the patient having received a communication from a pbm that has some adverse impact on their ability to get their medications. the community pharmacist is really on the front line of receiving these complaints and yet, has little ability to provide any advice or resolve of those concerns for the patient. in fact, if you were to look at many pmb contracts with pharmacies, they contain things such as confidentiality clauses and gag clauses, which bar the pharmacists from discussing certain aspects of the pmb agreement with that provider. this eliminates the pharmacist's ability to be the patient's advocate and render the patient simply frustrated. the problems that consumers bring to our members span a spectrum of concerns and while those concerns are broad in an array of subjects, have it suggested they're really true primary themes that emerge. one, either the patient is being told that they can no longer receive their medication that the doctor has prescribed in the same manner for the same cost. or two, the patient is being directed out of a relationship with their neighborhood pharmacist and forced into a pbm owned mail order or subsidiary controlled pharmacy. now if i can get very practical for a moment, i'd like to share a story that demonstrates the types of consumer concerns that comes to our members. a case in point is an example that one of our members brought to my attention, and since then my staff validated with several other additional pharmacies as occurring, as well. the patient, we'll call him david, received a letter from the pbm and the header of the letter said, notice of denial for medical judgment. the letter goes on to state that the pbm had received a request from david's physician for coverage of a medication called coreg cr. it's a drug used to treat high blood pressure and also to improve the chance of survival after a heart attack. in the letter, the pbm informed the patient that it was denying this medicine because, and i quote, you did not meet the established medication-specific criteria of guidelines for coreg cr at this time. coreg cr is denied for medical necessity. now, understandably, there are times that a patient must meet certain medical thresholds for certain procedures and medications, that's how these utilization controls can help contain costs, but what is very concerning and candidly, quite suspicious, is what occurred next, and that is the patient handed the pharmacist the second letter, they had received just two days after the first. and it too was from the same pbm and in that letter, the pbm notified the patient it was quote, making it easy for you to get your maintenance medications by making the choice of filling 90 day supply through the pbm's mail order program or 90 day supply at a designated pharmacy chain which the pbm had a relationship and as you might guess, one of the medications approved through the pbms program, was coreg cr. i would ask, how can the patient be medically denied for the medication their physician prescribed in one letter, and just two days later, receive a letter from their pbm saying that it was approved if they use the pbm's wholly owned subsidiary operations. the patient, of course, was distraught and confused as you might imagine, and was not only sure whether they were going to even get their medication, but was completely flustered with the fact that they could no longer see the pharmacist that had cared for them for the past 10 years. now perhaps for the benefit of argument, there was an error made in this case, and denial of medical necessity was incorrect, despite the fact that we validated this same tactic was used in other pharmacies with other patients around this time frame. but the point being is just that without over site, transparency and a regulatory framework to shed light on pbm practices. there's no method for determining and distinguishing between a legitimate processing error and an egregious policy that harms consumers. there are countless other stories where patients are disadvantaged by pbm practices. while, as dr. jones mentioned, pbms will testify that they saved the health care system money. my own very simple personal litmus test is that my phone has never rang with the pharmacist telling me a heartwarming story about a pbm practice that made the patient life better. because pbms directly impact consumers, our association believes that critical first step is bringing light to how they operate, and to do so is to create a regulatory framework in the state of california. we believe the most appropriate agency to oversee this regulatory process is the california state board of pharmacy. the board of pharmacy, by statutory definition, is a consumer protection agency, and as such currently regulates all aspects of the pharmacy supply chain and related activities in california, and this includes just much more than pharmacies and pharmacists. it includes organizations and companies such as wholesalers, third party logistics companies, reverse distributors, waste haulers, medical device companies, and even out of state companies that provide medication-related goods and services in this state. the entire supply chain, except pbms are regulated by the board of pharmacy, when it comes to delivering pharmaceutical benefit to consumers. given the direct relationship between pbms and consumer access to coverage and medication benefits. it's not only appropriate, but a necessity for the board of pharmacy to regulate these entities. mr chairman, in lieu of time, i'd like to thank you again for inviting me to speak with you here today. thank the committee for their interest in the subject. be happy to answer any questions.
[{'start': 58, 'end': 73, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2965, 'end': 2970, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3306, 'end': 3309, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5569, 'end': 5574, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5750, 'end': 5755, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8126, 'end': 8131, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nick Louizos: Thank you Mr. Chair and members, Nick Louizos on behalf of the California Association of Health Plans. Thank you for holding this hearing. Health plans are very concerned about the underlying costs of drugs and the impact that those are having on premiums and out of pocket costs for our consumers. And that is why the health plans that choose to use pharmacy benefit managers value those relationships. There's no requirement that a health plan use a PBM. But if a plan does not have the internal capability of performing those functions, they will sometimes go out and contract with a pharmacy benefit manager. And the reason that health plans value that relation is that in those cases, they use a PBM to drive down the costs of drugs, particularly when faced with manufactures that have patent protections on their products. So health plans use them because they save the plan money and they save our consumers money. Now we've heard a lot of talk about the processes and mechanisms that are put in place in order to design an affordable product. And we would just submit that if there are those that are concerned about a lot the contortions and back flips that the payers have to do in order to create an affordable product, then we ought to focus a little bit more. And what we believes is the underlying cost of that and that is the other underlying reason of that which is the underlying cost of the drugs themselves. Thank you.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Benjamin Frank: Good morning, Chairman Hill, Chairman Salas, and Committee Members and staff. And thank you for providing me with this opportunity to provide you with a brief summary of the work I've completed during the past year as the Administrative Enforcement Program Monitor for the Board of Vocational Nursing and Psychiatric Technicians. And by the way, I'm Ben Frank and I'm the chief Executive Officer of Benjamin Frank, LLC. By way of introduction, I began my professional career working for an accounting firm while completing my Master of Business Administration at Washington University in St. Louis. My management consulting career began with performing workload, staffing and business process re-engineering analyses for Fortune 200 manufacturing firms in high technology and other industries. Subsequently, during the early 1980's, I joined the Sacramento office of Arthur Young, a big 8 accounting and consulting services firm. Which subsequently merged with Ernst & Whinney to become Ernst&Young. While with Ernst &Young, I specialized in providing organizational assessment, program evaluation, and staffing and financial analysis services to public sector agencies at the State and local level in California and other western region states. I have successfully completed more than 100 engagements for California State government, including projects performed for the State Auditor general, the Department of Justice, and committees of the State Legislature. My experience includes more than 50 organizational workload staffing and business process re-engineering engagements. I have previously been involved with four separate monitor engagements. During 2001/2, and 2002/3, under a contract with the Contractor's State License Board, I provided enforcement program data collection, analysis and reporting services to support the Center for Public Interest Law, which at that time was the Contractors Board Enforcement Monitor. During 2002/3 I served as enforcement monitor for the Dental Board. During 2004/5, I worked again with the Center for Public Interest Law, which was the Medical Board Enforcement Monitor. My responsibilities included collecting, compiling, and analyzing all enforcement program data. And additionally, I completed a detailed assessment to the medical board's diversion program. And in 2005/6, I served as Operations and Enforcement Monitor for the Bureau of Private Post-Secondary and Vocational Education. Over the years, I should say decades, I've also completed several other projects for both the Contractors Board and the Medical Board, involving their licensing and enforcement programs and their administrative and forward support processes. My experience with California State Government licensing and enforcement programs also includes projects completed for the Air Resources Board, the Board of Accountancy, the Board of Optometry, the Bureau of Automotive Repair, the Department of Boating and Waterways, the Department of Motor Vehicles, the Department of Pesticide Regulation and the State Treasurers Office. Before my presentation, I would first like to have Ms. Vivian Novella and Ms. Gina Bayless on my left here share with you their experiences with this board. Ms. Avella was appointed to the board in September 2013, and was a lead member of the boards enforcement task force. She was subsequently a member of the board's Enforcement Committee after it was reactivated during 2016 but then resigned from the board last October. Ms. Bayless was hired by the board a few months after it's March 2015 Sunset review, and served at that point forward as the boards chief of enforcement until taking a leave of absence in October 2016. And then separating from the board in January of 2017. Ms. Ovella?
[{'start': 23, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 38, 'end': 43, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 350, 'end': 359, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3111, 'end': 3125, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3134, 'end': 3146, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3217, 'end': 3223, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3485, 'end': 3492, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3742, 'end': 3748, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Vivien Avella: good morning, chairman hill and chairman salas, committee members. my name is vivien jonah avella, and as mr. frank stated, i served as a public member of the board for three years. i have come here at the request of the committees to provide my relevant experiences and perspectives with regard to the board's overall management and government process. and specifically, my experience in enforcement. i expect my testimony to last approximately 15 minutes. i was appointed by governor brown in september, 2013. and was reappointed in june of 2016, and regrettably resigned four months later in october. in the past few years, there certainly have been some board successes and i believe that the board was on positive path beginning in early to mid 2015. but in 2016, i believe that significant barriers to providing meaningful oversight had once again been created and we're allowed to persist. i felt the board was headed in poor direction and i did not want to be accountable for decisions where i couldn't meaningfully contribute or do my job. my professional background includes extensive years in the corporate finance and consulting sector. i have held positions in investment banking, as treasurer and officer of publicly held technology company. and as director and senior managing director for the financial consulting arms of ernst & young and fti consulting, respectively. in these later positions, my work was focused on the financial and operational restructuring of distressed and bankrupt companies, and i was told that because of this background, i might be well-suited to the operational challenges of the board. i understood that my role as board member was to ask the tough questions, and provide meaningful oversight and governance to the board, which was an obligation i took quite seriously. in my first months on the board, i became very concerned with the level of the board's operational difficulties and significant backlogs. i will primarily discuss my experiences with enforcement and matters that occurred in 2016 during my tenure. but i'd like to briefly discuss one historical challenge in the education division, so as to demonstrate that the board's difficulties represent repeated and systemic management and government's issues not limited to the boards enforcement activities. for years, the board has struggled with a significant backlog in the processing and review of new school applications. as far back as 2008, there was a backlog of over 70 schools. this number had double to 144 by the time i joined the board in late 2013. but there were no active committees to provide oversight, and very few tough questions were asked. and there were seemingly no consequences to management or the board, so that backlog persisted for several years. i was in a minority of board members who questioned the eo in rigorous fashion regarding this issue at several board meetings and in followup communications. i ask for analyses of average processing timelines, goal setting, and also ask for a business plan for how to deal with this issue. i also inquired as to why the process took so long and several times asked the board to consider reclassifying the nec position to other more easily fillable positions so the board could complete its workload. the only significant action that the board took at that time was to impose a moratorium on the processing of new school applications which did nothing to address the fundamental backlog itself. the eo stated that the backlog resulted from the board's inability to attract and retain nec's due to salary restraints out of its control. but that information was incomplete and did not alleviate the board's need to probe new solutions and address its backlog. ultimately, the senior staff did in fact provide appropriate goal setting reports and tracking which i do think contributed to the board's eventual success. and substantially eliminating the backlog in 2015. onto enforcement. in my first few months on the board, i became extremely concerned about the aging of disciplinary cases the board reviewed. on average, the cases seemed to take three years to fully adjudicate, and in some cases even longer. these observations were corroborated in the quarterly enforcement statistics published by the dca and included in the board's quarterly reports. performance statistic pm4, which the committee is familiar with, consistently exceeded 1,000 days or three years as far back as 2010. the consumer protection enforcement initiative provides for a target goal of 540 days or 18 months. i made similar attempts to rigorously question management regarding its performance. i was told that delays in the attorney general's office and the lack of authorized positions were to blame and the board had no control to improve its performance. these unsupported claims have been proven inaccurate and misleading in both my work on the task force, in the findings of the enforcement monitor, and in statements made by the interim co mr. brooks and ms. bayless. i'm happy to answer specific questions and provide more detail to the committee regarding this assertion in the question and answer period if necessary. which brings me to the origins of the enforcement task force, of which i am the founder and principle author of its recommendations and reports. a legislative affairs office report released in 2014 ranked the bvnpt 19 out of 19 healing arts boards and 36 out of 37 of total boards in terms of the pm4 statistic at over 1200 days. attempts i made to leverage this scathing report to start an active dialogue with our executive leadership team in the summer of 2014 were unsuccessful. at the following board meeting in september of 2014, i very publicly called out the board's performance as unacceptable. that same day, the board approved the formation of the enforcement task force and i was appointed the principal chairperson. i agreed to present findings at the following board meeting and then subsequently chose a co-chair to assist. in the task force work, we freely reached out as necessary and appropriate to board staff, dca leadership, dca finance, dca legal, the department of investigations, the ag's office and br and exec, the board of registered nursing executive and enforcement program staff, in order to gain insights and complete our investigation. while this level and volume of contact is admittedly not typical for board members, it was highly necessary given the boards predicament. within two months the task force had developed the slate of recommendations designed to fulfill its mission, which was to quickly investigate and formulate high value target recommendations to reduce the extended enforcement processing timelines. the board approved all of the task force recommendation in november of 2014 and directed its eo to immediately proceed with implementation. while the primary goal of the task force was to help reduce enforcement timelines, i had hoped it would have significance beyond its recommendations. it was a wake-up call and reminder of the board's power and responsibility to govern its operations and to break the cycle of eo control and suppression of complete information. it was intended to restore board staff's accountability for its performance which had suffered in part due to a long standing culture among the governing board of prioritizing loyalty and supportive staff ahead of enforcing accountability for board operations which i assert continues today to the detriment of the board. i believe this can clearly be seen in matters such as the ce audit, which i assume will be discussed by mr. frank in greater detail. i also believe the task force was at least a small catalyst for the many positive changes in internal enforcement improvements that were clearly needed and yet to come. admittedly, implementation of task force recommendations was not robust until the executive and enforcement management team resigned. i was thrilled when our dca partners worked to provide interim resources to stabilize and improve operations. these resources and personnel included a strong and trim eo candidate, mr. brooks, a team of investigators in the d of i, and soon after, an experienced new enforcement chief, miss bayless. as a result of the assistance provided by these parties, and our new strong and trim executive and enforcement leadership, the board's enforcement operations began to slowly improve over the course of 2015 and early 2016. there was also a new and refreshing climate at the board in general, one of transparency, collaboration, and mutual respect. the enforcement monitor distributed a board member survey on march 23rd, 2016, that asked board members to rate the support they had received over the past year from the eo and its staff, which was a direct commentary on mr. brooks and his newer staff, including ms. bayless. the vast majority of the feedback was highly positive, which was not the case with feedback regarding the preceding management. for the first time since my appointment i felt encouraged about the progress on the board and the direction the board was headed in. the board also had a full compliment of board members complete with a six to five public member majority which it has since once again lost, making it a five to four majority licensee board which is not its intended structure or what i believe is its most effective composition and potentially compromises the board independence to the industry it regulates. i believe there have been examples of how the board has become fairly close to the industry it regulates and has at times lost sight of its principal obligation to put consumers first. this includes, but is not limited to, the board's ongoing struggles to discipline lvn schools consistently not meeting regulatory standards. as a result california's nclex pass rate for the past five years has averaged 10 percentage points below the national average which may certainly have implications on patients safety. i began to see many concerning changes beginning in the spring of 2016. from my perspective, the gains the task force and the interim leadership had made in rolling back eo control seemed to be fading, and very few board members seemed to notice. the executive team advanced proposals that at times i felt were flawed and unsubstantiated. committees were reinstated but in my view were at times ineffective and simply an extension of the eo's control and authority and the harder and longer the board worked, the more ineffective it seemed to be. during mr brooks' tenure i would say that the time the board asked of its members which generally in line with the guidelines as delineated in the dca's board member training manual, which is approximately 8 to 12 meetings a year, including committee meetings. obviously much more time is required for the boards other at-home responsibilities, but i never found those requirements to go outside of the guidelines with the exception of the enforcement task force. although admittedly the time each board member serves varies depending upon their committee assignments, under the new executive leadership team that arrived in 2016 i would assert the amount of meeting days i was required to attend at least doubled and i was spending an extraordinary amount of time on board responsibilities without seeing additional progress. as one example of what i would call the working harder but not smarter approach the board was pushed out a third consecutive day to its august board meeting schedule, which has since repeated itself to allow for a full day board retreat to formulate its strategic plan with the assistance of dca's solid team. but in comments made directly to me by the eo in late september after the retreat, the eo summarily dismissed the solid effort as a bad product and as worthless. regarding the matter of eo control that i mentioned, i will provide the following support. during the summer of 2016, the eo distributed a new board administrative procedures manual that contained many sections limiting the governing board's involvement. it should be noted that had this manual been in place in 2014, the task force would never have been allowed to happen, as the provisions in the manual clearly, clearly prohibit the task force level of involvement. one section of this manual is entitled quote rules for contacting staff. this provision directed that board members should be not contacting staff or dca legal, and all communication should go through the eo except for largely administrative matters such as travel expense reimbursements. regarding these rules, i respectfully appeal to the eo, the board president, and dca legal while still on the board to reconsider this language. access to staff is an important check and balance on the eo's powers. using this language institutionalizes a framework for an eo to potentially abuse its powers. after i left, the board approved the manual, substantially without revision, thereby formally subjugating its own authority to its eo again, despite lessons learned from the task force experience. it should also be noted that long before this language was approved by the current board, it was regularly being practiced. and fear and intimidation were active tools being used to control information and communication. i experienced this first hand. i called the senior staff person with an innocuous follow-up to a board meeting in late august. this individual clearly felt compelled to report me to the eo. and my call was returned not by the intended staff, but by the eo, who made me explain as a governing board member why i had called staff. regarding committee meetings and their level of effectiveness that i had mentioned, i will offer the following support. in perhaps not all, but in most cases, the committee agendas and reports are authored by the current eo or staff under her direction. the meetings are again typically presided over and discussion is often lead by the eo. i myself experienced the eo's attempt to influence my committee meetings when i co-chaired the reconstituted enforcement committee in 2016. in an attempt to exert editorial control over my july enforcement committee summary report, which i authored, i was initially told i couldn't write comments about the enforcement monitor process or morale issues that existed in the division, which was untrue. additionally, the day before i was to chair the october committee meeting, i got into a brief and unnecessary exchange over what could be included in the agenda i had created for a board led committee meeting. furthermore, when i made a polite suggestion on a board meeting agenda in august, i was told by the eo that my suggestion served to quote, dismantle the agenda. and it was further implied that ab 179 essentially prevented me from participating in the development of the agenda, which it does not. and if further corroboration is needed of the committee's lack of engagement or visibility to important board operations, it should be noted that the highly significant ce audit compliance project and resulting issues was well in progress at the time of the enforcement committee's meeting held on january 11, 2017. yet the minutes from the meeting indicate that no mention of the project was made. nor is there evidence on the board's website or provided from the monitor that would suggest that any of the board committees that met around the time of this project, discussed or were made aware of this highly significant project with far reaching implications on board operations. regarding the proposals the board was setting forth and resulting poor direction the board was taking that i had mentioned, i can provide the following support. i felt as if the leadership team was making poor decisions that i was increasingly uncomfortable with. at the august 2016 board meeting, i voiced several objections to proposals that i felt were unsubstantiated and lacked accurate and rigorous analysis. these proposals were very significant in their implications. in the interest of wrapping up my testimony in a few minutes, i will only discuss two of these instances. our executive leadership team included a proposal to eliminate the employment equivalency pathway to licensure, notwithstanding the current administration's desire to alleviate unnecessary barriers to employment and the fact that the proposal provided no real evidence of patient harm caused by this class of licensees. as can clearly be seen, i'm the sole board member questioning this analysis in a lengthy discussion that bordered on the absurd. executive leadership and staff's analysis and discussion was filled with non-sequiturs and contradictory statements regarding the past rates and population of this group of candidates. and at one point, a licensee board member directly compared equivalency candidates to monkeys. additionally, as clearly can be seen, i strongly objected to the board's inclusion of the fee auditor's report and presentation, which was intended to support our leadership team's desire to augment and to provide for the gradual increase in the board's vn fees, which were at their statutory maximums. i will note that the report did advocate for the moderation of pt fees, but given the overwhelmingly proportional representation of vns to psychiatric technicians, the overall impact would be an increase in fees assessed. the report contained material misrepresentations of the board's fund condition, inaccurate assumptions and resulting analysis. and the incorrect suggestion that the board's fees had not been raised in 20 years, when they had, in fact, been raised to their statutory maximums in 2009. and certainly in my mind, the auditor nor did the board ever present evidence for justification as to why a board with over $11 million in funds and a comparable number of months in reserves would even need to pursue additional or increased fees. in my mind, asking the legislature to increase fees should come after all other possibilities have been exhausted and when there is a clear necessity to do it. it should be well noted that when both of these items were re-presented to the board in late october, after my departure, they were both approved by the board. i'd like to complete my testimony with my experiences relating to the monitor's second report to the legislature and the board's process in reviewing it. the enforcement monitor provided a comprehensive slate of recommendations to further improve performance in its second report, which was delivered in late september. i received an advance copy of this report, along with board executive staff and the then board president. i was supposed to serve on a board committee to review the report and meet in advance with the monitor, which never occurred due to the eo's refusal to meet with the monitor when it was announced the dca would also be present. i believe the report to be a detailed and comprehensive assessment of the board's enforcement program and that the recommendations were well thought out and would provide a strong foundation and road map for the future of the board. i found the tone of the report to generally be constructive, and willing to provide credit for the board's recent successes at improving its performance, yet appropriately critical where the board's performance warranted such feedback. i believed and still believe that the monitor's program of recommendations would greatly assist and are, in fact, now more than ever necessary to ensure that the board completes it's mandate of consumer protection. and unlike the eo and the apparent majority of the board, i had no issue with recommendations that reference and call for further implementation of the task force recommendations which i was responsible for creating. in at least one of these cases, the task force recommendation had never been implemented. and in another case, it had become admittedly stalled in its implementation. the refusal of these recommendations is antithetical to the board's responsibility to put the consumer first. instead, what did come first, was the board's self-serving desire to protect itself from critical feedback regarding the implementation of task force recommendations which had, in fact, stalled. but even before i was provided my copy, the eo excoriated the report, its tone, and the integrity of its author in multiple calls to me in my final days on the board. and it wasn't just the monitor that was the target. the eo made openly disparaging comments about the dca at all levels. on several of these calls, i felt extraordinary pressure to fall in line with what were essentially total repudiations of the monitor and our long standing dca partner. on my final call with the eo, when i believe i respectively and diplomatically disagreed with some of her viewpoints regarding the dca and the monitor report and asserted my right to do so, the open hostility turned on me. it was clear that my support for some of the monitor's recommendations was seen as undermining the board. and after a brief but unforgettable conversation, i decided i wanted nothing further to do with the board and tendered my resignation the following day. finally, it should be noted that the board went on to unanimously approve the sunset review report, which rejected 28 out of 29 monitor recommendations. that concludes my testimony, and thank you for the opportunity.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 41, 'end': 46, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 78, 'end': 97, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 110, 'end': 115, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 486, 'end': 491, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5011, 'end': 5017, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5026, 'end': 5033, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7639, 'end': 7644, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8152, 'end': 8158, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8258, 'end': 8265, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8839, 'end': 8845, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8881, 'end': 8888, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 10577, 'end': 10583, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Benjamin Frank: thank you, sir, chairman hill. i will now summarize for you the results of my assessment to the board that i completed during the past year. i apologize in advance. my comments are a little lengthy. it will take me about 30 minutes to complete my testimony. as you are already aware from the legislative staff summaries, the board's enforcement program was thrown in to disarray by the organizational and work flow changes that were implemented during 2011-12 and 2012-13. these changes included establishing a new non-sworn investigation section and assigning all licensee complaint cases to the new section, including cases involving serious criminal misconduct and significant patient harm that were previously referred to the department's division of investigation. as discussed by miss avella, members of the board began developing an awareness of these problems and appointed the enforcement task force to assess the board's enforcement and discipline processes. concurrently, reports surfaced during the board's sunset review about these organizational and operational problems and the scope and magnitude of the problems became apparent to the legislature. subsequently, ab 179 was enacted requiring the department to appoint a monitor to assess the board's enforcement program and specified administrative processes. on february 29th, 2016, dca awarded a contract to benjamin vivien frank llc to provide the monitor services. work on the project commenced almost immediately following contract award. during march and april of last year, i completed an initial assessment of the enforcement program. the initial report documenting results of the initial assessment was presented to the board's governing board in june. the initial report provided a summary of historical information that i had collected, compiled, and analyzed and provided a foundation for completing additional reviews and analyses during phases 2 and 3 of the project. additionally, in consultation with the department's contract manager and the board's executive officer and chief of enforcement, i prepared a work plan to guide completion of phases 2 and 3 during the remainder of 2016. additional interviews, research, and analyses of the enforcement program were completed during june, july and august. the second report highlighted the turnaround that had occurred during 2015-16 but also pointed out that there were continuing needs to further reduce legacy case backlogs, and the amount of time needed to complete investigations, and impose discipline. the second report also provided 29 recommendations to help address these and other improvement needs. the review of the draft's second report with the board's leadership team in late september was contentious. for example, the executive officer demanded that i delete some sections of the report and replace a summary of a confidential board member survey that i had previously completed with a subsequent non-confidential survey of board members, completed by the executive officer without my involvement. i was not agreeable to making these types of changes. additionally, the executive officer expressed disagreement with nearly all of the recommendations for improvement. also, during late september, the executive officer began limiting my access to the chief of enforcement, and a few weeks later the chief of enforcement began a leave of absence. the final second report documenting results of my phase two assessment efforts was presented to the board's governing board on october 20th. at about that same time, i was directed to submit all request for information through the executive officer, which delayed and further restricted my ability to obtain information directly from subordinate managers and rank and file staff. problems in this area later led to a meeting in mid-november with legislative staff to address these problems. during november and december, i completed an updated assessment of the enforcement program along with targeted assessments in several other areas. the third report documenting results of these efforts were submitted to the board's governing board during february. the third report again highlighted the turnaround that had occurred during 2015-16, but pointed out that this turnaround appeared to have stalled. a number of changes became evident that supported this conclusion. including one, reduced numbers of completed licensee arrest conviction report and non-sworn licensee complaint investigations. two, unchanged numbers of pending licensee arrest conviction report and non-sworn licensee complaint investigations. three, reduced numbers of completed discipline cases, and four, increased numbers of pending discipline cases. additionally, the average elapsed times to complete investigations and impose discipline, while improved in comparison to earlier periods, remained quite long. for example, the one-year average elapsed time to complete non-sworn investigations and the two-and-a-half-year average elapsed time from case receipt to completion of discipline for processes referred for discipline were both still quite long. additionally, the third report highlighted that staff turnover had increased and that, rather than continuing to decline, vacancy rates rose to about 17%. some of these positions had been vacant for extended periods of time, including the assistant executive officer position which, at that time, had already been vacant for 21 months. the board's elevated number of enforcement division- vacant enforcement division positions, the extended absence of the board's chief of enforcement, and turn over of experienced enforcement division staff appeared to be adversely impacting overall enforcement program performance. additionally, based on interviews conducted during early december with about two-thirds of all the enforcement division's staff, the overall work environment and workforce morale appeared to have deteriorated markedly since march of 2016, at least within the enforcement division. i also pointed out that the board's large number of vacant supervisory and management positions and the extent to which the board was utilizing short term, out of class assignments to temporarily fill these positions, and noted that these temporary assignments were not a substitute for filling the positions on a permanent basis. the third report also spotlighted the dependency of the board's governing board members on information provided to them by the executive officer for purposes of performing their oversight responsibilities. and noted that this dependency, while not unique to this board, can result in the board being unaware of performance or other problems as occurred previously. i suggested that oversight of the board's executive officer, and, by extension, the board's programs and operations, could potentially benefit from utilization of a 360 degree, multi-rater assessment process, in which feedback regarding the executive officer's performance is solicited from a variety of points of view, and then i recommended establishing a work group, a multi-agency work group, to assess needs for development of a 360 degree executive officer feedback process. and, if needed, the best approach and time frame for developing and implementing the process. the third report also provided a summary of the status of the board's implementation of the 29 recommendations for improvement provided in the second report. as of late december, the board had implemented just four recommendations, had partially implemented eight others, and had not yet began implementing any of the remaining 17 recommendations for improvement. finally, i disclosed in the third report a handful of potential problems that brought to my attention, that were brought to my attention, involving the board's licensing and support service business processes. these potential problems were not assessed because they were not within the scope of the monitor assignment. now, i would like to provide you with some additional updated information regarding the current status of the enforcement program and the overall health of the organization. what these updates show is that while the board's troubled history may not repeat itself, it does seem to rhyme. first, areas of improvement, some of these you've heard about. areas that have improved significantly since the boards last sunset review include, one, the handling of license applicant cases. two, the the handling of licensee subsequent arrest, conviction, report cases. and three, the referral of high priority licensee complaint cases to the department's division of investigation and the division's of investigation's handling of these cases. first, license applicant cases. the board no longer unnecessarily opens several thousand license applicant cases involving minor offenses and offenses that occurred in the distant past that have no bearing on the board's licensing decision. currently, only about 600 to 700 license applicant cases are referred to enforcement, and the enforcement division's complaint section analyst now consistently, promptly processed these cases. in most instances, the division authorizes issuance of the license, either without, or in conjunction with, a notice of warning. denials of licensure are issued in the remaining cases. on an annual basis, a few dozen of the denials are appealed, which prompts referral of the case to the attorney general's office for hearing. two, the licensee's subsequent arrest, conviction, report cases. the board continues to receive about 1500 licensee subsequent arrest, conviction, report cases per year, nearly all of which are now assigned to the complaint section analyst for desk investigation. these cases consistently account for more than one-half of all the cases that the board refers to the attorney general's office for discipline. however, during 2015-16 the complaint section analyst completed about 1,900 investigations of these cases, and a large number of cases closed during 2015-16 helped to reduce the number of pending cases. however, since that time, the pace of case closures has decreased and there has been no further reduction in the number of pending cases and little change in the average elapsed time to complete these investigations. three, licensee complaint cases referred to the department's division of investigation. following the board's last sunset hearing, several hundred high priority licensee complaint cases that had been languishing in the board's investigations section were transferred to the department's division of investigation. concurrently, the board began identifying high priority cases during intake and referring them to the division of investigation and, since that time, has been consistently referring about 180 to 200 cases per year to the division. initially, during 2015, the transferred legacy cases, along with the newly received cases, created a large backlog of more than 360 pending cases at the division and many of these cases were quite old. however, during 2016, the division began consistently completing these investigations at a rate faster than new cases were being assigned, which enabled it to reduce this back log along with the average age of its remaining pending cases. currently, the department's division of investigation has about 200 pending cases. about one-third of their investigations are referred for discipline, and these cases account for most of the licensee complaint cases that are referred for discipline. non-sworn licensee complaint investigations. the area where this board seems to continue to struggle most is with the handling of lower priority licensee complaint cases that are not referred to the department's division of investigation. as discussed in the third report, during the period from july to october 2016, the board's non-sworn investigation section completed an average of about a dozen licensee complaint investigations per month and there was little change in the number of pending investigations. to keep case loads manageable for investigators, only about one-half of the more than 400 cases assigned to the section were assigned to specific investigators. the remaining, more recently received cases, were placed on a pending shelf. subsequently, during november and december, the section continued to complete an average of about a dozen investigations per month which did not keep pace with the flow of newly assigned cases. as a result, the number of pending cases began to increase. as of late december, the section had more than 440 pending cases. for the 6 month period from july to december 2016, the board's investigation section completed a total of about 75 investigations. some of these cases were referred to discipline and about a dozen were closed with issuance of a citation. only a handful of the cases were closed with issuance of a now, or a notice of warning. then, over a one month period extending from late december to late january, the board abruptly reversed its process for completing non-sworn investigations of licensee complaint cases. the way that the investigation process usually works is that each case is assigned to an investigator to gather additional information about the case, including information to determine whether the alleged violation occurred, and to rule out other potential related violations. the results of the investigation are then reviewed by supervisory management personnel and discipline case analysts to determine whether the investigation was properly completed and whether the investigative findings support issuance of a now or a citation or referral of the case for discipline. the benefits of this process are that the investigation is not guided or conducted to achieve any predetermined outcome and blanket rules are not established regarding the type of discipline imposed for any broad category of cases. however, according to board staff in late december, at the specific direction of the executive officer, investigation staff began a review of the sections pending cases, including the 200 or so cases that had not yet been assigned to an investigator. the review specifically targeted cases involving sleeping on the job and time sheet fraud, but also encompassed other types of cases. following this review, and completion of some limited additional information gathering activities for some of the cases, 70 cases were abruptly closed with issuance of a notice of warning. specifically, on january 11th, 27 non-sworn investigation cases were closed with issuances of a now. on the same day, a 45 minute teleconference meeting was held with the board's enforcement committee, during which staff disclosed that they had initiated a review of the section's pending cases, and had identified 107 cases that could potentially be closed with a now. contemporaneous minutes of this meeting were not kept, but it is our understanding there is only a brief discussion of this topic. then on the next two days, january 12th and 13th, another 31 cases were closed with issuance of a now and over the next two weeks another 11 cases were closed with insurance of a now. during january, 24 other non-sworn investigations were also closed, but as of about two weeks ago, none of those other cases had resulted in either issuance of a citation, or referral of the case for discipline. in total, 94 non-sworn investigations were completed during january, equivalent to more than 20% of the sections 440 pending cases and about 75% of these cases we closed with issuance of a now. this compares to just 75 investigations completed during the entire preceding six month period with only a handful of nows issued for all of those cases. the abrupt closure of so many non sworn investigations in such a short period of time, and all with exactly the same outcome, which was issuance of a now, caught my immediate attention and prompted me to gather additional information about the surprising development. what i've since learned is encouraging in some respects and disconcerting in others. for example, it's encouraging that the board finally began to implement my earlier recommendation to screen and triage lower priority licensee complaint cases not referred to the division of investigation, to identify those that could be handled as desk investigations and completed more quickly by gathering some additional records, making some phone calls to confirm or clarify the information provided with the complaint. however, i'm not comfortable with how this new process was implemented and i think my discomfort is shared by both the department's division of investigation, and staff within the non-sworn investigation section. based on the information i've gathered to this point, it is self-evident from the large number of nows issued that the conventional investigatory process was reversed to instead search out cases where the currently available information could be used to support immediate closure of the cases with issuance of a now, rather than first investigating the cases and then determining what, if any, disciplinary outcome was supported by results of the investigation. i also believe that the section staff felt pressured to close cases with issuance of a now, in some cases without sufficiently investigating the cases. in summary, needs now exist to meet with the board's non-sworn investigators and re-review all of these cases, to identify any cases that need to be reopened and further investigated. at this point, i expect the board's investigators to be very forthcoming and helpful in identifying any such cases. additionally, until this re-review is completed, caution should be exercised in interpreting any workload, backlog, or performance data provided by the board concerning its recent handling of non-sworn investigation cases. discipline case processing. the board's discipline case processing, including the use of the attorney general's fast track program, is continuing to improve marginally in some respects. recently, however, there has been some additional accumulation of discipline cases. the recent increase in pending discipline cases appears to be the result of one, the increased number of discipline referrals to the ag, resulting from the larger number of investigations completed by the department's division of investigation. and two, larger numbers of subsequent discipline cases generated as a result of the large number of discipline case settlements reached during 2015-16, and related increases in the number of new probationers who are most likely to trigger subsequent discipline cases. management and staff turnover and vacancies. as of early march, about 20% of the board's positions were vacant. additionally, excluding the executive officer, five of the board's 10 supervisory and management positions were vacant. in my experience, i've never before seen such high levels of vacant positions, particularly at the supervisory and management levels. the board's management structure has partially collapsed, particularly with respect to the enforcement program. one adverse consequence of the loss of key management personnel is that for the past seven weeks the board has been unable to issue subpoenas for records that are needed to complete its enforcement investigations. additionally, there are not currently any outside expert witnesses available to review cases involving psychiatric technicians. and there is only one outside expert witness available to review cases involving vocational nurses, and it is my understanding that outside expert witness recruitment activities have been stalled since the executive officer's leave began seven weeks ago. also, probation reviews of new staff are no longer being consistently completed on a timely basis, as was previously the case. all of these circumstances increase the board's vulnerability to various risk and should be a cause of considerable concern. my last topic is the continuing education compliance audit project. the continuing education compliance audit project, which has already been in the news, is illustrative of a broad range of problems that continue to be experienced by this board. despite obvious major problems with this project throughout the past four months, nothing has been done to restructure or abort this misguided, poorly conceived, runaway project. it is my understanding the ce compliance audit project was initiated in late november during a meeting between the executive officer, the acting assistant executive officer, and two support staff. the project was launched shortly thereafter with the creation of a mass mailing list, the printing of about 57,000 dated audit letters, and the redirection of staff to stuff thousands of envelopes. then, in early december, management apparently realized that they would be unable to complete the mailing. but rather than recognizing if board staff were unable to even complete the mailing, then they certainly wouldn't be able to process the responses, management instead requested that the department's office of business services complete the remaining mailings. then, in early january, after requesting, expediting, receiving delivery of a large supply of window envelopes from the office of state printing, the office of business services completed about 50,000 additional mailings. from this sequence of activities, it is evident that it was not the board's intention to spread the mailings out in batches over a period of several months, as was suggested by the board's acting assistant executive officer during the board's february 10th meeting, or to send out 1,000 letter waves, spaced two weeks apart that was stated by the board in it's february 24th correspondence to assembly staff. this latter report approach would have required more than two full years just to complete the mailings and would still have generated an overwhelming amount of work for board staff. had the board utilized the 1,000 piece wave approach, it would have unleashed upon itself a 28-month-long flood of ce submittals, rather than the two month long tsunami of submittals that it instead experienced. since completion of the mailings in early january, a group of two permanent full-time staff, two half-time retired annuitants, and one permanent full-time analyst on a half-time basis have been working on this project. this is equivalent to three and a half full-time positions. additionally, other staff have been supporting the project on an intermittent basis and overtime was utilized during mid to late january to support the project and the use of overtime continued into february. finally, at least two half-time aarp volunteers, equivalent to another full-time position, have been assigned to the project. to help handle deluge of submittals that were initially received, all of the enforcement division's managers, along with others, spent a full day together just opening mail. the board's public phone lines have been continuously overflowing since early january, and during january the board also received overflowing volumes of emails and faxes. the ce compliance audit has adversely impacted operations throughout much of the board and has diverted staff, management, board member, and oversight agency attention from other more important business needs. every passing day this project unnecessarily wastes more money and resources. the problems with this project will not somehow resolve themselves over the next several months as some seem to believe. two weeks i visited the board's offices and interviewed most of the staff that had been subsequently involved in supporting this project since its inception. i also requested access to a locked, vacant manager's office where i found more than 100 us postal service mail baskets filled with open but unprocessed ce submittals. in this same office there were just five baskets containing submittals that have been preliminary reviewed, but still needed to be re-reviewed and completed by the board's ce audit specialist. today, they have only about one basket of submittals has been fully processed by the ce audit specialist. finally, there were a couple of trace that appear to contain about 800 pieces of unopened return mail but rubber banded stacks of unopened return mail were also present in many of the 100+ baskets of opened mail that had not yet been processed. these baskets may also contain license application fee remittances or other documents unrelated to ce that were not correctly separated from the ce documents. the board does not track the ce submittals as they are received against the initial mailing list. thus, there is absolutely no way that anybody can provide even a ballpark guesstimate as to how many of the 57,000 targeted licensees have actually responded to the mailing. tracking against the initial mailing list is only completed by the board ce audit specialist after completing a final review of the submittals and updating briefs. for various reasons, staff assigned to complete the preliminary review of the submittals sometimes experienced problems that prevent them from completing the reviews. the submittals with problems were set aside in separate stacks for subsequent review and handling by the audit specialist, who cannot possibly keep pace with the incoming flow of work generated by all the different staff involved in performing the preliminary case reviews. to date, the audit specialist has completed reviews and breeze updates for only about 1,000 ce audit cases. based on actual performance, it clearly does not take an average of just 30 seconds to two minutes to review these submittals as has been stated by the board. in fact, it probably took close to that amount of time per submittal just to open, date stamp and assemble the documents for subsequent processing. according to the board's acting executive officer, about 4,000 submitted packages have been preliminary reviewed today as evidenced by the board's issuance of about 4,000 letters of compliance. however, in some cases, these letters were issued in error. in these cases, the ce audit specialist issues a letter of non-compliance to the licensee, after the licensee's already received a letter stating they were in compliance. so needless to say, this process necessarily creates a great deal of confusion among the affected licensees. assuming that the board continues to process an average of three baskets of submittals per month, using all the same staffing resources that have been allocated to the project since the start of the year, it will take two to three years just to do the preliminary reviews of the currently accumulated baskets of submittals. this does not account for any of the more time consuming work associated with completing the final reviews of the submittals and upgrading breeze, following up with licensees in cases where they're not in compliance with the ce requirements, following up with all the licensees that didn't even respond to the initial mailing and who are especially likely to have completed little or no ce, and tracking down thousands of licensees in cases where the initial mailings were returned to the board because they were not deliverable to the address that the board had on file. additionally, most of more than 5,000 emails that the board has received have not yet been processed at all. finally, in those instances where the submittals do show compliance with the board's ce requirements, the processes being used may not be producing documentation sufficient to support an actionable enforcement case. if enforcement actions are able to be initiated, then significant additional resources will be needed to perform citation preparation, issuance, fine collection and appeal handling services. this debacle needs to be stopped and it needs to be stopped now. there is no realistic path forward for this wasteful project. if the board does not promptly abort this project, then legislation should be introduced to require such action. hopefully, that would prompt the board to terminate the project on its own accord. in conclusion, recent events and the board's current circumstances may not repeat the specific events and circumstances that existed prior to the board's previous sunset review. but they certainly have a familiar ring. in closing, i'd like to express my gratitude to the department of consumer affairs leadership team, the department's project manager, bryan clifford, and the department's division of investigation, office of information services, and office of human resources for their cooperation and assistance throughout the past year and particularly during the past six months. additionally, i would like to thank board staff for their open and candid communication with me during my on site interviews, particularly, again, during the past six months. and i would especially like to thank those staff, who within, found ways to continuously relay additional information to me through various other communication channels. the information they provided was invaluable in enabling me to complete my assessments and helped immeasurably to keep me up-to-date regarding changes occurring at the board. and that concludes my testimony and thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 29, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 791, 'end': 797, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 28511, 'end': 28519, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tammy Endozo: My name is Tammy Endozo, I'm the current Board President of the Vocational Nursing and Psychiatric Technicians, thank you for the opportunity to present today on behalf of the Board of Vocational Nursing and Psychiatric Technicians. The Board looks forward to working collaboratively with the committees, DCA, the Business Services, Consumer and Housing Agency, and the enforcement monitor to provide the protection of the consumers. The Board's mission is the protection of the consumers of the State of California. The Board accomplishes that mandate through regulation of the education, licensure and practice of licensed vocational nurses and psychiatric technicians, by the timely execution of existing disciplinary statutes and regulations, and by proposing new legislation and regulations that strengthen and enhance the protection of consumers. Since the last sunset review, the Board has implemented a number of critical changes. Briefly, those changes include, one, the Board successfully transitioned to the new BreEZe licensing and enforcement system on January 19th, 2016. This system provides enhanced online services and accessibility for consumers. Two, revise the organizational structure to improve accountability and enhance oversight over staff and critical Board processes. Three, overhaul the enforcement division. As a result, during fiscal year 2014-2015 through 2015-2016, the Board received 1,622 complaints alleging incompetence and, or unprofessional practice by licensees. We closed investigations on 12,252 licenses, referred 654 applicants and licensees for formal discipline, revoked or accepted surrender of 408 licenses, and collected a $182,278 in citation and fine revenue. Four, based on the monitor's recommendation, the Board established a probation unit with new staffing infrastructure. All probation unit positions are currently filled, newly created discipline unit. Five, expanded candidate pool for the four vacant nursing education consultant positions to allow qualified candidates to work in a home-based capacity. Six, instituted quarterly meetings for all staff, increased internal and external training of existing staff. As a part of the Board's outreach to consumers, the Board launched a new and approved website that was more user friendly, designed and printed three new brochures as a part of its outreach to consumers. Effective fiscal year 2016-2017, completion of the following operational improvements is projected. Complete development and revision of the internal procedures manual. B, regarding enforcement division in accordance with the monitor's recommendation, Board's records of conviction form will be revised. Completed implementation of procedures relative to screening and assignment of complaints that do not require field investigation. And I am not sure, Senator Hill, if you want me to go through the adequate staffing and Board management leadership, those are the questions, I believe, that Mr. Gage had sent over.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2839, 'end': 2843, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2974, 'end': 2978, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Vertido: yes, sir, my name is john benjamin vertido, i'm the board nursing educator, and in regards to mr. glazer's request, i'm probably the longest serving member on the board. i am currently in my grace period, i was appointed in 2005, under governor schwarzenegger, and then re-appointed under governor brown, so i have probably the longest institutional knowledge of the board. i agree with the 360, i have been trained as a certified strategic planner and that's one of the things we do agree on, is if you're going to give good customer service, you need to know about the people in the front line, your customers, people above you, to give that good imput. as a former board president, with my two other colleagues here, i run at least five of the executive officer evaluations, and while we gave input as board members, as her immediate supervisor, it was always good to be able to give good comments from the rank and file, to hear how's it going, what's going on? also, as the last president of the board that actually lived in northern california, all subsequent presidents have lived in the southern part of the state, so it was quite easy for me to stop by the board and walk through the board offices and see how people were doing. i visited gina a couple times when she was in her offices, and i was unaccompanied by any of the executive officers, but that didn't always happen, because i was usually escorted by the executive officer, but when i would arrive early, i would see members of the staff and just engage them in routine conversation. how's it going, how's your work progressing, what's your name, where do you work? and get that type of information, so i felt i was relatively approachable to the rank and file members of the board for their input, and i would go around, ask questions about the decorations in their cubicle, family members, talking about the work they did, how important it was contributing to the health and welfare of our citizens. these are people, are licensees, who affect the lives of people everyday, and i take very seriously, as i know my other members do, that protection of the public, we deal with people at their most vulnerable, and it's important that we maintain that integrity, and that we maintain that level of care to see for their health and welfare, so i know my colleagues feel the same way. and it's a question that, if we're doing it, then i feel that we didn't do a good enough job, but it is hard to do supervision by remote control. and so we try to do visits as often as possible, sam, previous board president, came up as often as possible, and now tammy, our current board president, is coming up as much as she can. today is a good example of how she will leave her home in southern california and fly up to be here, but these problems is, in endorsing the 360, we do need that feedback, because we trust our employees, we trust the people, and we hope that they would be honest with us and telling us what they really think rather than hearing it through a filter, mr. frank was also right, we get a majority of our information from the executive officer, because they are our point of contact who we're supposed to be getting most of the information through, and that is to maintain information, 360, to all parts of the chain of command.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 98, 'end': 104, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 245, 'end': 259, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 298, 'end': 303, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1248, 'end': 1252, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2547, 'end': 2550, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2616, 'end': 2621, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3039, 'end': 3044, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tim Cameron: Chairman Salas, thank you for the opportunity to speak. My name is Tim Cameron, and I represent SEIU Local 1000. I have a few points and I'll be brief as we've been here a while, and I know that. First I want to thank the Committee consultants for all of their hard work. They have done an excellent job writing these sunset reports, and I'm sure I'm not the only one that had quite a bit of reading to do this weekend. Their information was beyond informative, and it was an excellent resource providing context, and a level of sophistication to the situation. Second, we support the Assembly recommendation to hold off at the moment. As this hearing has kind of noted for all of us, it's been illuminating. A lot of things have been shown, and there are definitely different perspectives. In fact, I think the board said it eloquently when they said, it's clear we all need to get on the same page. So we appreciate the recommendation from the Assembly Committee consultant, to hold off until after this hearing. We also appreciate, Chairman, your actual suggestion that the board should meet with staff. We think this is a good idea that'll allow everyone, if not to agree, at least to understand what they're all talking about and where their positions come from. Lastly, we partially endorsed the Senate staff consultant's recommendation, to at least keep the board in existence. We do not support a temporary creation of a bureau, even if only for a year, because we believe that would only cause more disruption and chaos for our members, licensees and consumers. We think the issue would low turn, low morale, is partially due to a constant change in the day to day operations of our members. When a person comes in to do their job, they're being pulled aside to do other things. They're being asked to change it. Whether that's from audit requests, monitor requests or just day to day changes from the board. Regardless, it's a lot to do, and it's a lot of burdensome work when you keep coming to sit down and do one thing, and you're not really sure if you're going to have time to do it. So we think instead, creating a bureau will only allow more transition problems, more disruption, another need for another audit once we come back to the original board again, in a year or two from now. It doesn't make sense. Consistency is what we think is important and so we would instead, hope that the administration would work with the BVNPT board and the Legislature, to come up with a solution that is consistent and allows our members to know what they're going to be doing, day to day. Thank you.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 14, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 67, 'end': 78, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Coby Pizzotti: Mr. Chair, my name is Coby Pizzotti with the California Association of Psychiatric Technicians. My colleague from SCIU just basically stole my thunder. So I will just basically echo his statements, and especially the point about rolling the board into a bureau. We only represent 12,000 licensees in the state, so that's a very small number of individuals. As well as the fact, what we do is highly specialized. Being rolled up into a bureaucratic system where the expertise of what somebody does is lost, and you don't have a board who truly understand, or this board does truly understand what it is that we do, and how we provide the best practices in the best care possible. I just want to make one comment about the makeup of the board, and how it was stated that the board is a five to four makeup now. Well it's a five to four makeup because there was one recent resignation, and then there's two vacant positions. Those vacant positions are to be filled by the Governor. So if the Governor fills those vacant positions, it will be back to a six to five make up. But as one of the board members did eloquently say, these people are volunteers, they've sworn an oath to uphold the profession that they're overseeing, and to ensure that the consumers and the licensees, have their best interest at heart. So thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Samantha Sanchez: good afternoon my name is samantha john sanchez. i am the past president of the northern california directors obligational nursing program and i represent gurnick academy of medical arts. i hope you take into consideration that turning this board into a bureau, is not a good idea. not only does it not sit well with the lvn's and the site techs, but it also lowers the morale. and i echo miss vilma gaines from lvnl's point of view that it takes time to to get this board together and then give them time to collaborate with the department of consumer affairs and maybe also take into consideration that they're under staff. so it takes a long time to get an organization, or an institution to really function accordingly. one of the things that you need to take into consideration is giving support, especially to the nursing education consultants. i've worked closely with the nursing education consultants for so many years, and was invited in their strategic plan last year and i have never seen a board who collaborates with the schools, and the nurse educators. thank you very much.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 394, 'end': 406, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Elizabeth Estrada: Honorable members of the Assembly and Senate Business Professions and Economic Development Committee, I am Elizabeth Estrada and I am the President of the Southern California Directors of Vocational Nursing Programs and I'm here to speak to you on behalf of those program directors and vocational nursing programs, which we oversee. I'm reading a prepared comment. It should take less than two and a half minutes. One of the many areas of emphasis of great concern is directly associated with our ability to gain access to pertinent information which is necessary to ensure the highest degree of oversight before, during, and after the graduates sits for the NCLEX-PN licensing exam. The result of these tests in many cases have yielded unfavorable and direct negative impact on the State of California for which program directors are 100% responsible and accountable. It is our belief that new legislation can be discussed, developed, and implemented, allowing for the appropriate tools and strategies to overcome our current standing as the lowest ranking in the nation. Let me repeat, lowest ranking in the nation. As directors, we believe that it is our responsibility to offer our knowledge and expertise to the conversation. We have been advised that there may be legislative changes necessary. Our goal is to continue to comply with emission of the Board of Vocational Nursing and Psychiatric Technicians, but do so with the highest degree of support from our state and our state legislatures. We recognize that the laws, rules and regulations are in place for a reason and jurisdictional governance is of utmost importance. We also understand and recognize there comes a time to adopt new legislation, that which will enhance and achieve the objective. Those objectives which reflect the most current and up to date changes in the profession. Past practice has been to seek assistance directly from the Board and it's staff which we have done so repeatedly. However, we do feel a need to forward our efforts for support by reaching out directly to the Business and Profession Economic Development Committee because there is a concern that the structure of the board is not as stable as it could be. To support the over arching importance of our quest, we look forward to a constructive discussions and deliberations in the future, as we navigate the NCLEX-PN exam that rendered results and the impact on the profession, the State of California, and California's community at large. I do have copies of my comments for you-
[{'start': 107, 'end': 124, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Benjamin Frank: Good morning, Chairman Hill, Chairman Salas, and Committee Members and staff. And thank you for providing me with this opportunity to provide you with a brief summary of the work I've completed during the past year as the Administrative Enforcement Program Monitor for the Board of Vocational Nursing and Psychiatric Technicians. And by the way, I'm Ben Frank and I'm the chief Executive Officer of Benjamin Frank, LLC. By way of introduction, I began my professional career working for an accounting firm while completing my Master of Business Administration at Washington University in St. Louis. My management consulting career began with performing workload, staffing and business process re-engineering analyses for Fortune 200 manufacturing firms in high technology and other industries. Subsequently, during the early 1980's, I joined the Sacramento office of Arthur Young, a big 8 accounting and consulting services firm. Which subsequently merged with Ernst & Whinney to become Ernst&Young. While with Ernst &Young, I specialized in providing organizational assessment, program evaluation, and staffing and financial analysis services to public sector agencies at the State and local level in California and other western region states. I have successfully completed more than 100 engagements for California State government, including projects performed for the State Auditor general, the Department of Justice, and committees of the State Legislature. My experience includes more than 50 organizational workload staffing and business process re-engineering engagements. I have previously been involved with four separate monitor engagements. During 2001/2, and 2002/3, under a contract with the Contractor's State License Board, I provided enforcement program data collection, analysis and reporting services to support the Center for Public Interest Law, which at that time was the Contractors Board Enforcement Monitor. During 2002/3 I served as enforcement monitor for the Dental Board. During 2004/5, I worked again with the Center for Public Interest Law, which was the Medical Board Enforcement Monitor. My responsibilities included collecting, compiling, and analyzing all enforcement program data. And additionally, I completed a detailed assessment to the medical board's diversion program. And in 2005/6, I served as Operations and Enforcement Monitor for the Bureau of Private Post-Secondary and Vocational Education. Over the years, I should say decades, I've also completed several other projects for both the Contractors Board and the Medical Board, involving their licensing and enforcement programs and their administrative and forward support processes. My experience with California State Government licensing and enforcement programs also includes projects completed for the Air Resources Board, the Board of Accountancy, the Board of Optometry, the Bureau of Automotive Repair, the Department of Boating and Waterways, the Department of Motor Vehicles, the Department of Pesticide Regulation and the State Treasurers Office. Before my presentation, I would first like to have Ms. Vivian Novella and Ms. Gina Bayless on my left here share with you their experiences with this board. Ms. Avella was appointed to the board in September 2013, and was a lead member of the boards enforcement task force. She was subsequently a member of the board's Enforcement Committee after it was reactivated during 2016 but then resigned from the board last October. Ms. Bayless was hired by the board a few months after it's March 2015 Sunset review, and served at that point forward as the boards chief of enforcement until taking a leave of absence in October 2016. And then separating from the board in January of 2017. Ms. Ovella?
[{'start': 23, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 38, 'end': 43, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 350, 'end': 359, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3111, 'end': 3125, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3134, 'end': 3146, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3217, 'end': 3223, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3485, 'end': 3492, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3742, 'end': 3748, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Vivien Avella: Good morning, Chairman Hill and Chairman Salas, Committee Members. My name is Vivien Avella, and as Mr. Frank stated, I served as a public member of the Board for three years. I have come here at the request of the committees to provide my relevant experiences and perspectives with regard to the board's overall management and government process. And specifically, my experience in enforcement. I expect my testimony to last approximately 15 minutes. I was appointed by Governor Brown in September, 2013. And was reappointed in June of 2016, and regrettably resigned four months later in October. In the past few years, there certainly have been some board successes and I believe that the board was on positive path beginning in early to mid 2015. But in 2016, I believe that significant barriers to providing meaningful oversight had once again been created and we're allowed to persist. I felt the board was headed in poor direction and I did not want to be accountable for decisions where I couldn't meaningfully contribute or do my job. My professional background includes extensive years in the corporate finance and consulting sector. I have held positions in investment banking, as treasurer and officer of publicly held technology company. And as director and senior managing director for the financial consulting arms of Ernst & Young and FTI Consulting, respectively. In these later positions, my work was focused on the financial and operational restructuring of distressed and bankrupt companies, and I was told that because of this background, I might be well-suited to the operational challenges of the board. I understood that my role as Board Member was to ask the tough questions, and provide meaningful oversight and governance to the board, which was an obligation I took quite seriously. In my first months on the board, I became very concerned with the level of the Board's operational difficulties and significant backlogs. I will primarily discuss my experiences with enforcement and matters that occurred in 2016 during my tenure. But I'd like to briefly discuss one historical challenge in the education division, so as to demonstrate that the Board's difficulties represent repeated and systemic management and government's issues not limited to the Boards enforcement activities. For years, the Board has struggled with a significant backlog in the processing and review of new school applications. As far back as 2008, there was a backlog of over 70 schools. This number had double to 144 by the time I joined the board in late 2013. But there were no active committees to provide oversight, and very few tough questions were asked. And there were seemingly no consequences to management or the board, so that backlog persisted for several years. I was in a minority of board members who questioned the EO in rigorous fashion regarding this issue at several board meetings and in followup communications. I ask for analyses of average processing timelines, goal setting, and also ask for a business plan for how to deal with this issue. I also inquired as to why the process took so long and several times asked the board to consider reclassifying the NEC position to other more easily fillable positions so the Board could complete its workload. The only significant action that the Board took at that time was to impose a moratorium on the processing of new school applications which did nothing to address the fundamental backlog itself. The EO stated that the backlog resulted from the Board's inability to attract and retain NEC's due to salary restraints out of its control. But that information was incomplete and did not alleviate the Board's need to probe new solutions and address its backlog. Ultimately, the senior staff did in fact provide appropriate goal setting reports and tracking which I do think contributed to the board's eventual success. And substantially eliminating the backlog in 2015. Onto enforcement. In my first few months on the Board, I became extremely concerned about the aging of disciplinary cases the Board reviewed. On average, the cases seemed to take three years to fully adjudicate, and in some cases even longer. These observations were corroborated in the quarterly enforcement statistics published by the DCA and included in the Board's quarterly reports. Performance statistic PM4, which the Committee is familiar with, consistently exceeded 1,000 days or three years as far back as 2010. The Consumer Protection Enforcement Initiative provides for a target goal of 540 days or 18 months. I made similar attempts to rigorously question management regarding its performance. I was told that delays in the Attorney General's Office and the lack of authorized positions were to blame and the board had no control to improve its performance. These unsupported claims have been proven inaccurate and misleading in both my work on the task force, in the findings of the enforcement monitor, and in statements made by the interim CO Mr. Brooks and Ms. Bayless. I'm happy to answer specific questions and provide more detail to the Committee regarding this assertion in the question and answer period if necessary. Which brings me to the origins of the enforcement task force, of which I am the founder and principle author of its recommendations and reports. A Legislative Affairs office report released in 2014 ranked the BVNPT 19 out of 19 healing Arts Boards and 36 out of 37 of total Boards in terms of the PM4 statistic at over 1200 days. Attempts I made to leverage this scathing report to start an active dialogue with our executive leadership team in the summer of 2014 were unsuccessful. At the following board meeting in September of 2014, I very publicly called out the Board's performance as unacceptable. That same day, the Board approved the formation of the enforcement task force and I was appointed the principal chairperson. I agreed to present findings at the following board meeting and then subsequently chose a Co-Chair to assist. In the task force work, we freely reached out as necessary and appropriate to Board staff, DCA leadership, DCA Finance, DCA Legal, the Department of Investigations, the AG's office and BR and Exec, the Board of Registered Nursing Executive and Enforcement Program staff, in order to gain insights and complete our investigation. While this level and volume of contact is admittedly not typical for Board members, it was highly necessary given the boards predicament. Within two months the task force had developed the slate of recommendations designed to fulfill its mission, which was to quickly investigate and formulate high value target recommendations to reduce the extended enforcement processing timelines. The Board approved all of the task force recommendation in November of 2014 and directed its EO to immediately proceed with implementation. While the primary goal of the task force was to help reduce enforcement timelines, I had hoped it would have significance beyond its recommendations. It was a wake-up call and reminder of the Board's power and responsibility to govern its operations and to break the cycle of EO control and suppression of complete information. It was intended to restore Board staff's accountability for its performance which had suffered in part due to a long standing culture among the governing board of prioritizing loyalty and supportive staff ahead of enforcing accountability for Board operations which I assert continues today to the detriment of the Board. I believe this can clearly be seen in matters such as the CE audit, which I assume will be discussed by Mr. Frank in greater detail. I also believe the task force was at least a small catalyst for the many positive changes in internal enforcement improvements that were clearly needed and yet to come. Admittedly, implementation of task force recommendations was not robust until the executive and enforcement management team resigned. I was thrilled when our DCA partners worked to provide interim resources to stabilize and improve operations. These resources and personnel included a strong and trim EO candidate, Mr. Brooks, a team of investigators in the D of I, and soon after, an experienced new Enforcement Chief, Miss Bayless. As a result of the assistance provided by these parties, and our new strong and trim executive and enforcement leadership, the board's enforcement operations began to slowly improve over the course of 2015 and early 2016. There was also a new and refreshing climate at the board in general, one of transparency, collaboration, and mutual respect. The Enforcement Monitor distributed a board member survey on March 23rd, 2016, that asked board members to rate the support they had received over the past year from the EO and its staff, which was a direct commentary on Mr. Brooks and his newer staff, including Ms. Bayless. The vast majority of the feedback was highly positive, which was not the case with feedback regarding the preceding management. For the first time since my appointment I felt encouraged about the progress on the Board and the direction the Board was headed in. The Board also had a full compliment of board members complete with a six to five public member majority which it has since once again lost, making it a five to four majority licensee board which is not its intended structure or what I believe is its most effective composition and potentially compromises the Board independence to the industry it regulates. I believe there have been examples of how the board has become fairly close to the industry it regulates and has at times lost sight of its principal obligation to put consumers first. This includes, but is not limited to, the Board's ongoing struggles to discipline LVN schools consistently not meeting regulatory standards. As a result California's NCLEX pass rate for the past five years has averaged 10 percentage points below the national average which may certainly have implications on patients safety. I began to see many concerning changes beginning in the spring of 2016. From my perspective, the gains the task force and the interim leadership had made in rolling back EO control seemed to be fading, and very few board members seemed to notice. The executive team advanced proposals that at times I felt were flawed and unsubstantiated. Committees were reinstated but in my view were at times ineffective and simply an extension of the EO's control and authority and the harder and longer the Board worked, the more ineffective it seemed to be. During Mr Brooks' tenure I would say that the time the Board asked of its members which generally in line with the guidelines as delineated in the DCA's board member training manual, which is approximately 8 to 12 meetings a year, including Committee meetings. Obviously much more time is required for the Boards other at-home responsibilities, but I never found those requirements to go outside of the guidelines with the exception of the enforcement task force. Although admittedly the time each board member serves varies depending upon their Committee assignments, under the new executive leadership team that arrived in 2016 I would assert the amount of meeting days I was required to attend at least doubled and I was spending an extraordinary amount of time on Board responsibilities without seeing additional progress. As one example of what I would call the working harder but not smarter approach the Board was pushed out a third consecutive day to its August board meeting schedule, which has since repeated itself to allow for a full day board retreat to formulate its strategic plan with the assistance of DCA's solid team. But in comments made directly to me by the EO in late September after the retreat, the EO summarily dismissed the solid effort as a bad product and as worthless. Regarding the matter of EO control that I mentioned, I will provide the following support. During the summer of 2016, the EO distributed a new board administrative procedures manual that contained many sections limiting the governing board's involvement. It should be noted that had this manual been in place in 2014, the task force would never have been allowed to happen, as the provisions in the manual clearly, clearly prohibit the task force level of involvement. One section of this manual is entitled quote Rules for Contacting Staff. This provision directed that board members should be not contacting staff or DCA legal, and all communication should go through the EO except for largely administrative matters such as travel expense reimbursements. Regarding these rules, I respectfully appeal to the EO, the board President, and DCA legal while still on the board to reconsider this language. Access to staff is an important check and balance on the EO's powers. Using this language institutionalizes a framework for an EO to potentially abuse its powers. After I left, the Board approved the manual, substantially without revision, thereby formally subjugating its own authority to its EO again, despite lessons learned from the task force experience. It should also be noted that long before this language was approved by the current Board, it was regularly being practiced. And fear and intimidation were active tools being used to control information and communication. I experienced this first hand. I called the senior staff person with an innocuous follow-up to a board meeting in late August. This individual clearly felt compelled to report me to the EO. And my call was returned not by the intended staff, but by the EO, who made me explain as a governing board member why I had called staff. Regarding Committee meetings and their level of effectiveness that I had mentioned, I will offer the following support. In perhaps not all, but in most cases, the Committee agendas and reports are authored by the current EO or staff under her direction. The meetings are again typically presided over and discussion is often lead by the EO. I myself experienced the EO's attempt to influence my Committee meetings when I co-chaired the reconstituted Enforcement Committee in 2016. In an attempt to exert editorial control over my July Enforcement Committee summary report, which I authored, I was initially told I couldn't write comments about the enforcement monitor process or morale issues that existed in the division, which was untrue. Additionally, the day before I was to chair the October Committee meeting, I got into a brief and unnecessary exchange over what could be included in the agenda I had created for a board led Committee meeting. Furthermore, when I made a polite suggestion on a board meeting agenda in August, I was told by the EO that my suggestion served to quote, dismantle the agenda. And it was further implied that AB 179 essentially prevented me from participating in the development of the agenda, which it does not. And if further corroboration is needed of the Committee's lack of engagement or visibility to important board operations, it should be noted that the highly significant CE audit compliance project and resulting issues was well in progress at the time of the Enforcement Committee's meeting held on January 11, 2017. Yet the minutes from the meeting indicate that no mention of the project was made. Nor is there evidence on the Board's website or provided from the monitor that would suggest that any of the board committees that met around the time of this project, discussed or were made aware of this highly significant project with far reaching implications on board operations. Regarding the proposals the board was setting forth and resulting poor direction the board was taking that I had mentioned, I can provide the following support. I felt as if the leadership team was making poor decisions that I was increasingly uncomfortable with. At the August 2016 board meeting, I voiced several objections to proposals that I felt were unsubstantiated and lacked accurate and rigorous analysis. These proposals were very significant in their implications. In the interest of wrapping up my testimony in a few minutes, I will only discuss two of these instances. Our executive leadership team included a proposal to eliminate the employment equivalency pathway to licensure, notwithstanding the current administration's desire to alleviate unnecessary barriers to employment and the fact that the proposal provided no real evidence of patient harm caused by this class of licensees. As can clearly be seen, I'm the sole board member questioning this analysis in a lengthy discussion that bordered on the absurd. Executive leadership and staff's analysis and discussion was filled with non-sequiturs and contradictory statements regarding the past rates and population of this group of candidates. And at one point, a licensee board member directly compared equivalency candidates to monkeys. Additionally, as clearly can be seen, I strongly objected to the Board's inclusion of the fee Auditor's report and presentation, which was intended to support our leadership team's desire to augment and to provide for the gradual increase in the Board's VN fees, which were at their statutory maximums. I will note that the report did advocate for the moderation of PT fees, but given the overwhelmingly proportional representation of VNs to psychiatric technicians, the overall impact would be an increase in fees assessed. The report contained material misrepresentations of the Board's fund condition, inaccurate assumptions and resulting analysis. And the incorrect suggestion that the Board's fees had not been raised in 20 years, when they had, in fact, been raised to their statutory maximums in 2009. And certainly in my mind, the auditor nor did the board ever present evidence for justification as to why a board with over $11 million in funds and a comparable number of months in reserves would even need to pursue additional or increased fees. In my mind, asking the Legislature to increase fees should come after all other possibilities have been exhausted and when there is a clear necessity to do it. It should be well noted that when both of these items were re-presented to the board in late October, after my departure, they were both approved by the board. I'd like to complete my testimony with my experiences relating to the monitor's second report to the Legislature and the Board's process in reviewing it. The Enforcement Monitor provided a comprehensive slate of recommendations to further improve performance in its second report, which was delivered in late September. I received an advance copy of this report, along with board executive staff and the then board President. I was supposed to serve on a board Committee to review the report and meet in advance with the monitor, which never occurred due to the EO's refusal to meet with the monitor when it was announced the DCA would also be present. I believe the report to be a detailed and comprehensive assessment of the Board's enforcement program and that the recommendations were well thought out and would provide a strong foundation and road map for the future of the board. I found the tone of the report to generally be constructive, and willing to provide credit for the Board's recent successes at improving its performance, yet appropriately critical where the Board's performance warranted such feedback. I believed and still believe that the monitor's program of recommendations would greatly assist and are, in fact, now more than ever necessary to ensure that the Board completes it's mandate of consumer protection. And unlike the EO and the apparent majority of the board, I had no issue with recommendations that reference and call for further implementation of the task force recommendations which I was responsible for creating. In at least one of these cases, the task force recommendation had never been implemented. And in another case, it had become admittedly stalled in its implementation. The refusal of these recommendations is antithetical to the Board's responsibility to put the consumer first. Instead, what did come first, was the Board's self-serving desire to protect itself from critical feedback regarding the implementation of task force recommendations which had, in fact, stalled. But even before I was provided my copy, the EO excoriated the report, its tone, and the integrity of its author in multiple calls to me in my final days on the Board. And it wasn't just the monitor that was the target. The EO made openly disparaging comments about the DCA at all levels. On several of these calls, I felt extraordinary pressure to fall in line with what were essentially total repudiations of the monitor and our long standing DCA partner. On my final call with the EO, when I believe I respectively and diplomatically disagreed with some of her viewpoints regarding the DCA and the monitor report and asserted my right to do so, the open hostility turned on me. It was clear that my support for some of the monitor's recommendations was seen as undermining the Board. And after a brief but unforgettable conversation, I decided I wanted nothing further to do with the Board and tendered my resignation the following day. Finally, it should be noted that the Board went on to unanimously approve the Sunset Review Report, which rejected 28 out of 29 monitor recommendations. That concludes my testimony, and thank you for the opportunity.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 41, 'end': 46, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 78, 'end': 91, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 104, 'end': 109, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 480, 'end': 485, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5005, 'end': 5011, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5020, 'end': 5027, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7633, 'end': 7638, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8146, 'end': 8152, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8252, 'end': 8259, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8833, 'end': 8839, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8875, 'end': 8882, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 10571, 'end': 10577, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Benjamin Frank: thank you, sir, chairman hill. i will now summarize for you the results of my assessment to the board that i completed during the past year. i apologize in advance. my comments are a little lengthy. it will take me about 30 minutes to complete my testimony. as you are already aware from the legislative staff summaries, the board's enforcement program was thrown in to disarray by the organizational and work flow changes that were implemented during 2011-12 and 2012-13. these changes included establishing a new non-sworn investigation section and assigning all licensee complaint cases to the new section, including cases involving serious criminal misconduct and significant patient harm that were previously referred to the department's division of investigation. as discussed by miss avella, members of the board began developing an awareness of these problems and appointed the enforcement task force to assess the board's enforcement and discipline processes. concurrently, reports surfaced during the board's sunset review about these organizational and operational problems and the scope and magnitude of the problems became apparent to the legislature. subsequently, ab 179 was enacted requiring the department to appoint a monitor to assess the board's enforcement program and specified administrative processes. on february 29th, 2016, dca awarded a contract to benjamin jonah frank llc to provide the monitor services. work on the project commenced almost immediately following contract award. during march and april of last year, i completed an initial assessment of the enforcement program. the initial report documenting results of the initial assessment was presented to the board's governing board in june. the initial report provided a summary of historical information that i had collected, compiled, and analyzed and provided a foundation for completing additional reviews and analyses during phases 2 and 3 of the project. additionally, in consultation with the department's contract manager and the board's executive officer and chief of enforcement, i prepared a work plan to guide completion of phases 2 and 3 during the remainder of 2016. additional interviews, research, and analyses of the enforcement program were completed during june, july and august. the second report highlighted the turnaround that had occurred during 2015-16 but also pointed out that there were continuing needs to further reduce legacy case backlogs, and the amount of time needed to complete investigations, and impose discipline. the second report also provided 29 recommendations to help address these and other improvement needs. the review of the draft's second report with the board's leadership team in late september was contentious. for example, the executive officer demanded that i delete some sections of the report and replace a summary of a confidential board member survey that i had previously completed with a subsequent non-confidential survey of board members, completed by the executive officer without my involvement. i was not agreeable to making these types of changes. additionally, the executive officer expressed disagreement with nearly all of the recommendations for improvement. also, during late september, the executive officer began limiting my access to the chief of enforcement, and a few weeks later the chief of enforcement began a leave of absence. the final second report documenting results of my phase two assessment efforts was presented to the board's governing board on october 20th. at about that same time, i was directed to submit all request for information through the executive officer, which delayed and further restricted my ability to obtain information directly from subordinate managers and rank and file staff. problems in this area later led to a meeting in mid-november with legislative staff to address these problems. during november and december, i completed an updated assessment of the enforcement program along with targeted assessments in several other areas. the third report documenting results of these efforts were submitted to the board's governing board during february. the third report again highlighted the turnaround that had occurred during 2015-16, but pointed out that this turnaround appeared to have stalled. a number of changes became evident that supported this conclusion. including one, reduced numbers of completed licensee arrest conviction report and non-sworn licensee complaint investigations. two, unchanged numbers of pending licensee arrest conviction report and non-sworn licensee complaint investigations. three, reduced numbers of completed discipline cases, and four, increased numbers of pending discipline cases. additionally, the average elapsed times to complete investigations and impose discipline, while improved in comparison to earlier periods, remained quite long. for example, the one-year average elapsed time to complete non-sworn investigations and the two-and-a-half-year average elapsed time from case receipt to completion of discipline for processes referred for discipline were both still quite long. additionally, the third report highlighted that staff turnover had increased and that, rather than continuing to decline, vacancy rates rose to about 17%. some of these positions had been vacant for extended periods of time, including the assistant executive officer position which, at that time, had already been vacant for 21 months. the board's elevated number of enforcement division- vacant enforcement division positions, the extended absence of the board's chief of enforcement, and turn over of experienced enforcement division staff appeared to be adversely impacting overall enforcement program performance. additionally, based on interviews conducted during early december with about two-thirds of all the enforcement division's staff, the overall work environment and workforce morale appeared to have deteriorated markedly since march of 2016, at least within the enforcement division. i also pointed out that the board's large number of vacant supervisory and management positions and the extent to which the board was utilizing short term, out of class assignments to temporarily fill these positions, and noted that these temporary assignments were not a substitute for filling the positions on a permanent basis. the third report also spotlighted the dependency of the board's governing board members on information provided to them by the executive officer for purposes of performing their oversight responsibilities. and noted that this dependency, while not unique to this board, can result in the board being unaware of performance or other problems as occurred previously. i suggested that oversight of the board's executive officer, and, by extension, the board's programs and operations, could potentially benefit from utilization of a 360 degree, multi-rater assessment process, in which feedback regarding the executive officer's performance is solicited from a variety of points of view, and then i recommended establishing a work group, a multi-agency work group, to assess needs for development of a 360 degree executive officer feedback process. and, if needed, the best approach and time frame for developing and implementing the process. the third report also provided a summary of the status of the board's implementation of the 29 recommendations for improvement provided in the second report. as of late december, the board had implemented just four recommendations, had partially implemented eight others, and had not yet began implementing any of the remaining 17 recommendations for improvement. finally, i disclosed in the third report a handful of potential problems that brought to my attention, that were brought to my attention, involving the board's licensing and support service business processes. these potential problems were not assessed because they were not within the scope of the monitor assignment. now, i would like to provide you with some additional updated information regarding the current status of the enforcement program and the overall health of the organization. what these updates show is that while the board's troubled history may not repeat itself, it does seem to rhyme. first, areas of improvement, some of these you've heard about. areas that have improved significantly since the boards last sunset review include, one, the handling of license applicant cases. two, the the handling of licensee subsequent arrest, conviction, report cases. and three, the referral of high priority licensee complaint cases to the department's division of investigation and the division's of investigation's handling of these cases. first, license applicant cases. the board no longer unnecessarily opens several thousand license applicant cases involving minor offenses and offenses that occurred in the distant past that have no bearing on the board's licensing decision. currently, only about 600 to 700 license applicant cases are referred to enforcement, and the enforcement division's complaint section analyst now consistently, promptly processed these cases. in most instances, the division authorizes issuance of the license, either without, or in conjunction with, a notice of warning. denials of licensure are issued in the remaining cases. on an annual basis, a few dozen of the denials are appealed, which prompts referral of the case to the attorney general's office for hearing. two, the licensee's subsequent arrest, conviction, report cases. the board continues to receive about 1500 licensee subsequent arrest, conviction, report cases per year, nearly all of which are now assigned to the complaint section analyst for desk investigation. these cases consistently account for more than one-half of all the cases that the board refers to the attorney general's office for discipline. however, during 2015-16 the complaint section analyst completed about 1,900 investigations of these cases, and a large number of cases closed during 2015-16 helped to reduce the number of pending cases. however, since that time, the pace of case closures has decreased and there has been no further reduction in the number of pending cases and little change in the average elapsed time to complete these investigations. three, licensee complaint cases referred to the department's division of investigation. following the board's last sunset hearing, several hundred high priority licensee complaint cases that had been languishing in the board's investigations section were transferred to the department's division of investigation. concurrently, the board began identifying high priority cases during intake and referring them to the division of investigation and, since that time, has been consistently referring about 180 to 200 cases per year to the division. initially, during 2015, the transferred legacy cases, along with the newly received cases, created a large backlog of more than 360 pending cases at the division and many of these cases were quite old. however, during 2016, the division began consistently completing these investigations at a rate faster than new cases were being assigned, which enabled it to reduce this back log along with the average age of its remaining pending cases. currently, the department's division of investigation has about 200 pending cases. about one-third of their investigations are referred for discipline, and these cases account for most of the licensee complaint cases that are referred for discipline. non-sworn licensee complaint investigations. the area where this board seems to continue to struggle most is with the handling of lower priority licensee complaint cases that are not referred to the department's division of investigation. as discussed in the third report, during the period from july to october 2016, the board's non-sworn investigation section completed an average of about a dozen licensee complaint investigations per month and there was little change in the number of pending investigations. to keep case loads manageable for investigators, only about one-half of the more than 400 cases assigned to the section were assigned to specific investigators. the remaining, more recently received cases, were placed on a pending shelf. subsequently, during november and december, the section continued to complete an average of about a dozen investigations per month which did not keep pace with the flow of newly assigned cases. as a result, the number of pending cases began to increase. as of late december, the section had more than 440 pending cases. for the 6 month period from july to december 2016, the board's investigation section completed a total of about 75 investigations. some of these cases were referred to discipline and about a dozen were closed with issuance of a citation. only a handful of the cases were closed with issuance of a now, or a notice of warning. then, over a one month period extending from late december to late january, the board abruptly reversed its process for completing non-sworn investigations of licensee complaint cases. the way that the investigation process usually works is that each case is assigned to an investigator to gather additional information about the case, including information to determine whether the alleged violation occurred, and to rule out other potential related violations. the results of the investigation are then reviewed by supervisory management personnel and discipline case analysts to determine whether the investigation was properly completed and whether the investigative findings support issuance of a now or a citation or referral of the case for discipline. the benefits of this process are that the investigation is not guided or conducted to achieve any predetermined outcome and blanket rules are not established regarding the type of discipline imposed for any broad category of cases. however, according to board staff in late december, at the specific direction of the executive officer, investigation staff began a review of the sections pending cases, including the 200 or so cases that had not yet been assigned to an investigator. the review specifically targeted cases involving sleeping on the job and time sheet fraud, but also encompassed other types of cases. following this review, and completion of some limited additional information gathering activities for some of the cases, 70 cases were abruptly closed with issuance of a notice of warning. specifically, on january 11th, 27 non-sworn investigation cases were closed with issuances of a now. on the same day, a 45 minute teleconference meeting was held with the board's enforcement committee, during which staff disclosed that they had initiated a review of the section's pending cases, and had identified 107 cases that could potentially be closed with a now. contemporaneous minutes of this meeting were not kept, but it is our understanding there is only a brief discussion of this topic. then on the next two days, january 12th and 13th, another 31 cases were closed with issuance of a now and over the next two weeks another 11 cases were closed with insurance of a now. during january, 24 other non-sworn investigations were also closed, but as of about two weeks ago, none of those other cases had resulted in either issuance of a citation, or referral of the case for discipline. in total, 94 non-sworn investigations were completed during january, equivalent to more than 20% of the sections 440 pending cases and about 75% of these cases we closed with issuance of a now. this compares to just 75 investigations completed during the entire preceding six month period with only a handful of nows issued for all of those cases. the abrupt closure of so many non sworn investigations in such a short period of time, and all with exactly the same outcome, which was issuance of a now, caught my immediate attention and prompted me to gather additional information about the surprising development. what i've since learned is encouraging in some respects and disconcerting in others. for example, it's encouraging that the board finally began to implement my earlier recommendation to screen and triage lower priority licensee complaint cases not referred to the division of investigation, to identify those that could be handled as desk investigations and completed more quickly by gathering some additional records, making some phone calls to confirm or clarify the information provided with the complaint. however, i'm not comfortable with how this new process was implemented and i think my discomfort is shared by both the department's division of investigation, and staff within the non-sworn investigation section. based on the information i've gathered to this point, it is self-evident from the large number of nows issued that the conventional investigatory process was reversed to instead search out cases where the currently available information could be used to support immediate closure of the cases with issuance of a now, rather than first investigating the cases and then determining what, if any, disciplinary outcome was supported by results of the investigation. i also believe that the section staff felt pressured to close cases with issuance of a now, in some cases without sufficiently investigating the cases. in summary, needs now exist to meet with the board's non-sworn investigators and re-review all of these cases, to identify any cases that need to be reopened and further investigated. at this point, i expect the board's investigators to be very forthcoming and helpful in identifying any such cases. additionally, until this re-review is completed, caution should be exercised in interpreting any workload, backlog, or performance data provided by the board concerning its recent handling of non-sworn investigation cases. discipline case processing. the board's discipline case processing, including the use of the attorney general's fast track program, is continuing to improve marginally in some respects. recently, however, there has been some additional accumulation of discipline cases. the recent increase in pending discipline cases appears to be the result of one, the increased number of discipline referrals to the ag, resulting from the larger number of investigations completed by the department's division of investigation. and two, larger numbers of subsequent discipline cases generated as a result of the large number of discipline case settlements reached during 2015-16, and related increases in the number of new probationers who are most likely to trigger subsequent discipline cases. management and staff turnover and vacancies. as of early march, about 20% of the board's positions were vacant. additionally, excluding the executive officer, five of the board's 10 supervisory and management positions were vacant. in my experience, i've never before seen such high levels of vacant positions, particularly at the supervisory and management levels. the board's management structure has partially collapsed, particularly with respect to the enforcement program. one adverse consequence of the loss of key management personnel is that for the past seven weeks the board has been unable to issue subpoenas for records that are needed to complete its enforcement investigations. additionally, there are not currently any outside expert witnesses available to review cases involving psychiatric technicians. and there is only one outside expert witness available to review cases involving vocational nurses, and it is my understanding that outside expert witness recruitment activities have been stalled since the executive officer's leave began seven weeks ago. also, probation reviews of new staff are no longer being consistently completed on a timely basis, as was previously the case. all of these circumstances increase the board's vulnerability to various risk and should be a cause of considerable concern. my last topic is the continuing education compliance audit project. the continuing education compliance audit project, which has already been in the news, is illustrative of a broad range of problems that continue to be experienced by this board. despite obvious major problems with this project throughout the past four months, nothing has been done to restructure or abort this misguided, poorly conceived, runaway project. it is my understanding the ce compliance audit project was initiated in late november during a meeting between the executive officer, the acting assistant executive officer, and two support staff. the project was launched shortly thereafter with the creation of a mass mailing list, the printing of about 57,000 dated audit letters, and the redirection of staff to stuff thousands of envelopes. then, in early december, management apparently realized that they would be unable to complete the mailing. but rather than recognizing if board staff were unable to even complete the mailing, then they certainly wouldn't be able to process the responses, management instead requested that the department's office of business services complete the remaining mailings. then, in early january, after requesting, expediting, receiving delivery of a large supply of window envelopes from the office of state printing, the office of business services completed about 50,000 additional mailings. from this sequence of activities, it is evident that it was not the board's intention to spread the mailings out in batches over a period of several months, as was suggested by the board's acting assistant executive officer during the board's february 10th meeting, or to send out 1,000 letter waves, spaced two weeks apart that was stated by the board in it's february 24th correspondence to assembly staff. this latter report approach would have required more than two full years just to complete the mailings and would still have generated an overwhelming amount of work for board staff. had the board utilized the 1,000 piece wave approach, it would have unleashed upon itself a 28-month-long flood of ce submittals, rather than the two month long tsunami of submittals that it instead experienced. since completion of the mailings in early january, a group of two permanent full-time staff, two half-time retired annuitants, and one permanent full-time analyst on a half-time basis have been working on this project. this is equivalent to three and a half full-time positions. additionally, other staff have been supporting the project on an intermittent basis and overtime was utilized during mid to late january to support the project and the use of overtime continued into february. finally, at least two half-time aarp volunteers, equivalent to another full-time position, have been assigned to the project. to help handle deluge of submittals that were initially received, all of the enforcement division's managers, along with others, spent a full day together just opening mail. the board's public phone lines have been continuously overflowing since early january, and during january the board also received overflowing volumes of emails and faxes. the ce compliance audit has adversely impacted operations throughout much of the board and has diverted staff, management, board member, and oversight agency attention from other more important business needs. every passing day this project unnecessarily wastes more money and resources. the problems with this project will not somehow resolve themselves over the next several months as some seem to believe. two weeks i visited the board's offices and interviewed most of the staff that had been subsequently involved in supporting this project since its inception. i also requested access to a locked, vacant manager's office where i found more than 100 us postal service mail baskets filled with open but unprocessed ce submittals. in this same office there were just five baskets containing submittals that have been preliminary reviewed, but still needed to be re-reviewed and completed by the board's ce audit specialist. today, they have only about one basket of submittals has been fully processed by the ce audit specialist. finally, there were a couple of trace that appear to contain about 800 pieces of unopened return mail but rubber banded stacks of unopened return mail were also present in many of the 100+ baskets of opened mail that had not yet been processed. these baskets may also contain license application fee remittances or other documents unrelated to ce that were not correctly separated from the ce documents. the board does not track the ce submittals as they are received against the initial mailing list. thus, there is absolutely no way that anybody can provide even a ballpark guesstimate as to how many of the 57,000 targeted licensees have actually responded to the mailing. tracking against the initial mailing list is only completed by the board ce audit specialist after completing a final review of the submittals and updating briefs. for various reasons, staff assigned to complete the preliminary review of the submittals sometimes experienced problems that prevent them from completing the reviews. the submittals with problems were set aside in separate stacks for subsequent review and handling by the audit specialist, who cannot possibly keep pace with the incoming flow of work generated by all the different staff involved in performing the preliminary case reviews. to date, the audit specialist has completed reviews and breeze updates for only about 1,000 ce audit cases. based on actual performance, it clearly does not take an average of just 30 seconds to two minutes to review these submittals as has been stated by the board. in fact, it probably took close to that amount of time per submittal just to open, date stamp and assemble the documents for subsequent processing. according to the board's acting executive officer, about 4,000 submitted packages have been preliminary reviewed today as evidenced by the board's issuance of about 4,000 letters of compliance. however, in some cases, these letters were issued in error. in these cases, the ce audit specialist issues a letter of non-compliance to the licensee, after the licensee's already received a letter stating they were in compliance. so needless to say, this process necessarily creates a great deal of confusion among the affected licensees. assuming that the board continues to process an average of three baskets of submittals per month, using all the same staffing resources that have been allocated to the project since the start of the year, it will take two to three years just to do the preliminary reviews of the currently accumulated baskets of submittals. this does not account for any of the more time consuming work associated with completing the final reviews of the submittals and upgrading breeze, following up with licensees in cases where they're not in compliance with the ce requirements, following up with all the licensees that didn't even respond to the initial mailing and who are especially likely to have completed little or no ce, and tracking down thousands of licensees in cases where the initial mailings were returned to the board because they were not deliverable to the address that the board had on file. additionally, most of more than 5,000 emails that the board has received have not yet been processed at all. finally, in those instances where the submittals do show compliance with the board's ce requirements, the processes being used may not be producing documentation sufficient to support an actionable enforcement case. if enforcement actions are able to be initiated, then significant additional resources will be needed to perform citation preparation, issuance, fine collection and appeal handling services. this debacle needs to be stopped and it needs to be stopped now. there is no realistic path forward for this wasteful project. if the board does not promptly abort this project, then legislation should be introduced to require such action. hopefully, that would prompt the board to terminate the project on its own accord. in conclusion, recent events and the board's current circumstances may not repeat the specific events and circumstances that existed prior to the board's previous sunset review. but they certainly have a familiar ring. in closing, i'd like to express my gratitude to the department of consumer affairs leadership team, the department's project manager, bryan clifford, and the department's division of investigation, office of information services, and office of human resources for their cooperation and assistance throughout the past year and particularly during the past six months. additionally, i would like to thank board staff for their open and candid communication with me during my on site interviews, particularly, again, during the past six months. and i would especially like to thank those staff, who within, found ways to continuously relay additional information to me through various other communication channels. the information they provided was invaluable in enabling me to complete my assessments and helped immeasurably to keep me up-to-date regarding changes occurring at the board. and that concludes my testimony and thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 29, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 791, 'end': 797, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 28504, 'end': 28518, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tammy Endozo: my name is tammy, i'm the current board president of the vocational nursing and psychiatric technicians, thank you for the opportunity to present today on behalf of the board of vocational nursing and psychiatric technicians. the board looks forward to working collaboratively with the committees, dca, the business services, consumer and housing agency, and the enforcement monitor to provide the protection of the consumers. the board's mission is the protection of the consumers of the state of california. the board accomplishes that mandate through regulation of the education, licensure and practice of licensed vocational nurses and psychiatric technicians, by the timely execution of existing disciplinary statutes and regulations, and by proposing new legislation and regulations that strengthen and enhance the protection of consumers. since the last sunset review, the board has implemented a number of critical changes. briefly, those changes include, one, the board successfully transitioned to the new breeze licensing and enforcement system on january 19th, 2016. this system provides enhanced online services and accessibility for consumers. two, revise the organizational structure to improve accountability and enhance oversight over staff and critical board processes. three, overhaul the enforcement division. as a result, during fiscal year 2014-2015 through 2015-2016, the board received 1,622 complaints alleging incompetence and, or unprofessional practice by licensees. we closed investigations on 12,252 licenses, referred 654 applicants and licensees for formal discipline, revoked or accepted surrender of 408 licenses, and collected a $182,278 in citation and fine revenue. four, based on the monitor's recommendation, the board established a probation unit with new staffing infrastructure. all probation unit positions are currently filled, newly created discipline unit. five, expanded candidate pool for the four vacant nursing education consultant positions to allow qualified candidates to work in a home-based capacity. six, instituted quarterly meetings for all staff, increased internal and external training of existing staff. as a part of the board's outreach to consumers, the board launched a new and approved website that was more user friendly, designed and printed three new brochures as a part of its outreach to consumers. effective fiscal year 2016-2017, completion of the following operational improvements is projected. complete development and revision of the internal procedures manual. b, regarding enforcement division in accordance with the monitor's recommendation, board's records of conviction form will be revised. completed implementation of procedures relative to screening and assignment of complaints that do not require field investigation. and i am not sure, senator hill, if you want me to go through the adequate staffing and board management leadership, those are the questions, i believe, that mr. gage had sent over.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2832, 'end': 2836, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2967, 'end': 2971, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Vertido: Yes, sir, my name is John Vertido, I'm the Board Nursing Educator, and in regards to Mr. Glazer's request, I'm probably the longest serving member on the Board. I am currently in my grace period, I was appointed in 2005, under Governor Schwarzenegger, and then re-appointed under Governor Brown, so I have probably the longest institutional knowledge of the Board. I agree with the 360, I have been trained as a certified strategic planner and that's one of the things we do agree on, is if you're going to give good customer service, you need to know about the people in the front line, your customers, people above you, to give that good imput. As a former Board President, with my two other colleagues here, I run at least five of the executive officer evaluations, and while we gave input as Board members, as her immediate supervisor, it was always good to be able to give good comments from the rank and file, to hear how's it going, what's going on? Also, as the last President of the Board that actually lived in Northern California, all subsequent presidents have lived in the southern part of the state, so it was quite easy for me to stop by the Board and walk through the Board offices and see how people were doing. I visited Gina a couple times when she was in her offices, and I was unaccompanied by any of the Executive Officers, but that didn't always happen, because I was usually escorted by the Executive Officer, but when I would arrive early, I would see members of the staff and just engage them in routine conversation. How's it going, how's your work progressing, what's your name, where do you work? And get that type of information, so I felt I was relatively approachable to the rank and file members of the Board for their input, and I would go around, ask questions about the decorations in their cubicle, family members, talking about the work they did, how important it was contributing to the health and welfare of our citizens. These are people, are licensees, who affect the lives of people everyday, and I take very seriously, as I know my other members do, that protection of the public, we deal with people at their most vulnerable, and it's important that we maintain that integrity, and that we maintain that level of care to see for their health and welfare, so I know my colleagues feel the same way. And it's a question that, if we're doing it, then I feel that we didn't do a good enough job, but it is hard to do supervision by remote control. And so we try to do visits as often as possible, Sam, previous Board President, came up as often as possible, and now Tammy, our current Board President, is coming up as much as she can. Today is a good example of how she will leave her home in Southern California and fly up to be here, but these problems is, in endorsing the 360, we do need that feedback, because we trust our employees, we trust the people, and we hope that they would be honest with us And telling us what they really think rather than hearing it through a filter, Mr. Frank was also right, we get a majority of our information from the Executive Officer, because they are our point of contact who we're supposed to be getting most of the information through, and that is to maintain information, 360, to all parts of the chain of command.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 89, 'end': 95, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 236, 'end': 250, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 289, 'end': 294, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1239, 'end': 1243, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2538, 'end': 2541, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2607, 'end': 2612, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3030, 'end': 3035, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tim Cameron: chairman salas, thank you for the opportunity to speak. my name is tim benjamin cameron, and i represent seiu local 1000. i have a few points and i'll be brief as we've been here a while, and i know that. first i want to thank the committee consultants for all of their hard work. they have done an excellent job writing these sunset reports, and i'm sure i'm not the only one that had quite a bit of reading to do this weekend. their information was beyond informative, and it was an excellent resource providing context, and a level of sophistication to the situation. second, we support the assembly recommendation to hold off at the moment. as this hearing has kind of noted for all of us, it's been illuminating. a lot of things have been shown, and there are definitely different perspectives. in fact, i think the board said it eloquently when they said, it's clear we all need to get on the same page. so we appreciate the recommendation from the assembly committee consultant, to hold off until after this hearing. we also appreciate, chairman, your actual suggestion that the board should meet with staff. we think this is a good idea that'll allow everyone, if not to agree, at least to understand what they're all talking about and where their positions come from. lastly, we partially endorsed the senate staff consultant's recommendation, to at least keep the board in existence. we do not support a temporary creation of a bureau, even if only for a year, because we believe that would only cause more disruption and chaos for our members, licensees and consumers. we think the issue would low turn, low morale, is partially due to a constant change in the day to day operations of our members. when a person comes in to do their job, they're being pulled aside to do other things. they're being asked to change it. whether that's from audit requests, monitor requests or just day to day changes from the board. regardless, it's a lot to do, and it's a lot of burdensome work when you keep coming to sit down and do one thing, and you're not really sure if you're going to have time to do it. so we think instead, creating a bureau will only allow more transition problems, more disruption, another need for another audit once we come back to the original board again, in a year or two from now. it doesn't make sense. consistency is what we think is important and so we would instead, hope that the administration would work with the bvnpt board and the legislature, to come up with a solution that is consistent and allows our members to know what they're going to be doing, day to day. thank you.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 14, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 67, 'end': 87, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Coby Pizzotti: Mr. Chair, my name is Coby Pizzotti with the California Association of Psychiatric Technicians. My colleague from SCIU just basically stole my thunder. So I will just basically echo his statements, and especially the point about rolling the board into a bureau. We only represent 12,000 licensees in the state, so that's a very small number of individuals. As well as the fact, what we do is highly specialized. Being rolled up into a bureaucratic system where the expertise of what somebody does is lost, and you don't have a board who truly understand, or this board does truly understand what it is that we do, and how we provide the best practices in the best care possible. I just want to make one comment about the makeup of the board, and how it was stated that the board is a five to four makeup now. Well it's a five to four makeup because there was one recent resignation, and then there's two vacant positions. Those vacant positions are to be filled by the Governor. So if the Governor fills those vacant positions, it will be back to a six to five make up. But as one of the board members did eloquently say, these people are volunteers, they've sworn an oath to uphold the profession that they're overseeing, and to ensure that the consumers and the licensees, have their best interest at heart. So thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Samantha Sanchez: good afternoon my name is samantha. i am the past president of the northern california directors obligational nursing program and i represent gurnick academy of medical arts. i hope you take into consideration that turning this board into a bureau, is not a good idea. not only does it not sit well with the lvn's and the site techs, but it also lowers the morale. and i echo miss vilma gaines from lvnl's point of view that it takes time to to get this board together and then give them time to collaborate with the department of consumer affairs and maybe also take into consideration that they're under staff. so it takes a long time to get an organization, or an institution to really function accordingly. one of the things that you need to take into consideration is giving support, especially to the nursing education consultants. i've worked closely with the nursing education consultants for so many years, and was invited in their strategic plan last year and i have never seen a board who collaborates with the schools, and the nurse educators. thank you very much.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 381, 'end': 393, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Elizabeth Estrada: Honorable members of the Assembly and Senate Business Professions and Economic Development Committee, I am Elizabeth Estrada and I am the President of the Southern California Directors of Vocational Nursing Programs and I'm here to speak to you on behalf of those program directors and vocational nursing programs, which we oversee. I'm reading a prepared comment. It should take less than two and a half minutes. One of the many areas of emphasis of great concern is directly associated with our ability to gain access to pertinent information which is necessary to ensure the highest degree of oversight before, during, and after the graduates sits for the NCLEX-PN licensing exam. The result of these tests in many cases have yielded unfavorable and direct negative impact on the State of California for which program directors are 100% responsible and accountable. It is our belief that new legislation can be discussed, developed, and implemented, allowing for the appropriate tools and strategies to overcome our current standing as the lowest ranking in the nation. Let me repeat, lowest ranking in the nation. As directors, we believe that it is our responsibility to offer our knowledge and expertise to the conversation. We have been advised that there may be legislative changes necessary. Our goal is to continue to comply with emission of the Board of Vocational Nursing and Psychiatric Technicians, but do so with the highest degree of support from our state and our state legislatures. We recognize that the laws, rules and regulations are in place for a reason and jurisdictional governance is of utmost importance. We also understand and recognize there comes a time to adopt new legislation, that which will enhance and achieve the objective. Those objectives which reflect the most current and up to date changes in the profession. Past practice has been to seek assistance directly from the Board and it's staff which we have done so repeatedly. However, we do feel a need to forward our efforts for support by reaching out directly to the Business and Profession Economic Development Committee because there is a concern that the structure of the board is not as stable as it could be. To support the over arching importance of our quest, we look forward to a constructive discussions and deliberations in the future, as we navigate the NCLEX-PN exam that rendered results and the impact on the profession, the State of California, and California's community at large. I do have copies of my comments for you-
[{'start': 107, 'end': 124, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Coby Peterson: Good afternoon ma'am. Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, Committee Members, my name's Coby Peterson, I am the deputy secretary for the Veteran's Homes division. With me, with this aggress group, I've got Thomas Martin, who's are assistant deputy secretary. We want to thank you for the opportunity of being here today. I'd like to take a few moments if I could, to give you a quick update on the status of our veterans homes. kind of address some of the accomplishments that we've been able to achieve in the past year or so. And talk a little bit about some of the initiatives that the secretary has eluded to in a little bit greater detail. As you know CalVet operates eight veterans homes throughout the state, five of those homes have opened since 2010. These five newer homes are pretty much been in the primary focus of the homes division of the past seven years. I'm proud to announce that the ramp up process is finally coming to a close. And as you can imagine the as been all encompassing for our team. And so it's nice to be able to be in a position were you can take some stock in where we have been and what we have been able to accomplish during that period of time. But also we're at that point I think we need to start assessing where we need to be and what's going to be the best situation for our future generations of veterans. So we are at that point, we are coming to a close of phase one and we're going to get ready to transition to the next section. So the veterans homes system since 2010 has grown by over 1,000 beds, some 20 new licensed units. Over the last year we've had some significant milestones and accomplishments. As the Secretary mentioned, the kitchen and facility in West LA is finally opened. It's licensed, it's budgeted, I'm sorry, it's full and it's certainly providing great opportunity for those new skilled nursing beds that the secretary mentioned that were open. So West LA is really, in the last year, has come a long way. And we're really excited about the future growth of West LA. Fresno has passed its CMS certification survey with the performance that was far above the industry average, especially for a brand new facility. They were only given a few minor deficiencies, which is unheard of in the industry, I think they had three minor deficiencies. So what we expect out of Fresno is when their start ratings come out later this year, we expect them to be very high, which is tremendous for Fresno. Fresno has really grown in the past year. Redding has earned five out of five stars in it's first CMS Star Rating. It ranks the home in the top 10% nationally of all certified skilled nursing facilities, which is remarkable for a brand new home to come right out of the gate and relieve a five star rating. We're expecting the same thing with Fresno since it did so well. Redding is a super star, they are certainly I do not know what they got going on up there but they certainly have something going on because they are not missing a beat and we're extremely proud of that team up there. These accomplishments are not just exclusive to our newer homes, both Chula Vista and Yountville, like the secretary mentioned, received in the last few months indications that their star ratings have gone up from 2 and 3 stars to four stars. So again, that puts Chula Vista and Yountville in the top 20% of certified skilled nursing facilities in the nation, again, great news. I know many of you know where we were a few years ago, we had three veterans homes, and they were a two star rating. So, that begs the question, what have we done? What has actually happened in that short amount of time? So, I believe it's because we've been able to assemble a great team of folks led by a group of individuals that are, administrators that are dedicated, passionate. They're, in my mind, some of the best administrators in the country. They have over 20 years experience in the industry, each. So we are incredibly proud of them, and their staff, to be able to achieve what they've been able to achieve in such a short amount of time. And obviously our goal Isn't just to rest on that but obviously can continue to move the homes, the remaining homes that going to get certified to maintain those star ratings. So that's a huge jump for us. So, in the past seven years, we've open five homes. We were able to standardize them across the board. We were able to get them licensed and now we're able to provide the quality of care that's appropriate for a five star facility. So I think it's just a testament to folks that we have at leadership at the top of the department, as well as what we've been able to assemble in the homes. Now we want to talk a little bit about where we're going. Now that the ramp up process is coming to and end and we're re-evaluating where we stand as a system, we're taking a hard look at the future. We need to remain focused on our foundation. We need to make sure that we are setting the homes up for long term success. And we do that, as the secretary mentioned, by re-examining the older homes. As the secretary talked about the state is spending a considerable amount of money on resources in Yountville to repair the aging facility. One of our top priorities this year obviously is to develop a comprehensive plan for Yountville that best addresses the future needs of veterans. And also at the same time ensures that state funds are used efficiently and effectively. In that same vein the administration is pursuing a baseline improvement to the military and veterans code with the trailer bill language and the governors proposed budget. The proposal will allow the department to better serve veterans with the greatest need, as the secretary mentioned, while reducing the affected general fund footprint. And also fixing and eliminating some of the obsolete statutes that are in there now. We're also working with the homes on standardization across the board. And we're working hard on our regulations in the departments, so we have a new program with that. So we believe that these initiatives set the stage for the next phase of the veteran's homes. I'm proud as a veteran myself of the amount of state and department commitment to veterans and I appreciate the strong support we receive in Legislature and from your staffs. So bottom line, homes are doing fantastic, we've come a long way and it wasn't easy in a short amount of time. The secretary and I are encouraged on where we're heading. I think we have a solid plan, starting with the thoughts in Yountville, take a hard look at the two older homes. And I think that we're just in the position now that we finally feel like we've gotten to a point where we can see the finish line. And now we need to start looking toward the future. So with that said, I just want to say thank you for your time and Thomas and I are happy to answer any questions you have.
[{'start': 75, 'end': 88, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 193, 'end': 206, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6832, 'end': 6838, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Theresa Gunn: deputy secretary gunn, thank you. i'm proud to be here, and i appreciate getting the opportunity to speak to you about the farm and home loan program. the program, as you already know, probably many of you, especially if you read the briefing document that we got to late last week, started in 1921 as a thank you to our veterans for protecting our freedom. it is a home ownership loan program. we provide mortgages, we are like any other bank in providing those mortgages. we, like other banks, suffered through the great recession and did very little loans for that period of time. i'm happy to say that this year, we are very close, when we close this year, to being back to more of a normal operations in line with the rest of the industry. our program, unlike many other lenders, we do not sell our loans. when we make a loan to the veteran, we hold that for the life of the loan. we do all of the servicing on that. we manage all of the issues that come up during the home ownership process, in all the variety of different things that individuals go through. getting easements, renting out portions of their property, refinancing, doing home improvements, you name it. we help the veterans work through those, including if they run into financial hardship, we do our own foreclosure as well. i'm happy to say, with our foreclosure process, that we have the lowest number in the nation. and a lot of that is because we keep these loans. the veterans know who to call. we work with them. we've got the support of our entire department. so as veterans are having difficulties, we reach into our department and help  direct the veteran to other resources to help assist them through that. we also reach out to other sister agencies, like calhfa, that has the keep your home california program that they're offering. and we've used that pretty extensively with our veterans and collected over 13 million, so far, to help veterans reduce the cost of their home or help get them through their rough period that they're having. beyond that, we managed to do this through bonds, general obligation bonds that are self-liquidating. meaning, that this program, literally, the veterans that are borrowing the money repay these bonds. they pay for the operational cost of the program. as well. and so this program in the last 95 years hasn't used any general fund and i don't mean in any situation. it pays our cost, it pays the cost of the bond sales. it pays for the bond debt, it pays for the bond interest. it pays for agencies that work on the bond sales. it literally is self-contained, and self-supporting. we are so well structured, that the rating agencies do honor us, with a double a credit rating. and weve maintained that, even through the great recession, as our figures decreased. and with that, i think that's the general high level overview. i'm happy to take any questions.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : Do we have any questions.
[]
Coby Peterson: good afternoon ma'am. mr. chair, madam chair, committee members, my name's peterson, i am the deputy secretary for the veteran's homes division. with me, with this aggress group, i've got thomas martin, who's are assistant deputy secretary. we want to thank you for the opportunity of being here today. i'd like to take a few moments if i could, to give you a quick update on the status of our veterans homes. kind of address some of the accomplishments that we've been able to achieve in the past year or so. and talk a little bit about some of the initiatives that the secretary has eluded to in a little bit greater detail. as you know calvet operates eight veterans homes throughout the state, five of those homes have opened since 2010. these five newer homes are pretty much been in the primary focus of the homes division of the past seven years. i'm proud to announce that the ramp up process is finally coming to a close. and as you can imagine the as been all encompassing for our team. and so it's nice to be able to be in a position were you can take some stock in where we have been and what we have been able to accomplish during that period of time. but also we're at that point i think we need to start assessing where we need to be and what's going to be the best situation for our future generations of veterans. so we are at that point, we are coming to a close of phase one and we're going to get ready to transition to the next section. so the veterans homes system since 2010 has grown by over 1,000 beds, some 20 new licensed units. over the last year we've had some significant milestones and accomplishments. as the secretary mentioned, the kitchen and facility in west la is finally opened. it's licensed, it's budgeted, i'm sorry, it's full and it's certainly providing great opportunity for those new skilled nursing beds that the secretary mentioned that were open. so west la is really, in the last year, has come a long way. and we're really excited about the future growth of west la. fresno has passed its cms certification survey with the performance that was far above the industry average, especially for a brand new facility. they were only given a few minor deficiencies, which is unheard of in the industry, i think they had three minor deficiencies. so what we expect out of fresno is when their start ratings come out later this year, we expect them to be very high, which is tremendous for fresno. fresno has really grown in the past year. redding has earned five out of five stars in it's first cms star rating. it ranks the home in the top 10% nationally of all certified skilled nursing facilities, which is remarkable for a brand new home to come right out of the gate and relieve a five star rating. we're expecting the same thing with fresno since it did so well. redding is a super star, they are certainly i do not know what they got going on up there but they certainly have something going on because they are not missing a beat and we're extremely proud of that team up there. these accomplishments are not just exclusive to our newer homes, both chula vista and yountville, like the secretary mentioned, received in the last few months indications that their star ratings have gone up from 2 and 3 stars to four stars. so again, that puts chula vista and yountville in the top 20% of certified skilled nursing facilities in the nation, again, great news. i know many of you know where we were a few years ago, we had three veterans homes, and they were a two star rating. so, that begs the question, what have we done? what has actually happened in that short amount of time? so, i believe it's because we've been able to assemble a great team of folks led by a group of individuals that are, administrators that are dedicated, passionate. they're, in my mind, some of the best administrators in the country. they have over 20 years experience in the industry, each. so we are incredibly proud of them, and their staff, to be able to achieve what they've been able to achieve in such a short amount of time. and obviously our goal isn't just to rest on that but obviously can continue to move the homes, the remaining homes that going to get certified to maintain those star ratings. so that's a huge jump for us. so, in the past seven years, we've open five homes. we were able to standardize them across the board. we were able to get them licensed and now we're able to provide the quality of care that's appropriate for a five star facility. so i think it's just a testament to folks that we have at leadership at the top of the department, as well as what we've been able to assemble in the homes. now we want to talk a little bit about where we're going. now that the ramp up process is coming to and end and we're re-evaluating where we stand as a system, we're taking a hard look at the future. we need to remain focused on our foundation. we need to make sure that we are setting the homes up for long term success. and we do that, as the secretary mentioned, by re-examining the older homes. as the secretary talked about the state is spending a considerable amount of money on resources in yountville to repair the aging facility. one of our top priorities this year obviously is to develop a comprehensive plan for yountville that best addresses the future needs of veterans. and also at the same time ensures that state funds are used efficiently and effectively. in that same vein the administration is pursuing a baseline improvement to the military and veterans code with the trailer bill language and the governors proposed budget. the proposal will allow the department to better serve veterans with the greatest need, as the secretary mentioned, while reducing the affected general fund footprint. and also fixing and eliminating some of the obsolete statutes that are in there now. we're also working with the homes on standardization across the board. and we're working hard on our regulations in the departments, so we have a new program with that. so we believe that these initiatives set the stage for the next phase of the veteran's homes. i'm proud as a veteran myself of the amount of state and department commitment to veterans and i appreciate the strong support we receive in legislature and from your staffs. so bottom line, homes are doing fantastic, we've come a long way and it wasn't easy in a short amount of time. the secretary and i are encouraged on where we're heading. i think we have a solid plan, starting with the thoughts in yountville, take a hard look at the two older homes. and i think that we're just in the position now that we finally feel like we've gotten to a point where we can see the finish line. and now we need to start looking toward the future. so with that said, i just want to say thank you for your time and thomas and i are happy to answer any questions you have.
[{'start': 75, 'end': 83, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 188, 'end': 201, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2812, 'end': 2819, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6827, 'end': 6833, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Theresa Gunn: Deputy Secretary Theresa Gunn, thank you. I'm proud to be here, and I appreciate getting the opportunity to speak to you about the Farm and Home Loan program. The program, as you already know, probably many of you, especially if you read the briefing document that we got to late last week, started in 1921 as a thank you to our veterans for protecting our freedom. It is a home ownership loan program. We provide mortgages, we are like any other bank in providing those mortgages. We, like other banks, suffered through the great recession and did very little loans for that period of time. I'm happy to say that this year, we are very close, when we close this year, to being back to more of a normal operations in line with the rest of the industry. Our program, unlike many other lenders, we do not sell our loans. When we make a loan to the veteran, we hold that for the life of the loan. We do all of the servicing on that. We manage all of the issues that come up during the home ownership process, in all the variety of different things that individuals go through. Getting easements, renting out portions of their property, refinancing, doing home improvements, you name it. We help the veterans work through those, including if they run into financial hardship, we do our own foreclosure as well. I'm happy to say, with our foreclosure process, that we have the lowest number in the nation. And a lot of that is because we keep these loans. The veterans know who to call. We work with them. We've got the support of our entire department. So as veterans are having difficulties, we reach into our department and help  direct the veteran to other resources to help assist them through that. We also reach out to other sister agencies, like CalHFA, that has the Keep Your Home California program that they're offering. And we've used that pretty extensively with our veterans and collected over 13 million, so far, to help veterans reduce the cost of their home or help get them through their rough period that they're having. Beyond that, we managed to do this through bonds, general obligation bonds that are self-liquidating. Meaning, that this program, literally, the veterans that are borrowing the money repay these bonds. They pay for the operational cost of the program. As well. And so this program in the last 95 years hasn't used any general fund and I don't mean in any situation. It pays our cost, it pays the cost of the bond sales. It pays for the bond debt, it pays for the bond interest. It pays for agencies that work on the bond sales. It literally is self-contained, and self-supporting. We are so well structured, that the rating agencies do honor us, with a double A credit rating. And weve maintained that, even through the great recession, as our figures decreased. And with that, I think that's the general high level overview. I'm happy to take any questions.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : Do we have any questions.
[]
Ellen Peter: good afternoon, chairman beall, chairman wieckowski, and members of the committee. as indicated, my name is ellen jonah peter. i'm the chief council of the california air resources board. and prior to taking that position at arb, i worked for the california attorney general's office for over 20 years. so i defended state agencies and i also prosecuted their enforcement cases. so as this committee is well aware, over 50 years ago car emissions were started to be regulated by the california air resources board to reduce smog and also to protect public health. each year, each manufacturer, both cars and trucks, for each engine family have to submit a certification application. thousands of these cert apps come into arb every year and they're reviewed. and there's follow up testing. and then once approved, an arb executive order allows these cars to be legally sold in california. today, as the chair has indicated i am going to discuss arb versus volkswagen. the diesel emissions cheating scandal that broke in september 2015. this case is the biggest enforcement case that arb ever handled. and also, it highlights the skills and the talents of the arb scientists and engineers that figured this out. our staff forced a confession after persistent questioning, innovative testing, and just a refusal to give up. volkswagen's confession was triggered to arb not others, and it was triggered by the enormous amount of data that arb had collected in the case. vw is left with no other option than to admit it's deceit. so, i'm still under the federal court civil gag order as to the negotiations but more information is now public because the criminal indictments are unsealed and volkswagen entered a guilty plea in court. so currently seven individual vw employees are under indictment, one's in custody. vw filed a guilty plea last month in detroit and this guilty plea and these indictments sent out some public information. and i'm going to on that public information, in terms of the history, for the committee today. so this conspiracy started over a decade ago. diesel vehicles are very common in europe. but because of arb's tail pipe emission standards, they were not sold in california. however, over time california cleaned up its fuels and made it the possibility of diesel vehicles in california. so in turn, with these diesel vehicles, clean diesel vehicles, we were told, where is the possibility. so vw jumped on this opportunity and it launched off, it was the first to announce its clean diesel vehicle, and was starting to be sold in model year 2009. but the problem was their marketing announcement was head of their engineering expertise. so instead of solving an engineering problem or delaying the release of the car to the next model year, vw decided to lie, and to cheat, and did so for years. in the criminal indictments and the guilty plea, the facts are set out how a research project with arb and others, including west virginia university. how it blossomed into the discovery of an enormous emission scandal for these diesel vehicles. what was used was a defeat device, as chairman bell indicated. a defeat device essentially turns off the emissions control system when the car is not being tested. in some vw cars, as was mentioned, the excess nox emissions was up to 40 times the allowed limit. now, cars contain very complicated computer systems, that are constantly adjusting various systems. if your car has a serious problem, a rock comes up, pierces your oil pan, and all the oil drains out. your car automatically goes into a protection mode to protect the engine. so one thing that happens in that situation is your emissions control system turns off. so in a less dramatic example, it's fine if you're emissions control system is designed to temporarily switch off in certain situations. such as, you're accelerating passing another car. these are considered aecd's, auxiliary emission control devices, and they're fine as long as they're listed in a certification application and use in very limited situations. what's not okay is not telling about these aecds. so when volkswagen diesel certification applications instead of outlining the permitted conditions were turned off vw lied. in fact, the emissions control system was on only when it was on the laboratory dyno being tested in the required cycles leading up to certification. so vw wrote and installed complicated computer code so the car knew when it was being tested. it turned of the emissions control device when it was not. so in arbs el monte lab, this is where the cars are tested.  they're attached to multi-million dollar, huge dynanometer called dynos. and then the cars run in place like they're on a treadmill while they're being tested. another system captures the hard emissions and these are then tested in the adjacent chemistry laboratory. in fact, the emissions control system was on only when it was on the laboratory dyno being tested in the required cycles leading up to certification. so vw wrote and installed complicated computer code so the car knew when it was being tested. it turned of the emissions control device when it was not. so in arbs el monte lab, this is where the cars are tested.  they're attached to multi-million dollar, huge dynanometer called dynos. and then the cars run in place like they're on a treadmill while they're being tested. another system captures the hard emissions and these are then tested in the adjacent chemistry laboratory. so the dyno operator drives the vehicle through prescribed test cycles which replicate things like going up hills and so forth. now these test procedures are set out both in federal and state regulations, because the regulatory agencies and the car manufacturers need to know what they test procedures and requirements are. so we know that on road, real, driving emissions are almost always higher then the lab results. just like when you buy a new car, your fuel economy sticker, saying with your miles per gallon is typically a little higher than what you actually get when you drive. so when arb's research study started, they were examining these questions about why these higher emissions on the road for these volkswagen diesel cars. is it the fuel? something else going on?. so, now at this point we can look backwards and we know what happened. because vw was required to produce documents in respond to the federal criminal discovery. so in those indictments it outlines publicly what was happening in the scandal. we also know more from these documents as to vw's motivation. for example, in vw's larger, three liter cars, a mixture of urea and water known as adblue is stored in a tank and injected into the exhaust system to reduce nox emissions. however the adblue tank design was not viewed as marketable in the united states. the proposed tank either reduce the rise on the trunk so you have less storage or the ad tank, the smaller ad blue tank had to be refilled for more frequently before you had to get your oil changed. so vw decided neither of these options were acceptable. instead, the vw engineers changed the adblue injection levels to operate correctly only when they were tested on the dyno. adblue was not injected when it was on the road. so end result bigger trunk, but more emissions. we also know now that the vw engineers improved their defeat devices over time. unbeknownst to the owners, software updates to make the defeat devices work better were added when you took your car in for routine service. what is also revealed in the indictment are emails sent by increasingly panicky vw employees. in one email, a vw german engineer worried about the upcoming arb dyno testing. another email discussed arb's responses that they needed to make to arb. the email suggested creativity would be helpful here. another email also translated from german said quote arb is still waiting for answers. we still have no good explanations, end of quote, followed by five exclamation points. so back in california, there was a breakthrough. one of the arb engineers hooked up the arb's emissions monitoring laptop to a vw passat, embraced it on that, on the passenger seat, so, at this point, there was real-time emissions data being collected from the passat on their monitoring laptop. fortunately, he had a long commute, and so he saw, as he was driving, that the nox emissions unexpectedly started going up. and while he was driving, he saw that the software turn off. so, we've got a piece of information. so then afterwards, the arb engineers went back to the lab and figured out how to replicate those situations. and they designed an alternative set of tests that nobody else knew about to try to get this to happen on the dyno. so, what happened, is these new tests that our arb engineers designed, tricked the car when it was on the dyno to think it was on the road and then turned off the emissions control device. so, then the emissions from the illegal defeat devices were recorded, and they could be analysed on the dyno. so, it was admitted later by volkswagen, much later, if the steering wheel turned in a certain way after a certain length of time, the car thought it was on the road and turned off the emissions device. so, in addition to that example our engineers also figured out other triggers for these cheating defeat devices, plural defeat devices. so, at this point, arb goes back to the company and says, okay, this doesn't make sense. what's going on here? but vw kept lying. so, in the summer of 2015, vw employees came from germany and made personal pitches to the arb management and they said we have new data to show your testing anomalies. it's your problem your engineers are wrong. however, arb refused to certify the model year 2016 cars until these answers were provided. then more importantly, later that summer, arb provided to vw the data from our newly discovered testing. and these emissions traces proved the case. and shortly thereafter vw confessed. so, what vw admitted then that had built illegal defeat devices into it's cars, into it's diesel cars for years over many different models. nationwide, the illegal cars number over a half a million. in california there were about 85,000 illegal vw cars on the road when the settlements were negotiated last year. and then the question is, what to do? so, in my view, the case revolved around several key concerns that needed to be addressed, the cars, the environment, the market, and then the penalties and the deterrents. so, as for the cars, the issue confronting arb was what can the owners do with these cars? can they be fixed to meet the original standards? if fixed will they work properly? will they be durable? what about an extended warranty? so, all those questions were dealt with and addressed in our settlement agreement. environment's another concern. how do you address these past and future excess nox emissions? then we have the market. clean diesel advertising attracted purchasers and distorted the market since these people could have bought zero emissions cars instead. so, california's historically been pushing the adoption of zero emission vehicles through various regulations and programs funding by the legislature. but vw's actions hindered this by diverting people to cars that weren't clean. so, final concern is penalties and deterrence. how do we ensure that vw does not cheat again? and how do we make sure that other manufacturers conclude it's not worth cheating? so, these settlements were crafted to make the consumers in california whole and our environment whole. i'll run through the agreements in reverse chronological order. there was a chart in the agenda, the background paper with the agenda and also there is this one pager that also has a lot of that same information. so, the bottom agreement is the soon to be filed, california only, agreement for the penalty settlement with civil penalties for every illegal car sold. it also requires the payment of arb's costs and it lists pages and pages of injunctive terms. so, if vw violates in the future, there are immediate court sanctions. monetary relief is 153.8 million to the air pollution control fund, and the legislature can decide how it wishes to appropriate that money. and this significant penalty should warn other manufactures of the risks of cheating. so, the next agreement from the bottom on the list is the california only 3.0-liter agreement. once it's approved by the court, it requires an additional 25 million payment to the air pollution control fund on july 1st of this year. this extra monetary relief for california is to provide additional monies for low income californians to get zev cars or to have some other similar program. so, the legislature could choose to supplement the emp plus-up program that was funded last year, or some other program of their choice. so, we also required vw to offer additional zev models, and also additional cars, 5,000 per year. up through 2025. and this is to bring more zev cars to the market than is all ready required. so, those were the california only agreements. so, then we turn to the next two lines up. with the us epa, there's a joint two liter agreement, and two liter refers to the size of the car. those are the slightly smaller cars like the passat. that one's all ready approved by the court, and there was a joint, three-liter agreement, which is still awaiting court approval. it was filed in december of 2016. and these joint agreements dovetail with the consumer class actions. as judge breyer did with the two-liter deal when he considered it in october of 2016, i suspect he will consider all of these together with the class action settlement for the three-liter cars on his next hearing that he has set for may 11th of this year. so, what i'll do now is discuss the agreements by appendix. because each of the appendixes addresses a different issue.  so for cars, appendices a and b set out the process for vw to offer an emissions modification assuming the fix passes muster with arb after testing. they can't offer a fix until arb says it's okay and those incredibly good engineers that figured this out are sitting in the room every day figuring this out. so, we are on top of it. so, the owners can get a buyback from the two liter cars if they wish. but if they want to keep it, and they want to get it fixed, we want to make sure that the fix is as clean as possible. that after the fix, the car is going to work fine. and that the fix is durable. so we required an extended warranty to be built in for the owners that choose to use this fix. so, what we're going to also do is continue to test these cars over time to make sure the fix continues to work. so, there's an enormous amount of arb staff time that is reviewing the fixes, testing, monitoring. we're going to pull cars in off of the and borrow them from owners, which is what we do. but we think this investment of time and staff resources is important to make sure, again, that the consumers are protected and that the environment is protected. so, we know that there were past excess nox emissions from the cars model year 2009 to 15. and even if these cars are fixed, we know there are going to be future emissions because over the lifetime of the car, so years and years. because the cars cannot be brought back to their originally certified emissions level, that they're not going to be quite as clean as they were certified to be. if you did, the cars wouldn't work properly. so, we're getting as close as we can, but there's going to be a gap. so, appendix d of the two liter settlement is the way we take care of that problem. in the three liter settlement we just rolled the additional mitigation money into the same trust. so, for appendix d for mitigation, vw writes a check. actually, they write three checks, $900 million per check. so, the first one was paid in november of 2016 to the court. and then another 900 million is due november of this year and the third 900 million is due in november of 2018. now, vw cannot touch or control those $2.7 billion national total. and this mitigation money is going to be used for projects throughout the country. and the 2.7 billion goes into a trust. and one reason it's going into a trust is that, unfortunately, the us epa's had a bad experience where money that was supposed to be for mitigation was misspent. so, the money's going into a trust just like with the deepwater horizon and other environmental trusts. and so, then the question is what's our share of all this? so, mitigation monies were divided by vehicle sales by state. so, california gets, for the two liter cars, we had about 14% of the sales, so we got about 14% of the money. so, the total is 381 million for the two liter cars. for the three liter cars, the bigger cars, there's a higher percentage. california had 18% of the sales. and that's about 42 million. so, california's mitigation total that will be paid in and available within the next two years is about 423 million. so, this dividing up the money by sales, by state, is a very typical us epa process. i tried to explain that we should get a bigger share, i argued, argued, unsuccessful. so, but we do have the 423 million. but we could not upset that part of the arrangement. so, on march 15th, just last week, judge breyer appointed a trustee. it was a trustee nominated by us doj and arb, and so we now have a trustee as of last week, it's wilmington trust. the next step is the trust document's going to be finalized. and each state then, is a beneficiary to the trust and each governor must agree to the trust terms and select a lead agency. and then at that point, each state has 90 days to prepare a mitigation plan and there will be a public process in california once a lead agency is selected. so, appendix d did specify what the beneficiary mitigation plan must include. and one of its core requirements is a proposed geographical distribution within the state, but the emphasis is on money going to areas with a disproportionate burden from air pollution. so, when we negotiated the appendix d, we added in this provision. so, we had the ability to allow that the money go to where it's most needed. now, appendix d2 listed the eligible mitigation projects. so, one of the other things that you had before you is this 12 page document right out of the consent decree. and it lists the broad categories of eligible mitigation projects. so, the eligible mitigation projects focus on the different sources of nox pollution, such as trucks, school buses, equipment at ports and airports, and so forth. so, many of these programs are already funded through the legislature's other programs. so, the question is how should this trust money be integrated into these other purposes? so, direction from the legislature, suggestions from the public are key on that. so, with respect to timing, the governor will be asked to designate a lead agency as soon as a trust is established. there's 30 days to designate a lead agency. and then the trust monies can then start being put out after this 90 day plan period. so, i'm guessing that late this year there will actually be monies available to be spent. and once again, vw has no control whatsoever over california's $423 million mitigation share. those two liters, three liters, they can't touch that. they can't touch penalty money that's in the air pollution control fund. so, now turn to appendix c, which is only in the two liter deal, it's not in the three liter deal, and it addresses the market problems that vw cost. so, california will receive 40% or 800 million of volkswagen's 2 billion nationwide investment over the next 10 years. so, as mentioned before, a moment ago, vw has no control over the mitigation monies or the money that the legislature appropriates from the air pollution control funds. on those, they write a check. now, in contrast, appendix c is set up differently. appendix c requires vw to invest in the zev market. so, california got a bigger share, 40%, of that money and our goal with appendix c is to support a multi-pronged, ongoing zev effort in california. so, the consent decree and the zev investment plan are to guarantee that vw help build the entire electric vehicle market with this investment. as opposed to the other parts of the investment, this is their investment, it's not actually considered a punishment. it is something that they have to do, i don't think they would think it's voluntary, it was. but what it is, it's their investment, so it was set up differently than the other portions. and they can carry it differently on their books. and so, obviously it is something that we believe added value to california's efforts. and the way we control this is we built a lot of controls into the consent decree to put some rails around this kind of investment. it's not like you can go off to do whatever you want to do. so arb's guidance into vw released last month provides additional detail to the requirements of the consent decree where the investment best supplements the zev efforts by others. so, we have the utilities involved, we have other infrastructure providers involved, cities, counties and many others are also involved in these zev efforts. and our arb guidance, particularly, was focused on the need to benefit residents of disadvantaged communities. so, one way to think about this is to meet the california's upcoming year 2020 goal to have a million zevs on the road. we need consumer education, so people know about to buy these cars. and we also know that the infrastructure has to be there. it's kind of the chicken and egg in terms of buying a car and charging it. so arb staff estimates that vw's initial 30 month $200 million investment is less than 10% of what's needed for a million zev cars. so, in my view it's an all hands on deck effort that's needed to build this infrastructure system. it's not a zero sum game where we only have a certain number of slots that can take place. so, vw set up a new company called electrify america. so, the first part of my testimony, i was bashing how the horrible engineers cheating us. what was interesting in the course of the negotiations, vw brought in a lot of different people into the negotiations and into this process. so, electrify america is a wholly owned subsidiary of vw but it's a separate corporation. it's based in the united states and their ceo that was announced was previously involved with nissan and the leaf effort. and so, we think volkswagen, there's different, there's the diesel people and the zev people who have an opportunity to meet during the negotiations are a different people and are very committed to making their $2 billion investment work. so, the plan that was submitted by electrify america was posted by arb on march 14th. it's now open for public comment and it's going to be discussed friday at our board meeting, which is in riverside. and hopefully of the two legislative member, senator lara is going to be there and also assemblyman garcia. and so, we're just going to discuss and take public comment and at the meeting on this investment plan. and if you can't be in riverside, all of arb's board meetings are webcast. so, we wrote a consent decree with no deadline in us acting. we can approve it in part, in whole, or deny it. we have to, obviously, meet the requirements of the consent decree as to we can't be arbitrary and capricious. we will not. but we do have, as i said, goals built into it and we have a plan that has a lot of promise. and i'm just guessing here, i would anticipate there'd be action on the plan, probably april, may. so, turning away from these agreements, the question is what's the next steps in vw? and what's the status of arb's recent notice of violation to fiat chrysler, or fca, for the diesel dodge ram's 1500 pickups and the jeep grand cherokees? so, back to volkswagen. the testing of the two liter vehicle fixes is ongoing. the newer vehicles, the recent gen 3 fix was approved. it's two phases. one is a software phase that will be done immediately. hardware phase in 2018. and arb will be able to continue test to make sure that the consumers' warranty protections and discover any flaws. the two leader older cars, gen 1 and gen 2, those proposed fixes for those are in development. for volkswagen's three liter vehicles, any proposed fix for those gen 1 or gen 2 are probably later this year, but it depends on if the court approves the three liter deal. so, for the fca case, on january 12th, 2017, arb issued a notice of violation for failing to disclose the auxiliary emission control devices, the aecds. there were about 14,000 vehicles. their model years 2014 through 2016. and as i mentioned they are diesel dodge ram 1500 pickups and jeep grand cherokees. and those were identified because of our special testing cycles that we develop from volkswagen. so on the day the fca noticed a violation was filed, arb did brief some of the legislative staff. i participated in some of the briefings. and in terms of the legislature's involvement, i commit a or b will keep your staff, whoever you want, apprised of these new violations and significant issues in any of the fca or if we happen to have a future diesel enforcement case. so, with respect to fca, we're in extensive discussions with them. we're in involved testing of the various vehicles. and no court action has been filed yet. so, we're working with us epa, again, on this as we did with vw, but we can always break off because we have independent authority. so, that is a possibility if need be. so finally, i want to report on the resources that the legislature gave arb last year for fiscal year 2016 and 2017. additional staff was given to us. they're hired. the document database is up and running. when you're in middle of enforcement, in litigation you have to keep track of all your documents and respond to subpoenas and also the public records act request. if there's no guilty plea from any of these vw individual employees, our staff will then be in detroit, testifying in those cases. so, our investigative staff that you authorized us for this year, they've turned their attention to fca. and they're also looking at other test results. we have some other unfortunately suspicious test results. and i assure you we're looking at those very closely. so to conclude, i'm incredibly proud to be part of this fantastic enforcement group. vw is one example of one of arb's regulations, the vehicle certification. and you need to have vigorous enforcement in my view to keep a level playing field. companies who break the rules cannot be allowed to proceed. they must be penalized. and they shouldn't get a competitive advantage. enforcement also ensures that air quality and the public health improvements that are projected by the regulations are actually achieved. and we're doing our best to monitor all of our regulations. so thank you very much, and i'm happy to answer questions.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 30, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 41, 'end': 51, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 108, 'end': 125, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 3120, 'end': 3124, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5018, 'end': 5020, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 13575, 'end': 13581, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 17368, 'end': 17374, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 17429, 'end': 17432, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 22645, 'end': 22648, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 23057, 'end': 23061, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 23104, 'end': 23110, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ellen Peter: so what you're, this is ellen ellen peters personally, not ellen ellen peters, chief counsel of arb. so volkswagen paid a large penalty and they also paid a lot of money to consumers. and they also are having to spend a lot of money fixing these cars. so what i thought was interesting was the direction. because they were coming out in january 2016, so we were still in the middle, only a couple months after the scandal broke. and some of their people went to an auto show in las vegas and they started talking about their new zero emission vehicles. and it was like, okay, why don't you put your money where your mouth is, don't put out a concept car but actually start developing it? and that's kind of part of what happens is you bring in more models than you have to. more cars than are required by the zev regulations by arb. put your investment here and do it in a way that we have some control over that can spark it. so i personally think it's a lemonade kind of situation, especially in contrast with what some of the other auto makers are doing. we'll see how this all plays out with this 2022 to 2025, some of the auto makers are going to basically say lets revisit with the emissions standards are. so besides volkswagen that's another topic on our friday board meeting down in riverside, is to talk about those vehicles because california did its own analysis of the technical ability. and we think that once again, the autos underestimate themselves. they do it faster and cheaper. they've done it for 50 years. but they always, that's not what you see. so i was involved in the litigation on the first greenhouse gas cases when i was at the attorney general's office. but, i think this is an opportunity where if we start having the zev requirements continue, we start having the infrastructure. we get past the chicken and the egg situation that the chair had mentioned. that i think it has some, i think it should go somewhere.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 42, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 59, 'end': 77, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 809, 'end': 812, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1750, 'end': 1753, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bill Magavern: gavin. chairman beall, chairman wieckowski, and committee members, my name is bill ellen magavern. i am policy director for the coalition for clean air. and our mission is to restore healthy air for all californians. you've heard today a gripping tale of crime and punishment. the plot, i think, could actually serve well in a film, but also i think has some lessons for us in the policy realm. one is first of all, we know that volkswagen engaged in a criminal conspiracy, that's not just my opinion, they have plead guilty. and it reminds us that the worst environmental violations should be prosecuted criminally, that's the only really best deterrent that we have. and in this case, their crime really was an assault on the air that's breathed by billions of people around the world. and they did it intentionally and deliberately. second, we need to have the cops on the beat to enforce our laws when it comes to our air and also protecting our consumers from being defrauded. and in this case as you've heard the experts at the air resources board put a lot of time and resources into this. and so i chose the wisdom of the legislature in providing them with those resources. and we need to make sure those resources continue to be there for environmental enforcement. some people have called our environmental enforcers a thin green line, because there really aren't that many of them in this state. and if you look at the fact that the federal government is now in the hands of the polluters, and retreating from environmental enforcement, it becomes all the more important that the state fill that void. thirdly, what caught volkswagen and also, i think, led to the notices of violation issued to fiat chrysler, was testing of vehicles in the real world on the road. and so we need to make sure as arb is already taking steps to do, one is first of all, we know that volkswagen engaged in a criminal conspiracy, that's not just my opinion, they have plead guilty. and it reminds us that the worst environmental violations should be prosecuted criminally, that's the only really best deterrent that we have. and in this case, their crime really was an assault on the air that's breathed by billions of people around the world. and they did it intentionally and deliberately. second, we need to have the cops on the beat to enforce our laws when it comes to our air and also protecting our consumers from being defrauded. and in this case as you've heard the experts at the air resources board put a lot of time and resources into this. and so i chose the wisdom of the legislature in providing them with those resources. and we need to make sure those resources continue to be there for environmental enforcement. some people have called our environmental enforcers a thin green line, because there really aren't that many of them in this state. and if you look at the fact that the federal government is now in the hands of the polluters, and retreating from environmental enforcement, it becomes all the more important that the state fill that void. thirdly, what caught volkswagen and also, i think, led to the notices of violation issued to fiat chrysler, was testing of vehicles in the real world on the road. and so we need to make sure as arb is already taking steps to do, that we institutionalize that kind of testing. and again, i urge the legislature to make sure that they have a budget for that. when it comes to the investments that are being made from the various provisions of the settlement, we completely agree with the points made by chairman wieckowski and senator atkins and by ms. peter that we urge that the requirements for disadvantaged communities be exceeded. because we know that it's those communities that have suffered the worst effects of air pollution. in this case, it was nox, oxides of nitrogen, that was emitted way in excess because of these defeat devices. and nox is a precursor, both to smog and to particle pollution. and both of those pollutants are the worst in our disadvantaged communities. so we want to make sure that those communities get benefits from these agreements. we, along with nrdc and our other partners, lead the charge ahead california campaign, and we worked with the pro tem, senator de leon, on sb1275 in 2014. which established the charge ahead initiative, which has a goal of giving disadvantaged community members access to the cleanest vehicles. which we know in the past they have not really had that access. so this money is a way to augment the investments the state is already being made towards that access. secondly, we strongly agree with senator allen and senator roth that it shouldn't just be about cars, particularly when we're talking about the appendix d mitigation money. we need to make sure that we're making substantial investments in not only buses, but trucks, and other port and freight equipment. which, those are actually the largest emitters of nox in the state of california. it's our heavy-duty vehicles and off-road vehicles involved in freight. and so to attack the nox problem, we need to make sure we're investing in the cleanest heavy-duty vehicles. and there's a principle that the state adopted last year in the sustainable freight action plan that we think it's very important to follow here. that we should invest in zero-emission vehicles and equipment where those are feasible and available. and where we don't have the zero-emission technologies available, we should invest in near zero equipment and pair it with low carbon renewable fuels. also, we think a very worthy area for investment is in scrappage and replacement programs. and we heard, ms. peter talk about the enhanced fleet modernization program, which has already been successful in the south coast and san joaquin valley in getting low income people into much cleaner vehicles when they scrap an old polluting vehicle. this money represents an opportunity to expand that program to 80% of the disadvantaged communities in the state, and provide a unified management structure for smog repair, retirement, and replacement with zero-emission vehicles. and we urge that spending to come specifically from the 3.0 liter settlement. those funds are specific and unique, and should be used to extend the effectiveness of existing disadvantaged community zero-emission vehicle programs. important to follow here. that we should invest in zero-emission vehicles and equipment where those are feasible and available. and where we don't have the zero-emission technologies available, we should invest in near zero equipment and pair it with low carbon renewable fuels. also, we think a very worthy area for investment is in scrappage and replacement programs. and we heard, ms. peter talk about the enhanced fleet modernization program, which has already been successful in the south coast and san joaquin valley in getting low income people into much cleaner vehicles when they scrap an old polluting vehicle. this money represents an opportunity to expand that program to 80% of the disadvantaged communities in the state, and provide a unified management structure for smog repair, retirement, and replacement with zero-emission vehicles. and we urge that spending to come specifically from the 3.0 liter settlement. those funds are specific and unique, and should be used to extend the effectiveness of existing disadvantaged community zero-emission vehicle programs. the 25 million, exactly. we know there's plenty of demand for environmental programs like zero-emission vehicles. what we need is a sophisticated platform that can safely deliver existing services, and we could coordinate those services to disadvantaged community households, with other services like, for example, low-income energy assistance. and so that, we think, is an opportunity. we'll be speaking to the air resources board on friday, down in riverside. and we thank you for your time.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 16, 'end': 21, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 32, 'end': 42, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 78, 'end': 97, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 3570, 'end': 3580, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3593, 'end': 3599, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3611, 'end': 3616, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4255, 'end': 4262, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4630, 'end': 4635, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4648, 'end': 4652, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5664, 'end': 5669, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6746, 'end': 6751, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Max Baumhefner: Thank you, Chairman and Senators. Max Baumhefner, an attorney with the Natural Resources Defense Council Clean Vehicles and Fuels Team. And thank you for the opportunity to speak before you today. I work extensively on electric vehicle policies with a focus on infrastructure, both in California in the Legislature, the Public Utilities Commission, Air Board, and then in other states. And I think I'm going to focus most of my comments on some of the infrastructure pieces of the consent decree that Ellen did, yeah, you have the Venn diagram. I'll get to that in a second, so avert your eyes for the moment. First off I wanted to note that I think ARB got a good deal for California here. We represent 12% of the US population, and around 14% of the vehicles were in the state, and we got 40% of the appendix C ZEV investment dollars. In other states, they have no such carve-out. And when we're working in other states, they're clamoring and are envious of the carve-out that we have. And they're saying, VW come here, come here, come to us. And they have no certainty that they will. And so I think ARB is commended for bringing home its disproportionate share of those funds to benefit the ZEV market in California. And I would very much echo the comments of Mr. Costa that caution us against opening up that deal, this time with a very different EPA at the negotiating table. And I would not be at all confident that California would fare better with Pruitt as a counterparty to that negotiation. And then, with respect to the mentioned guidance that ARB provided VW in crafting its first investment plan pursuant to appendix C, also note that ARB had public workshops and gathered stakeholder input to inform their guidance that they provided to ARB. And as Mr. McGavern mentioned, the members of the Charge Ahead California campaign, NRDC, Coalition for Clean Air, Environment California, The Greenlining Institute, and Communities for a Better Environment were very pleased to see that ARB incorporated our guidance, or our suggestions into the guidance they provided to VW. And one of the first principles that was outlined in that guidance was to ensure that the investments that VW will be making, pursuant to Appendix C, are complimentary and additional to other efforts. And that's with this Venn diagram gets at. And it's a draft framework. There's a CAVEAT here, and one other CAVEAT, well two, actually. stakeholder input to inform their guidance that they provided to ARB. And as Mr. McGavern mentioned, the members of the Charge Ahead California campaign, NRDC, Coalition for Clean Air, Environment California, The Greenlining Institute, and Communities for a Better Environment were very pleased to see that ARB incorporated our guidance, or our suggestions into the guidance they provided to VW. And one of the first principles that was outlined in that guidance was to ensure that the investments that VW will be making, pursuant to Appendix C, are complimentary and additional to other efforts. And that's with this Venn diagram gets at. And it's a draft framework. There's a CAVEAT here, and one other CAVEAT, well two, actually. One, I'm only focusing on the infrastructure piece of Appendix C here. There are three other allowable categories of investment, Green Cities, market education and outreach, and ZEV access. And likewise, I'm only focusing on the plug-in electric vehicles here. As has been discussed, the consent decree contemplates refueling infrastructure for hydrogen fuel cell electric vehicles as well, which are another important long term strategy, even though the technology is not yet as mature as plug-in vehicles. So with those caveats, and with the fact that this is only kind of one way you could do this, I'll note that there are a lot of opportunities to encourage Volkswagen and encourage our state agencies to make investments that complimentary and matching, and that build upon each other and stretch the state's dollars further, and ensure that more Californians benefit from this opportunity. I will also note that if you see this football-looking Venn diagram towards the bottom, I'm presuming that ARB was named Lead Administrator, though as you point out, that has yet to happen. So maybe that is presumptuous on my case, but I I think it makes a lot of sense in this instance. And Electrify America is pictured in this red circle. And I have a supposition that they are going to prioritize investments in the DC fast charging space, that are really best for kind of public access applications. And that's, hence the heavy emphasis on DC fast charging, which they do talk about in their proposed plan that came out 10 days ago. There's an overlap with investments that the investor on utilities will be making pursuant to SB 350. That is somewhat aspirational, and I hope that the PUC can figure out how to encourage the utilities. And PG&E has stepped up to the plate on this front, in their current application that's before the Commission, pursuant to SB 350, with a proposal to provide supporting infrastructure for any entity to hang DC fast charging stations on it. And that could include VW and other charging service providers. And if the other utilities were to do that as well, it would help stretch this money, and also amplify the efforts of the other charging service providers, as well. And really create a more robust, reliable network. And there are other categories of investment that the utilities have either already been authorized to make. Last year, the PUC authorized programs for them to go after multi-family housing and workplaces. That's one tranche in the kind of upper right-hand corner of this wheel. And now, to the point that Senator Allen, Senator Roth made, about not just being cars. The utilities have now proposed very significant investments to provide charging infrastructure for medium and heavy duty vehicles that are responsible for a disproportionate share of air pollution in this state. And those investments, if they provide the plugs for the vehicles, that at least in my hypothetical, ARB might be funding through appendix D dollars, would mean that the state's appendix D dollars could go twice as far. And you could have twice as many vehicles out there and get twice the air quality benefits. And then I have the CEC with their smaller share of money, kind of filling remaining gaps. So this is an illuster to framework. I hope that we will prevail in our efforts at the PUC to help ensure that investments made by the utilities will be complimentary in this fashion, to both what Electrify America and other charging service providers will be doing, as well as to what the state will be doing pursuant to appendix D. And the note is, as Ellen pointed out, the staff estimates that even if VW were to spend all of its 800 million on infrastructure, it'd still only meet 10% of the need. And they're not going to spend all of it on that, they have other allowable uses. $800 million sounds like a lot, but spread over a decade, over a big state, and over multiple different use cases. So the message should definitely be that we still need an all hands on deck approach. And with that, I appreciate your time, thank you. I hope that we will prevail in our efforts at the PUC to help ensure that investments made by the utilities will be complimentary in this fashion, to both what Electrify America and other charging service providers will be doing, as well as to what the state will be doing pursuant to appendix D. And the note is, as Ellen pointed out, the staff estimates that even if VW were to spend all of its 800 million on infrastructure, it'd still only meet 10% of the need. And they're not going to spend all of it on that, they have other allowable uses. $800 million sounds like a lot, but spread over a decade, over a big state, and over multiple different use cases. So the message should definitely be that we still need an all hands on deck approach. And with that, I appreciate your time, thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 501, 'end': 506, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1268, 'end': 1273, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1457, 'end': 1463, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1769, 'end': 1777, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2502, 'end': 2510, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5727, 'end': 5732, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5742, 'end': 5746, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6750, 'end': 6755, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7549, 'end': 7554, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bill Elrick: Thank you. Bill Elrick of the California Fuel Cell Partnership. I want to start with California's always been technology agnostic when it comes to ZEVs. Recognizing both technologies must succeed to achieve the goals we have. To support our goals, the state has committed, as was noted, to co-fund at least the first 100 hydrogen stations in this first phase of commercial launch. But our state's own analysis shows the current funding mechanisms are insufficient. And an example is this month the Energy Commission funded 16 out of over 100 station proposals and primarily due to lack of funding. That state analysis also shows that business development or business as usual development will put us well behind the wanted auto deployment plans. Fuel cell vehicles are commercial today with models from Honda, Hyundai, Toyota, Honda, more coming, infrastructures, the handicapped. As noted, this settlement should be about California's ZEV market needs, not VW's. And regarding the infrastructure, while BEVs can charge at home, and as was pointed out, there's rate payer and other settlement money supporting them. Fuel cells must have public infrastructure to sell vehicles and the lack of infrastructure's our current biggest limitation. Industry's looking right now at the long term, building partnerships, the signals, the mechanisms to create the confidence in this early phase. And they want to position themselves to make this a market-based system. This ZEV settlement could go a long way in helping that, but I ask the body to consider two basic questions. What kind of signal does it send to automakers and others if CARB accepts a settlement favoring only one of these two ZEV technologies? And if CARB accepts this submission, how does CARB, the Energy Commission, and the other agencies create the equity needed to give both platforms a level playing field? Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ryan Perrini: thank you, chairman and members. ryan bill perrini with southern california edison. we'd like to plant another seed for you guys to consider. i'll try and be quick. we believe the 3.0 liter settlement fund for efmp plus-up is one time opportunity that will be most effective if we can direct funding to the areas that stand to benefit the most. and in the process, leverage existing state funds to expand access to zev's deeper in disadvantaged communities. one way to support this is to use the vw funds to develop a data management system that can enable programs who operate in disadvantaged communities, including our own utility run programs. to coordinate and offer more thank you, chairman and members. ryan bill perrini with southern california edison. we'd like to plant another seed for you guys to consider. i'll try and be quick. we believe the 3.0 liter settlement fund for efmp plus-up is one time opportunity that will be most effective if we can direct funding to the areas that stand to benefit the most. and in the process, leverage existing state funds to expand access to zev's deeper in disadvantaged communities. one way to support this is to use the vw funds to develop a data management system that can enable programs who operate in disadvantaged communities, including our own utility run programs. to coordinate and offer more benefits to more low income, underserved households. the idea is to build this type of coordination infrastructure with a small slice of the 3.0 liter settlement. so that future appropriation of state funds can benefit from its existence. fce wants to increase the value of everyone's investment by linking efforts, such as our investment in charging station infrastructure. and our solar offerings with zev programs like efmp plus-up. the 3.0 liter funds are a real opportunity to develop innovative approaches to coordinate these programs. thank you for your time and consideration.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 710, 'end': 727, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Boesel: Chairman Beall and Chairman Wieckowski my name is John Boesel President and CEO of Cal Start we are a not for profit organization that represents more than 160 companies working to build a clean transportation technologies industry. I really appreciate this opportunity to share out thoughts relative to the entire VW settlement. First of all, I think CARB deserves an enormous amount of praise for finding the problem, standing up to the VW challenges and their claims and getting to the root of it and bringing the issue forward. So it's really tremendous what I think ARB did. And then, ARB in conjunction with the EPA and the Department of Justice, both with Appendix D. And the fixes to the vehicle owners, the VW owners. I think all those parts of the deal are tremendous. I think also what we have tried to set forth in Appendix E as Ms. Peters said, we're trying to address a distortion to the market that was created by VW's claim that they had a truly clean diesel that really did not need the emission control system. So my focus on, my comments is really on the portion of appendix C that allows VW to set up its own EV charging company, and compete with existing players. Many of them who are members who have been in this space for years. And, is this the right thing to do? Is this the right thing to allow this company to take settlement funds. And to set up a, with a very significant balance sheet, being the largest automobile company in the world to then come in and compete with California companies. That's the only part, really of this whole plan that we have major problems with. And I think the good news is that there are so many great alternatives in ways in which that money could be invested. Let me give you just a few examples one is the California Plug and EV collaborative is looking to do a major education, out reach program. Create awareness about electric vehicles in equivalent of a got milk campaign for electric vehicles that's much needed. That money, that program could use a lot of investment. This money could go into the CEC's EV infrastructure program that gives out rebates so that all operators and owners of EV infrastructure could compete. Air Districts also have those funds as well. And then also there's been several mentions of the need to invest in disadvantaged communities, help spur electric buses, invest in electric bus infrastructure. Those are all great ways in which these funds could be used to really move the market forward. Thank you very much for your time.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 14, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 28, 'end': 38, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 50, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 845, 'end': 851, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tom Folks: Hi there Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman, panel members my name's Tom Folks I'm here representing the Diesel Technology Forum which is a kind of a trade association an education Association made up of diesel. Truck makers, car makers, engine manufacturers, components manufacturers, fuels, and what not. What we would like to stress to you. First of all, we're delighted not to have anything to say about Appendix C, we wanted to address you specifically about Appendix D. And echoing some remarks that were said earlier we think there ought to be sort of and efficacy test applied to the appendix D money that should meet certain criteria. First choices for spending ought to be on proven and established technologies capable of delivering true nox reductions. We think they ought to be done in as expeditious a way as possible. So, in other words, VW vehicles put nox in inventory within a certain period of time. That inventory, that number, those tons of nox ought to be reduced as quickly as possible. It just seems right since you're mitigating the wrong that was done by VW. The money ought to be targeted at the largest source of nox that is being emitted within your disadvantaged communities, that have been identified. And we think their ought to be a dollar metric applied to any technology that receives the funding. There ought to be a dollar per ton of nox reduced. There ought to be a figure attached to that. In other words, how much does it cost to reduce one ton of nox? And obviously we think these remedies ought to be brought to the people of California as soon as possible. Given all that, we believe that new diesel technology engine is the quickest way, and the cheapest way, to reduce the most nox in California using Appendix D money. We also really wanted to bring to your attention not just over the road trucks, which you've heard previous testimony. But there's large diesel engines out there In switch locomotives, in work boats, and in other large applications that emit huge amounts of noxs that could be updated and still get the work done. So we wanted to just plant that seed with you that we believe you can see really quick results. The port of LA, Port of Long Beach did something like this for PN years ago. And they were able to reduce pollution within one year. 70% within one year. And so rather than waiting for years and years and years to see your nox reduction fund reach some efficacy, we think you can do it now and show results. And bring home some actually deliverable results to your districts by looking at new diesel technology. Thank you.
[{'start': 61, 'end': 70, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ellen Peter: Good afternoon, Chairman Beall, Chairman Wieckowski, and Members of the Committee. As indicated, my name is Ellen Peter. I'm the Chief Council of the California Air Resources Board. And prior to taking that position at ARB, I worked for the California Attorney General's Office for over 20 years. So I defended state agencies and I also prosecuted their enforcement cases. So as this Committee is well aware, over 50 years ago car emissions were started to be regulated by the California Air Resources Board to reduce smog and also to protect public health. Each year, each manufacturer, both cars and trucks, for each engine family have to submit a certification application. Thousands of these cert apps come into ARB every year and they're reviewed. And there's follow up testing. And then once approved, an ARB executive order allows these cars to be legally sold in California. Today, as the chair has indicated I am going to discuss ARB versus Volkswagen. The diesel emissions cheating scandal that broke in September 2015. This case is the biggest enforcement case that ARB ever handled. And also, it highlights the skills and the talents of the ARB scientists and engineers that figured this out. Our staff forced a confession after persistent questioning, innovative testing, and just a refusal to give up. Volkswagen's confession was triggered to ARB not others, and it was triggered by the enormous amount of data that ARB had collected in the case. VW is left with no other option than to admit it's deceit. So, I'm still under the Federal Court civil gag order as to the negotiations but more information is now public because the criminal indictments are unsealed and Volkswagen entered a guilty plea in court. So currently seven individual VW employees are under indictment, one's in custody. VW filed a guilty plea last month in Detroit and this guilty plea and these indictments sent out some public information. And I'm going to on that public information, in terms of the history, for the Committee today. So this conspiracy started over a decade ago. Diesel vehicles are very common in Europe. But because of ARB's tail pipe emission standards, they were not sold in California. However, over time California cleaned up its fuels and made it the possibility of diesel vehicles in California. So in turn, with these diesel vehicles, clean diesel vehicles, we were told, where is the possibility. So VW jumped on this opportunity and it launched off, it was the first to announce its clean diesel vehicle, and was starting to be sold in model year 2009. But the problem was their marketing announcement was head of their engineering expertise. So instead of solving an engineering problem or delaying the release of the car to the next model year, VW decided to lie, and to cheat, and did so for years. In the criminal indictments and the guilty plea, the facts are set out how a research project with ARB and others, including West Virginia University. How it blossomed into the discovery of an enormous emission scandal for these diesel vehicles. What was used was a defeat device, as Chairman Bell indicated. A defeat device essentially turns off the emissions control system when the car is not being tested. In some VW cars, as was mentioned, the excess Nox emissions was up to 40 times the allowed limit. Now, cars contain very complicated computer systems, that are constantly adjusting various systems. If your car has a serious problem, a rock comes up, pierces your oil pan, and all the oil drains out. Your car automatically goes into a protection mode to protect the engine. So one thing that happens in that situation is your emissions control system turns off. So in a less dramatic example, it's fine if you're emissions control system is designed to temporarily switch off in certain situations. Such as, you're accelerating passing another car. These are considered AECD's, auxiliary emission control devices, and they're fine as long as they're listed in a certification application and use in very limited situations. What's not okay is not telling about these AECDs. So when Volkswagen diesel certification applications instead of outlining the permitted conditions were turned off VW lied. In fact, the emissions control system was on only when it was on the laboratory dyno being tested in the required cycles leading up to certification. So VW wrote and installed complicated computer code so the car knew when it was being tested. It turned of the emissions control device when it was not. So in ARBs El Monte lab, this is where the cars are tested.  They're attached to multi-million dollar, huge dynanometer called dynos. And then the cars run in place like they're on a treadmill while they're being tested. Another system captures the hard emissions and these are then tested in the adjacent chemistry laboratory. In fact, the emissions control system was on only when it was on the laboratory dyno being tested in the required cycles leading up to certification. So VW wrote and installed complicated computer code so the car knew when it was being tested. It turned of the emissions control device when it was not. So in ARBs El Monte lab, this is where the cars are tested.  They're attached to multi-million dollar, huge dynanometer called dynos. And then the cars run in place like they're on a treadmill while they're being tested. Another system captures the hard emissions and these are then tested in the adjacent chemistry laboratory. So the Dyno operator drives the vehicle through prescribed test cycles which replicate things like going up hills and so forth. Now these test procedures are set out both in federal and state regulations, because the regulatory agencies and the car manufacturers need to know what they test procedures and requirements are. So we know that on road, real, driving emissions are almost always higher then the lab results. Just like when you buy a new car, your fuel economy sticker, saying with your miles per gallon is typically a little higher than what you actually get when you drive. So when ARB's research study started, they were examining these questions about why these higher emissions on the road for these Volkswagen diesel cars. Is it the fuel? Something else going on?. So, now at this point we can look backwards and we know what happened. Because VW was required to produce documents in respond to the federal criminal discovery. So in those indictments it outlines publicly what was happening in the scandal. We also know more from these documents as to VW's motivation. For example, in VW's larger, three liter cars, a mixture of urea and water known as adblue is stored in a tank and injected into the exhaust system to reduce Nox emissions. However the adblue tank design was not viewed as marketable in the United States. The proposed tank Either reduce the rise on the trunk so you have less storage or the ad tank, the smaller ad blue tank had to be refilled for more frequently before you had to get your oil changed. So VW decided neither of these options were acceptable. Instead, the VW engineers changed the AdBlue injection levels to operate correctly only when they were tested on the dyno. AdBlue was not injected when it was on the road. So end result bigger trunk, but more emissions. We also know now that the VW engineers improved their defeat devices over time. Unbeknownst to the owners, software updates to make the defeat devices work better were added when you took your car in for routine service. What is also revealed in the indictment are emails sent by increasingly panicky VW employees. In one email, a VW German engineer worried about the upcoming ARB dyno testing. Another email discussed ARB's responses that they needed to make to ARB. The email suggested creativity would be helpful here. Another email also translated from German said quote ARB is still waiting for answers. We still have no good explanations, end of quote, followed by five exclamation points. So back in California, there was a breakthrough. One of the ARB engineers hooked up the ARB's emissions monitoring laptop To a VW Passat, embraced it on that, on the passenger seat, So, at this point, there was real-time emissions data being collected from the Passat on their monitoring laptop. Fortunately, he had a long commute, and so he saw, as he was driving, that the NOX emissions unexpectedly started going up. And while he was driving, he saw that the software turn off. So, we've got a piece of information. So then afterwards, the ARB engineers went back to the lab and figured out how to replicate those situations. And they designed an alternative set of tests that nobody else knew about to try to get this to happen on the dyno. So, what happened, is these new tests that our ARB engineers designed, tricked the car when it was on the dyno to think it was on the road and then turned off the emissions control device. So, then the emissions from the illegal defeat devices were recorded, and they could be analysed on the dyno. So, it was admitted later by Volkswagen, much later, if the steering wheel turned in a certain way after a certain length of time, the car thought it was on the road and turned off the emissions device. So, in addition to that example our engineers also figured out other triggers for these cheating defeat devices, plural defeat devices. So, at this point, ARB goes back to the company and says, okay, this doesn't make sense. What's going on here? But VW kept lying. So, in the summer of 2015, VW employees came from Germany and made personal pitches to the ARB management and they said we have new data to show your testing anomalies. It's your problem your engineers are wrong. However, ARB refused to certify the model year 2016 cars until these answers were provided. Then more importantly, later that summer, ARB provided to VW the data from our newly discovered testing. And these emissions traces proved the case. And shortly thereafter VW confessed. So, what VW admitted then that had built illegal defeat devices into it's cars, into it's diesel cars for years over many different models. Nationwide, the illegal cars number over a half a million. In California there were about 85,000 illegal VW cars on the road when the settlements were negotiated last year. And then the question is, what to do? So, in my view, the case revolved around several key concerns that needed to be addressed, the cars, the environment, the market, and then the penalties and the deterrents. So, as for the cars, the issue confronting ARB was what can the owners do with these cars? Can they be fixed to meet the original standards? If fixed will they work properly? Will they be durable? What about an extended warranty? So, all those questions were dealt with and addressed in our settlement agreement. Environment's another concern. How do you address these past and future excess NOx emissions? Then we have the market. Clean diesel advertising attracted purchasers and distorted the market since these people could have bought zero emissions cars instead. So, California's historically been pushing the adoption of zero emission vehicles through various regulations and programs funding by the Legislature. But VW's actions hindered this by diverting people to cars that weren't clean. So, final concern is penalties and deterrence. How do we ensure that VW does not cheat again? And how do we make sure that other manufacturers conclude it's not worth cheating? So, these settlements were crafted to make the consumers in California whole and our environment whole. I'll run through the agreements in reverse chronological order. There was a chart in the agenda, the background paper with the agenda and also there is this one pager that also has a lot of that same information. So, the bottom agreement is the soon to be filed, California only, agreement for the penalty settlement with civil penalties for every illegal car sold. It also requires the payment of ARB's costs and it lists pages and pages of injunctive terms. So, if VW violates in the future, there are immediate court sanctions. Monetary relief is 153.8 million to the Air Pollution Control Fund, and the Legislature can decide how it wishes to appropriate that money. And this significant penalty should warn other manufactures of the risks of cheating. So, the next agreement from the bottom on the list is the California Only 3.0-Liter Agreement. Once it's approved by the court, it requires an additional 25 million payment to the Air Pollution Control Fund on July 1st of this year. This extra monetary relief for California is to provide additional monies for low income Californians to get ZEV cars or to have some other similar program. So, the Legislature could choose to supplement the EMP Plus-up program that was funded last year, or some other program of their choice. So, we also required VW to offer additional ZEV models, and also additional cars, 5,000 per year. Up through 2025. And this is to bring more ZEV cars to the market than is all ready required. So, those were the California only agreements. So, then we turn to the next two lines up. With the US EPA, there's a joint two liter agreement, and two liter refers to the size of the car. Those are the slightly smaller cars like the Passat. That one's all ready approved by the court, and there was a joint, three-liter agreement, which is still awaiting court approval. It was filed in December of 2016. And these joint agreements dovetail with the consumer class actions. As Judge Breyer did with the two-liter deal when he considered it in October of 2016, I suspect he will consider all of these together with the class action settlement for the three-liter cars on his next hearing that he has set for May 11th of this year. So, what I'll do now is discuss the agreements by appendix. Because each of the appendixes addresses a different issue.  So for cars, appendices A and B set out the process for VW to offer an emissions modification assuming the fix passes muster with ARB after testing. They can't offer a fix until ARB says it's okay and those incredibly good engineers that figured this out are sitting in the room every day figuring this out. So, we are on top of it. So, the owners can get a buyback from the two liter cars if they wish. But if they want to keep it, and they want to get it fixed, we want to make sure that the fix is as clean as possible. That after the fix, the car is going to work fine. And that the fix is durable. So we required an extended warranty to be built in for the owners that choose to use this fix. So, what we're going to also do is continue to test these cars over time to make sure the fix continues to work. So, there's an enormous amount of ARB staff time that is reviewing the fixes, testing, monitoring. We're going to pull cars in off of the and borrow them from owners, which is what we do. But we think this investment of time and staff resources is important to make sure, again, that the consumers are protected and that the environment is protected. So, we know that there were past excess NOx emissions from the cars model year 2009 to 15. And even if these cars are fixed, we know there are going to be future emissions because over the lifetime of the car, so years and years. Because the cars cannot be brought back to their originally certified emissions level, that they're not going to be quite as clean as they were certified to be. If you did, the cars wouldn't work properly. So, we're getting as close as we can, but there's going to be a gap. So, Appendix D of the two liter settlement is the way we take care of that problem. In the three liter settlement we just rolled the additional mitigation money into the same trust. So, for Appendix D for mitigation, VW writes a check. Actually, they write three checks, $900 million per check. So, the first one was paid in November of 2016 to the court. And then another 900 million is due November of this year and the third 900 million is due in November of 2018. Now, VW cannot touch or control those $2.7 billion national total. And this mitigation money is going to be used for projects throughout the country. And the 2.7 billion goes into a trust. And one reason it's going into a trust is that, unfortunately, the US EPA's had a bad experience where money that was supposed to be for mitigation was misspent. So, the money's going into a trust just like with the Deepwater Horizon and other environmental trusts. And so, then the question is what's our share of all this? So, mitigation monies were divided by vehicle sales by state. So, California gets, for the two liter cars, we had about 14% of the sales, so we got about 14% of the money. So, the total is 381 million for the two liter cars. For the three liter cars, the bigger cars, there's a higher percentage. California had 18% of the sales. And that's about 42 million. So, California's mitigation total that will be paid in and available within the next two years is about 423 million. So, this dividing up the money by sales, by state, is a very typical US EPA process. I tried to explain that we should get a bigger share, I argued, argued, unsuccessful. So, but we do have the 423 million. But we could not upset that part of the arrangement. So, on March 15th, just last week, Judge Breyer appointed a trustee. It was a trustee nominated by US DOJ and ARB, and so we now have a trustee as of last week, it's Wilmington Trust. The next step is the trust document's going to be finalized. And each state then, is a beneficiary to the trust and each Governor must agree to the trust terms and select a lead agency. And then at that point, each state has 90 days to prepare a mitigation plan and there will be a public process in California once a lead agency is selected. So, Appendix D did specify what the beneficiary mitigation plan must include. And one of its core requirements is a proposed geographical distribution within the state, but the emphasis is on money going to areas with a disproportionate burden from air pollution. So, when we negotiated the appendix D, we added in this provision. So, we had the ability to allow that the money go to where it's most needed. Now, Appendix D2 listed the eligible mitigation projects. So, one of the other things that you had before you is this 12 page document right out of the consent decree. And it lists the broad categories of eligible mitigation projects. So, the eligible mitigation projects focus on the different sources of NOx pollution, such as trucks, school buses, equipment at ports and airports, and so forth. So, many of these programs are already funded through the Legislature's other programs. So, the question is how should this trust money be integrated into these other purposes? So, direction from the Legislature, suggestions from the public are key on that. So, with respect to timing, the Governor will be asked to designate a lead agency as soon as a trust is established. There's 30 days to designate a lead agency. And then the trust monies can then start being put out after this 90 day plan period. So, I'm guessing that late this year there will actually be monies available to be spent. And once again, VW has no control whatsoever over California's $423 million mitigation share. Those two liters, three liters, they can't touch that. They can't touch penalty money that's in the air pollution control fund. So, now turn to Appendix C, which is only in the two liter deal, it's not in the three liter deal, and it addresses the market problems that VW cost. So, California will receive 40% or 800 million of Volkswagen's 2 billion nationwide investment over the next 10 years. So, as mentioned before, a moment ago, VW has no control over the mitigation monies or the money that the Legislature appropriates from the air pollution control funds. On those, they write a check. Now, in contrast, Appendix C is set up differently. Appendix C requires VW to invest in the ZEV market. So, California got a bigger share, 40%, of that money and our goal with Appendix C is to support a multi-pronged, ongoing ZEV effort in California. So, the consent decree and the ZEV investment plan are to guarantee that VW help build the entire electric vehicle market with this investment. As opposed to the other parts of the investment, this is their investment, it's not actually considered a punishment. It is something that they have to do, I don't think they would think it's voluntary, it was. But what it is, it's their investment, so it was set up differently than the other portions. And they can carry it differently on their books. And so, obviously it is something that we believe added value to California's efforts. And the way we control this is we built a lot of controls into the consent decree to put some rails around this kind of investment. It's not like you can go off to do whatever you want to do. So ARB's guidance into VW released last month provides additional detail to the requirements of the consent decree where the investment best supplements the ZEV efforts by others. So, we have the utilities involved, we have other infrastructure providers involved, cities, counties and many others are also involved in these ZEV efforts. And our ARB guidance, particularly, was focused on the need to benefit residents of disadvantaged communities. So, one way to think about this is to meet the California's upcoming year 2020 goal to have a million ZEVs on the road. We need consumer education, so people know about to buy these cars. And we also know that the infrastructure has to be there. It's kind of the chicken and egg in terms of buying a car and charging it. So ARB staff estimates that VW's initial 30 month $200 million investment is less than 10% of what's needed for a million ZEV cars. So, in my view it's an all hands on deck effort that's needed to build this infrastructure system. It's not a zero sum game where we only have a certain number of slots that can take place. So, VW set up a new company called Electrify America. So, the first part of my testimony, I was bashing how the horrible engineers cheating us. What was interesting in the course of the negotiations, VW brought in a lot of different people into the negotiations and into this process. So, Electrify America is a wholly owned subsidiary of VW but it's a separate corporation. It's based in the United States and their CEO that was announced was previously involved with Nissan and the Leaf effort. And so, we think Volkswagen, there's different, there's the diesel people and the ZEV people who have an opportunity to meet during the negotiations are a different people and are very committed to making their $2 billion investment work. So, the plan that was submitted by Electrify America was posted by ARB on March 14th. It's now open for public comment and it's going to be discussed Friday at our board meeting, which is in Riverside. And hopefully of the two legislative member, Senator Lara is going to be there and also Assemblyman Garcia. And so, we're just going to discuss and take public comment and at the meeting on this investment plan. And if you can't be in Riverside, all of ARB's board meetings are webcast. So, we wrote a consent decree with no deadline in us acting. We can approve it in part, in whole, or deny it. We have to, obviously, meet the requirements of the consent decree as to we can't be arbitrary and capricious. We will not. But we do have, as I said, goals built into it and we have a plan that has a lot of promise. And I'm just guessing here, I would anticipate there'd be action on the plan, probably April, May. So, turning away from these agreements, the question is what's the next steps in VW? And what's the status of ARB's recent notice of violation to Fiat Chrysler, or FCA, for the diesel Dodge Ram's 1500 pickups and the Jeep Grand Cherokees? So, back to Volkswagen. The testing of the two liter vehicle fixes is ongoing. The newer vehicles, the recent Gen 3 fix was approved. It's two phases. One is a software phase that will be done immediately. Hardware phase in 2018. And ARB will be able to continue test to make sure that the consumers' warranty protections and discover any flaws. The two leader older cars, Gen 1 and Gen 2, those proposed fixes for those are in development. For Volkswagen's three liter vehicles, any proposed fix for those Gen 1 or Gen 2 are probably later this year, but it depends on if the court approves the three liter deal. So, for the FCA case, on January 12th, 2017, ARB issued a notice of violation for failing to disclose the auxiliary emission control devices, the AECDs. There were about 14,000 vehicles. Their model years 2014 through 2016. And as I mentioned they are diesel Dodge Ram 1500 pickups and Jeep Grand Cherokees. And those were identified because of our special testing cycles that we develop from Volkswagen. So on the day the FCA noticed a violation was filed, ARB did brief some of the legislative staff. I participated in some of the briefings. And in terms of the Legislature's involvement, I commit A or B will keep your staff, whoever you want, apprised of these new violations and significant issues in any of the FCA or if we happen to have a future diesel enforcement case. So, with respect to FCA, we're in extensive discussions with them. We're in involved testing of the various vehicles. And no court action has been filed yet. So, we're working with US EPA, again, on this as we did with VW, but we can always break off because we have independent authority. So, that is a possibility if need be. So finally, I want to report on the resources that the Legislature gave ARB last year for fiscal year 2016 and 2017. Additional staff was given to us. They're hired. The document database is up and running. When you're in middle of enforcement, in litigation you have to keep track of all your documents and respond to subpoenas and also the Public Records Act request. If there's no guilty plea from any of these VW individual employees, our staff will then be in Detroit, testifying in those cases. So, our investigative staff that you authorized us for this year, they've turned their attention to FCA. And they're also looking at other test results. We have some other unfortunately suspicious test results. And I assure you we're looking at those very closely. So to conclude, I'm incredibly proud to be part of this fantastic enforcement group. VW is one example of one of ARB's regulations, the vehicle certification. And you need to have vigorous enforcement in my view to keep a level playing field. Companies who break the rules cannot be allowed to proceed. They must be penalized. And they shouldn't get a competitive advantage. Enforcement also ensures that air quality and the public health improvements that are projected by the regulations are actually achieved. And we're doing our best to monitor all of our regulations. So thank you very much, and I'm happy to answer questions.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 30, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 41, 'end': 51, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 108, 'end': 119, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 3114, 'end': 3118, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5012, 'end': 5014, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 13569, 'end': 13575, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 17362, 'end': 17368, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 22639, 'end': 22642, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 23051, 'end': 23055, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 23098, 'end': 23104, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ellen Peter: so what you're, this is peters personally, not peters, chief counsel of arb. so volkswagen paid a large penalty and they also paid a lot of money to consumers. and they also are having to spend a lot of money fixing these cars. so what i thought was interesting was the direction. because they were coming out in january 2016, so we were still in the middle, only a couple months after the scandal broke. and some of their people went to an auto show in las vegas and they started talking about their new zero emission vehicles. and it was like, okay, why don't you put your money where your mouth is, don't put out a concept car but actually start developing it? and that's kind of part of what happens is you bring in more models than you have to. more cars than are required by the zev regulations by arb. put your investment here and do it in a way that we have some control over that can spark it. so i personally think it's a lemonade kind of situation, especially in contrast with what some of the other auto makers are doing. we'll see how this all plays out with this 2022 to 2025, some of the auto makers are going to basically say lets revisit with the emissions standards are. so besides volkswagen that's another topic on our friday board meeting down in riverside, is to talk about those vehicles because california did its own analysis of the technical ability. and we think that once again, the autos underestimate themselves. they do it faster and cheaper. they've done it for 50 years. but they always, that's not what you see. so i was involved in the litigation on the first greenhouse gas cases when i was at the attorney general's office. but, i think this is an opportunity where if we start having the zev requirements continue, we start having the infrastructure. we get past the chicken and the egg situation that the chair had mentioned. that i think it has some, i think it should go somewhere.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 30, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 47, 'end': 53, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 785, 'end': 788, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1726, 'end': 1729, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bill Magavern: gavin. chairman beall, chairman wieckowski, and committee members, my name is magavern. i am policy director for the coalition for clean air. and our mission is to restore healthy air for all californians. you've heard today a gripping tale of crime and punishment. the plot, i think, could actually serve well in a film, but also i think has some lessons for us in the policy realm. one is first of all, we know that volkswagen engaged in a criminal conspiracy, that's not just my opinion, they have plead guilty. and it reminds us that the worst environmental violations should be prosecuted criminally, that's the only really best deterrent that we have. and in this case, their crime really was an assault on the air that's breathed by billions of people around the world. and they did it intentionally and deliberately. second, we need to have the cops on the beat to enforce our laws when it comes to our air and also protecting our consumers from being defrauded. and in this case as you've heard the experts at the air resources board put a lot of time and resources into this. and so i chose the wisdom of the legislature in providing them with those resources. and we need to make sure those resources continue to be there for environmental enforcement. some people have called our environmental enforcers a thin green line, because there really aren't that many of them in this state. and if you look at the fact that the federal government is now in the hands of the polluters, and retreating from environmental enforcement, it becomes all the more important that the state fill that void. thirdly, what caught volkswagen and also, i think, led to the notices of violation issued to fiat chrysler, was testing of vehicles in the real world on the road. and so we need to make sure as arb is already taking steps to do, one is first of all, we know that volkswagen engaged in a criminal conspiracy, that's not just my opinion, they have plead guilty. and it reminds us that the worst environmental violations should be prosecuted criminally, that's the only really best deterrent that we have. and in this case, their crime really was an assault on the air that's breathed by billions of people around the world. and they did it intentionally and deliberately. second, we need to have the cops on the beat to enforce our laws when it comes to our air and also protecting our consumers from being defrauded. and in this case as you've heard the experts at the air resources board put a lot of time and resources into this. and so i chose the wisdom of the legislature in providing them with those resources. and we need to make sure those resources continue to be there for environmental enforcement. some people have called our environmental enforcers a thin green line, because there really aren't that many of them in this state. and if you look at the fact that the federal government is now in the hands of the polluters, and retreating from environmental enforcement, it becomes all the more important that the state fill that void. thirdly, what caught volkswagen and also, i think, led to the notices of violation issued to fiat chrysler, was testing of vehicles in the real world on the road. and so we need to make sure as arb is already taking steps to do, that we institutionalize that kind of testing. and again, i urge the legislature to make sure that they have a budget for that. when it comes to the investments that are being made from the various provisions of the settlement, we completely agree with the points made by chairman wieckowski and senator atkins and by ms. peter that we urge that the requirements for disadvantaged communities be exceeded. because we know that it's those communities that have suffered the worst effects of air pollution. in this case, it was nox, oxides of nitrogen, that was emitted way in excess because of these defeat devices. and nox is a precursor, both to smog and to particle pollution. and both of those pollutants are the worst in our disadvantaged communities. so we want to make sure that those communities get benefits from these agreements. we, along with nrdc and our other partners, lead the charge ahead california campaign, and we worked with the pro tem, senator de leon, on sb1275 in 2014. which established the charge ahead initiative, which has a goal of giving disadvantaged community members access to the cleanest vehicles. which we know in the past they have not really had that access. so this money is a way to augment the investments the state is already being made towards that access. secondly, we strongly agree with senator allen and senator roth that it shouldn't just be about cars, particularly when we're talking about the appendix d mitigation money. we need to make sure that we're making substantial investments in not only buses, but trucks, and other port and freight equipment. which, those are actually the largest emitters of nox in the state of california. it's our heavy-duty vehicles and off-road vehicles involved in freight. and so to attack the nox problem, we need to make sure we're investing in the cleanest heavy-duty vehicles. and there's a principle that the state adopted last year in the sustainable freight action plan that we think it's very important to follow here. that we should invest in zero-emission vehicles and equipment where those are feasible and available. and where we don't have the zero-emission technologies available, we should invest in near zero equipment and pair it with low carbon renewable fuels. also, we think a very worthy area for investment is in scrappage and replacement programs. and we heard, ms. peter talk about the enhanced fleet modernization program, which has already been successful in the south coast and san joaquin valley in getting low income people into much cleaner vehicles when they scrap an old polluting vehicle. this money represents an opportunity to expand that program to 80% of the disadvantaged communities in the state, and provide a unified management structure for smog repair, retirement, and replacement with zero-emission vehicles. and we urge that spending to come specifically from the 3.0 liter settlement. those funds are specific and unique, and should be used to extend the effectiveness of existing disadvantaged community zero-emission vehicle programs. important to follow here. that we should invest in zero-emission vehicles and equipment where those are feasible and available. and where we don't have the zero-emission technologies available, we should invest in near zero equipment and pair it with low carbon renewable fuels. also, we think a very worthy area for investment is in scrappage and replacement programs. and we heard, ms. peter talk about the enhanced fleet modernization program, which has already been successful in the south coast and san joaquin valley in getting low income people into much cleaner vehicles when they scrap an old polluting vehicle. this money represents an opportunity to expand that program to 80% of the disadvantaged communities in the state, and provide a unified management structure for smog repair, retirement, and replacement with zero-emission vehicles. and we urge that spending to come specifically from the 3.0 liter settlement. those funds are specific and unique, and should be used to extend the effectiveness of existing disadvantaged community zero-emission vehicle programs. the 25 million, exactly. we know there's plenty of demand for environmental programs like zero-emission vehicles. what we need is a sophisticated platform that can safely deliver existing services, and we could coordinate those services to disadvantaged community households, with other services like, for example, low-income energy assistance. and so that, we think, is an opportunity. we'll be speaking to the air resources board on friday, down in riverside. and we thank you for your time.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 16, 'end': 21, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 32, 'end': 42, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 78, 'end': 86, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 3559, 'end': 3569, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3582, 'end': 3588, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3600, 'end': 3605, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4244, 'end': 4251, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4637, 'end': 4641, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5653, 'end': 5658, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6735, 'end': 6740, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Max Baumhefner: thank you, chairman and senators. baumhefner, an attorney with the natural resources defense council clean vehicles and fuels team. and thank you for the opportunity to speak before you today. i work extensively on electric vehicle policies with a focus on infrastructure, both in california in the legislature, the public utilities commission, air board, and then in other states. and i think i'm going to focus most of my comments on some of the infrastructure pieces of the consent decree that ellen did, yeah, you have the venn diagram. i'll get to that in a second, so avert your eyes for the moment. first off i wanted to note that i think arb got a good deal for california here. we represent 12% of the us population, and around 14% of the vehicles were in the state, and we got 40% of the appendix c zev investment dollars. in other states, they have no such carve-out. and when we're working in other states, they're clamoring and are envious of the carve-out that we have. and they're saying, vw come here, come here, come to us. and they have no certainty that they will. and so i think arb is commended for bringing home its disproportionate share of those funds to benefit the zev market in california. and i would very much echo the comments of mr. costa that caution us against opening up that deal, this time with a very different epa at the negotiating table. and i would not be at all confident that california would fare better with pruitt as a counterparty to that negotiation. and then, with respect to the mentioned guidance that arb provided vw in crafting its first investment plan pursuant to appendix c, also note that arb had public workshops and gathered stakeholder input to inform their guidance that they provided to arb. and as mr. mcgavern mentioned, the members of the charge ahead california campaign, nrdc, coalition for clean air, environment california, the greenlining institute, and communities for a better environment were very pleased to see that arb incorporated our guidance, or our suggestions into the guidance they provided to vw. and one of the first principles that was outlined in that guidance was to ensure that the investments that vw will be making, pursuant to appendix c, are complimentary and additional to other efforts. and that's with this venn diagram gets at. and it's a draft framework. there's a caveat here, and one other caveat, well two, actually. stakeholder input to inform their guidance that they provided to arb. and as mr. mcgavern mentioned, the members of the charge ahead california campaign, nrdc, coalition for clean air, environment california, the greenlining institute, and communities for a better environment were very pleased to see that arb incorporated our guidance, or our suggestions into the guidance they provided to vw. and one of the first principles that was outlined in that guidance was to ensure that the investments that vw will be making, pursuant to appendix c, are complimentary and additional to other efforts. and that's with this venn diagram gets at. and it's a draft framework. there's a caveat here, and one other caveat, well two, actually. one, i'm only focusing on the infrastructure piece of appendix c here. there are three other allowable categories of investment, green cities, market education and outreach, and zev access. and likewise, i'm only focusing on the plug-in electric vehicles here. as has been discussed, the consent decree contemplates refueling infrastructure for hydrogen fuel cell electric vehicles as well, which are another important long term strategy, even though the technology is not yet as mature as plug-in vehicles. so with those caveats, and with the fact that this is only kind of one way you could do this, i'll note that there are a lot of opportunities to encourage volkswagen and encourage our state agencies to make investments that complimentary and matching, and that build upon each other and stretch the state's dollars further, and ensure that more californians benefit from this opportunity. i will also note that if you see this football-looking venn diagram towards the bottom, i'm presuming that arb was named lead administrator, though as you point out, that has yet to happen. so maybe that is presumptuous on my case, but i i think it makes a lot of sense in this instance. and electrify america is pictured in this red circle. and i have a supposition that they are going to prioritize investments in the dc fast charging space, that are really best for kind of public access applications. and that's, hence the heavy emphasis on dc fast charging, which they do talk about in their proposed plan that came out 10 days ago. there's an overlap with investments that the investor on utilities will be making pursuant to sb 350. that is somewhat aspirational, and i hope that the puc can figure out how to encourage the utilities. and pg&e has stepped up to the plate on this front, in their current application that's before the commission, pursuant to sb 350, with a proposal to provide supporting infrastructure for any entity to hang dc fast charging stations on it. and that could include vw and other charging service providers. and if the other utilities were to do that as well, it would help stretch this money, and also amplify the efforts of the other charging service providers, as well. and really create a more robust, reliable network. and there are other categories of investment that the utilities have either already been authorized to make. last year, the puc authorized programs for them to go after multi-family housing and workplaces. that's one tranche in the kind of upper right-hand corner of this wheel. and now, to the point that senator allen, senator roth made, about not just being cars. the utilities have now proposed very significant investments to provide charging infrastructure for medium and heavy duty vehicles that are responsible for a disproportionate share of air pollution in this state. and those investments, if they provide the plugs for the vehicles, that at least in my hypothetical, arb might be funding through appendix d dollars, would mean that the state's appendix d dollars could go twice as far. and you could have twice as many vehicles out there and get twice the air quality benefits. and then i have the cec with their smaller share of money, kind of filling remaining gaps. so this is an illuster to framework. i hope that we will prevail in our efforts at the puc to help ensure that investments made by the utilities will be complimentary in this fashion, to both what electrify america and other charging service providers will be doing, as well as to what the state will be doing pursuant to appendix d. and the note is, as ellen pointed out, the staff estimates that even if vw were to spend all of its 800 million on infrastructure, it'd still only meet 10% of the need. and they're not going to spend all of it on that, they have other allowable uses. $800 million sounds like a lot, but spread over a decade, over a big state, and over multiple different use cases. so the message should definitely be that we still need an all hands on deck approach. and with that, i appreciate your time, thank you. i hope that we will prevail in our efforts at the puc to help ensure that investments made by the utilities will be complimentary in this fashion, to both what electrify america and other charging service providers will be doing, as well as to what the state will be doing pursuant to appendix d. and the note is, as ellen pointed out, the staff estimates that even if vw were to spend all of its 800 million on infrastructure, it'd still only meet 10% of the need. and they're not going to spend all of it on that, they have other allowable uses. $800 million sounds like a lot, but spread over a decade, over a big state, and over multiple different use cases. so the message should definitely be that we still need an all hands on deck approach. and with that, i appreciate your time, thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 497, 'end': 502, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1264, 'end': 1269, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1453, 'end': 1459, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1765, 'end': 1773, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2498, 'end': 2506, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5723, 'end': 5728, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5738, 'end': 5742, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6746, 'end': 6751, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7545, 'end': 7550, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bill Elrick: Thank you. Bill Elrick of the California Fuel Cell Partnership. I want to start with California's always been technology agnostic when it comes to ZEVs. Recognizing both technologies must succeed to achieve the goals we have. To support our goals, the state has committed, as was noted, to co-fund at least the first 100 hydrogen stations in this first phase of commercial launch. But our state's own analysis shows the current funding mechanisms are insufficient. And an example is this month the Energy Commission funded 16 out of over 100 station proposals and primarily due to lack of funding. That state analysis also shows that business development or business as usual development will put us well behind the wanted auto deployment plans. Fuel cell vehicles are commercial today with models from Honda, Hyundai, Toyota, Honda, more coming, infrastructures, the handicapped. As noted, this settlement should be about California's ZEV market needs, not VW's. And regarding the infrastructure, while BEVs can charge at home, and as was pointed out, there's rate payer and other settlement money supporting them. Fuel cells must have public infrastructure to sell vehicles and the lack of infrastructure's our current biggest limitation. Industry's looking right now at the long term, building partnerships, the signals, the mechanisms to create the confidence in this early phase. And they want to position themselves to make this a market-based system. This ZEV settlement could go a long way in helping that, but I ask the body to consider two basic questions. What kind of signal does it send to automakers and others if CARB accepts a settlement favoring only one of these two ZEV technologies? And if CARB accepts this submission, how does CARB, the Energy Commission, and the other agencies create the equity needed to give both platforms a level playing field? Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ryan Perrini: thank you, chairman and members. ryan with southern california edison. we'd like to plant another seed for you guys to consider. i'll try and be quick. we believe the 3.0 liter settlement fund for efmp plus-up is one time opportunity that will be most effective if we can direct funding to the areas that stand to benefit the most. and in the process, leverage existing state funds to expand access to zev's deeper in disadvantaged communities. one way to support this is to use the vw funds to develop a data management system that can enable programs who operate in disadvantaged communities, including our own utility run programs. to coordinate and offer more thank you, chairman and members. ryan with southern california edison. we'd like to plant another seed for you guys to consider. i'll try and be quick. we believe the 3.0 liter settlement fund for efmp plus-up is one time opportunity that will be most effective if we can direct funding to the areas that stand to benefit the most. and in the process, leverage existing state funds to expand access to zev's deeper in disadvantaged communities. one way to support this is to use the vw funds to develop a data management system that can enable programs who operate in disadvantaged communities, including our own utility run programs. to coordinate and offer more benefits to more low income, underserved households. the idea is to build this type of coordination infrastructure with a small slice of the 3.0 liter settlement. so that future appropriation of state funds can benefit from its existence. fce wants to increase the value of everyone's investment by linking efforts, such as our investment in charging station infrastructure. and our solar offerings with zev programs like efmp plus-up. the 3.0 liter funds are a real opportunity to develop innovative approaches to coordinate these programs. thank you for your time and consideration.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 697, 'end': 701, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Boesel: chairman beall and chairman wieckowski my name is john jonah boesel president and ceo of cal start we are a not for profit organization that represents more than 160 companies working to build a clean transportation technologies industry. i really appreciate this opportunity to share out thoughts relative to the entire vw settlement. first of all, i think carb deserves an enormous amount of praise for finding the problem, standing up to the vw challenges and their claims and getting to the root of it and bringing the issue forward. so it's really tremendous what i think arb did. and then, arb in conjunction with the epa and the department of justice, both with appendix d. and the fixes to the vehicle owners, the vw owners. i think all those parts of the deal are tremendous. i think also what we have tried to set forth in appendix e as ms. peters said, we're trying to address a distortion to the market that was created by vw's claim that they had a truly clean diesel that really did not need the emission control system. so my focus on, my comments is really on the portion of appendix c that allows vw to set up its own ev charging company, and compete with existing players. many of them who are members who have been in this space for years. and, is this the right thing to do? is this the right thing to allow this company to take settlement funds. and to set up a, with a very significant balance sheet, being the largest automobile company in the world to then come in and compete with california companies. that's the only part, really of this whole plan that we have major problems with. and i think the good news is that there are so many great alternatives in ways in which that money could be invested. let me give you just a few examples one is the california plug and ev collaborative is looking to do a major education, out reach program. create awareness about electric vehicles in equivalent of a got milk campaign for electric vehicles that's much needed. that money, that program could use a lot of investment. this money could go into the cec's ev infrastructure program that gives out rebates so that all operators and owners of ev infrastructure could compete. air districts also have those funds as well. and then also there's been several mentions of the need to invest in disadvantaged communities, help spur electric buses, invest in electric bus infrastructure. those are all great ways in which these funds could be used to really move the market forward. thank you very much for your time.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 14, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 28, 'end': 38, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 50, 'end': 67, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 851, 'end': 857, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tom Folks: hi there mr. chairman, mr. chairman, panel members my name's folks i'm here representing the diesel technology forum which is a kind of a trade association an education association made up of diesel. truck makers, car makers, engine manufacturers, components manufacturers, fuels, and what not. what we would like to stress to you. first of all, we're delighted not to have anything to say about appendix c, we wanted to address you specifically about appendix d. and echoing some remarks that were said earlier we think there ought to be sort of and efficacy test applied to the appendix d money that should meet certain criteria. first choices for spending ought to be on proven and established technologies capable of delivering true nox reductions. we think they ought to be done in as expeditious a way as possible. so, in other words, vw vehicles put nox in inventory within a certain period of time. that inventory, that number, those tons of nox ought to be reduced as quickly as possible. it just seems right since you're mitigating the wrong that was done by vw. the money ought to be targeted at the largest source of nox that is being emitted within your disadvantaged communities, that have been identified. and we think their ought to be a dollar metric applied to any technology that receives the funding. there ought to be a dollar per ton of nox reduced. there ought to be a figure attached to that. in other words, how much does it cost to reduce one ton of nox? and obviously we think these remedies ought to be brought to the people of california as soon as possible. given all that, we believe that new diesel technology engine is the quickest way, and the cheapest way, to reduce the most nox in california using appendix d money. we also really wanted to bring to your attention not just over the road trucks, which you've heard previous testimony. but there's large diesel engines out there in switch locomotives, in work boats, and in other large applications that emit huge amounts of noxs that could be updated and still get the work done. so we wanted to just plant that seed with you that we believe you can see really quick results. the port of la, port of long beach did something like this for pn years ago. and they were able to reduce pollution within one year. 70% within one year. and so rather than waiting for years and years and years to see your nox reduction fund reach some efficacy, we think you can do it now and show results. and bring home some actually deliverable results to your districts by looking at new diesel technology. thank you.
[]
Phil Bonet: mr. pro tem and folks, my name is phil jonah bonet, i'm the executive director of the alta california regional center, here in sacramento. we provide services to about 22,000 folks in sacramento and around the area here and on behalf of all 22,000 of them and the folks that we work with to provide supports to them, we want to strongly urge your support for nancy's nomination and appointment. thank you. she is a leader who leads by example, and i think at this time and the challenges that we're facing, that's exactly what we need.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 359, 'end': 364, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Marty Omoto: Thank you, Marty Omoto, California Disability Community Action Network and also the California Person Centered Advocacy Partnership. I'm also a family member, my older sister had development disabilities. Worked with Nancy Bargeman for many years under two different previous directors, and she's proven herself to be compelling, compassionate, and competent, and I believe working with her as a family member, she's been willing to do that, especially on the issues that you just mentioned, the Committee just mentioned, regarding disparities. That's a huge issue for communities of color that impacted many people in communities across the state. And I believe that she is taking steps towards that and we'll be working with her to make sure those steps are meaningful and one of the things that we did impress upon her, I was part of the disparities hearing, is that the issue of reducing inequities and disparity should be a part of everything we do. Not a special thing, but everything we do. Lastly, I just want to also thank you, members of the Senate and the Assembly as well, for the efforts you all made with working with us and the administration and getting the needed funding to our community. That made a huge difference, and we appreciate it. Thank you very much. In strong support, I don't know if I said that actually.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 217, 'end': 231, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jordan Lindsay: thank you, mr. pro tem and senators. jordan phil lindsay, the executive director for the ark california representing the families and the ark and the united cerebral palsy collaborative and i'm the chair of the lanterman coalition, which represents the major stakeholders, state wide stakeholders in our community, and four years ago, perhaps to this very day, perhaps in this very room, frank lanterman, a republican legislature from los angeles, was harassed and targeted by moms from the bay area. moms who were passionate about their children, moms who wanted to see their children have a fulfilling life in the community. and frank lanterman pushed that through, brought it to governor reagan's desk, and now we have the hallmark and historical legislation called the lanterman act, and the lanterman coalition is here to make sure that we as a community and hopefully hold you accountable as the lawmakers to keep that promise to the members of our community. so they can be our neighbours, they can be our coworkers. okay, you have anything to say about ms. bargeman? and we're absolutely in support of ms bargeman for her nomination and just reaching out. to those in our community saying that what do you have, what words do you have to say? grace suerta down in bakersfield said please, please tell the committee that ms. bargeman came down to bakersfield, told our consumers that they don't have to worry about what may be happening. now she knows that she's got their back, and so we have heard back, as well.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 388, 'end': 403, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 631, 'end': 646, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 691, 'end': 697, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 796, 'end': 805, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1065, 'end': 1073, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1113, 'end': 1121, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1251, 'end': 1263, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1332, 'end': 1340, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kristin Jacobson: Yeah, my name is Kristin Jacobson with Autism Deserves Equal Coverage Foundation, and I have a long history of working with Ms. Bargeman. I think we maybe served on a panel together a number of years ago where we met. I've always been very impressed with her commitment to the consumers and the community that she serves. We had a lot of work that we did together around the Early Start program, which is something that's near and dear to my heart because it kept my kids out of needing life long Lanterman services, and I think that's something I think that she knows a lot about, and it helps families and saves costs in the long run. And I feel like also, you've done the Committee you've talked about on developmental disabilities disparities. I know you've already reached out to people who I respect in the community to join that Committee and I just am in strong support of Ms. Bargeman's nomination, thank you.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 128, 'end': 136, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 885, 'end': 893, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Santi Rogers: Good afternoon, my name is Santi Rogers. I'm the acting Director of the Regional Center of the East Bay. Somehow, this great law keeps you involved forever. The most important part is Nancy Bargeman is an extraordinary individual. She has learned about every aspect of what this law promises as an individual plan, the support of family members, and the support of the individuals receiving the service. She represents what I hope we've done over the last, in my case, five decades, bringing repertoire to all of those who serve, as well as the great families that we know throughout our 58 counties. This is an incredible nation state, this is an incredible piece of civil rights law, she's an incredible leader.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 184, 'end': 198, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Suzanne Worth: Mr. Chair, members, Suzanne Worth with California Disabilities Services Association. Here in strong support of Nancy Bargeman's appointment as the Director of the department that we mainly deal with for our service providers. Nancy brings a level of knowledge that is unusual in this department. I think prior to her appointment, Santi was the first departmental Director of DDS, who actually worked in the community. Everybody previously had been in state service before they came to the department. So, in these days of massive change, someone like Nancy brings the skill set that will help the state evolve the services, service models, policies, and procedures to make sure that we narrow issues, like vast disparities among populations. It takes someone who understands how the services get delivered from the front door to actually make it real. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 111, 'end': 127, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 226, 'end': 231, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 330, 'end': 335, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 551, 'end': 556, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Robert Benson: i am robert jordan benson. i'm a full-time advocate and a member of the california person centered advocacy partnership and that i strongly support nancy bargmann and i strongly support nancy bargmann. thank you.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 148, 'end': 162, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 186, 'end': 200, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rick Rollens: Thank you. I wanted to give respect where respect is due. You're part of this Senate institution and history. I appreciate the opportunity to be here today. I'm Rick Rollens, I'm here today representing ARCA, Association Regional Center Agencies. I'm also a parent of a 26 year old son with autism, and an advocate in the autism community. Here today in strong support of Miss Bargmann as Director of Developmental Services. She's the right person at the right time for a system in change and I'd really also parenthetically want to thank each of you who voted for the MCO tax, you Senator for your leadership, Speaker Atkins and Mr. Cannella, Senator Leyva for the good work last year. And again, right person right for the job. Very well respected and tremendous open door policy. All the families feel very comfortable dealing with her and on a professional level with the Regional Center system itself. The interaction between the Regional Centers and the department is critical and we have a good working relationship with Director Bargmann and would like to continue that process. Thank you.
[{'start': 161, 'end': 173, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 377, 'end': 385, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 619, 'end': 625, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 634, 'end': 642, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 652, 'end': 657, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1037, 'end': 1045, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bob Hamilton: senator de leon and esteemed members of the committee and staff, my name is bob robert hamilton. i'm the director of the north bay regional center. we serve napa, sonoma, and solano counties and we are the host center for the sonoma developmental center. i've known nancy bargmann for over 10 years, and in different roles, different organizations, and i can say that she has the highest integrity and is a very brilliant woman and knows this system inside and out and i thoroughly support her, working closely with her on the closure. she is determined, a very determined person to make this thing work right for the families and the clients, not just closing it, but closing it well. okay. so i want to thank you all. thank you very much.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 15, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 76, 'end': 95, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 266, 'end': 280, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Doug Pascover: Hi Senators, my name is Doug Pascover, I'm with Imagine Supported Living Services in Santa Cruz County, and the California Person Centered Advocacy Partnership. I've been aware of Nancy for about half of that 30 year career and she's always like that. Lots of data, always looking forward and always thinking about the people we serve and I appreciate her leadership and encourage an aye vote. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 180, 'end': 185, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Francisco Manzuela: Hi, my name is Francisco Manzuela. I'm here representing my Executive Director, Javier Zaldivar, for San Andreas Regional Center. San Andreas Regional Center serves over 16,000 families who have, sorry. San Andreas is in support of Ms. Bargmann and clearly her leadership, her experience, is something that we look forward to working with. It's something that we need. I was actually fortunate to work for Mr. Rogers for 15 years and what he showed me was you need good leadership and definitely Nancy has that and we look forward to working with her.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 80, 'end': 95, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 236, 'end': 244, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 410, 'end': 416, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 496, 'end': 501, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Will Sanford: Will Sanford, Futures Explored. I support about 700 individuals across four counties. I've worked with Nancy for a number of years on really ugly topics during the years where we had to do big cuts, and I've been able to come out the other side. I have always respected her ability to listen and understand that we may disagree, but at the end of the day, she is the leader of DDS, and I strongly support her. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 103, 'end': 108, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Shella DuMong: Hello, my name is Shella Dumong. I'm the parent of someone who receives Regional Center services. I'm also the Executive Director of a non-profit...
[{'start': 18, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shella DuMong: Does that work? My name is Shella Dumong. I am the mom of someone who receives Regional Center services. I'm also the Executive Director of CHANCE Housing, a local non-profit that provides affordable and accessible housing for people with developmental disabilities and I wanted to be present to express my strong support on the confirmation of Nancy Bargmann. Really look forward to working with her and the department and state on affordable and accessible housing initiatives and thank you very much for the No Place Like Home. Thank you, thank you very much.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 345, 'end': 359, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kacey Dillard: Hi, my name is Kacey Dillard, wow, that's really loud, and I'm the Advocacy and Project Development Manager...
[{'start': 15, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tony Anderson: good afternoon, senator de leon, members of the committee, and staff. my name's tony bob anderson. i'm the new executive director of the valley mountain regional center and i'm here in strong support of nancy bargman. thanks for not calling me out on some of those earlier things, but we had some great run arounds early on and i really appreciate everything you've done. one of the things, though, i really appreciated what you said about the boxes, checking the boxes, and i think that's critically important. i just want to tell you real quickly, a quick experience i had with nancy on my second day on the job. we are conservators for some of our consumers and there was a consumer that was going through an end of life time, a very serious emotional time and there are a lot of bureaucratic things that happen in that because the stage is the conservator for this particular person and there are things you get to check and make sure are done, but the questions that i was getting and the check, make sure you do this, make sure you do that, had nothing to do with a form. they had to do with a person and the quality of their life and their ability to drive, what that time of their life was like. and they were very meaningful, deep questions back to me and we assured that all of those things happened, but people needed to be around that person and she made sure that this person was around people who knew her and loved her and maybe i was too hard as an advocate in the years past because i was surprised to see that and i probably shouldn't have been, but it was very moving and so talk about not checking boxes. this was inside the heart and it was automatic, so you can at least have that assurance for yourself. thank you. so in strong support.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 31, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 80, 'end': 97, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 203, 'end': 216, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 580, 'end': 585, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tiffany Waiton: Tiffany Waiton with the Service Employees' International Union. It's my pleasure today to support Ms. Bargeman in the nomination. She has been very forthcoming, very honest, and very respectful any time that we have gone in her office, and we enjoy working with her, and we look forward to working with her in the future, and we would encourage your support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 102, 'end': 110, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nancy Chance: Good afternoon, my name is Nancy Chance. I am with Choices Person Centered Services. I'm a member of the California Person Centered Advocacy Partnership and I am here to offer my strong support for the confirmation of Nancy Bargeman management director from dell of development services agency developmental of service. I've had the opportunity to participate groups addressing issues like safety net services, common community based services and other things under Ms. Bargeman's Direction. She's forward thinking, she's shown great understanding of the issues facing the people that we serve, the people with developmental disabilities, their families and their service providers. And she shows a commitment to finding reasonable, thoughtful and inclusive solutions to those issues. I support her strongly, thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 218, 'end': 232, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 470, 'end': 478, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Paul Golaszewski: good afternoon. so i'm paul jonah golaszewski, with the legislative analyst office. and i was asked to come here, to provide an overview of the student loan market place. and this is primarily intended to set up your later discussion, on student loan servicing today. i will be speaking from a handout that the sergeant just distributed to you, and i'm going to really briefly cover six main topics. so first, ill just very briefly go over how student loans fit within the overall context of financial aid. then ill cover the different types of student loans that are available, and following that ill give you a summary of the student loan marketplace. i will talk a little about servicing, and repayments, and defaults as well. where possible, we tried to include california specific data but there's some gaps in the data, so at times i'll be referencing national data and sometimes it will be california data. i'll try to be clear as i go along. so if you turn to the first page of the hand out just very briefly, this is sort of to get you grounded on how student loans fit within the overall context of financial aid. financial aid is obviously intended to help students and families pay for college cost. that can pay for tuition, books and supplies and living expenses. and there's a couple different types of aid available. there's gift aid, which students don't have to repay. there's tax benefits which help reduce income tax payments, or even provide refunds. and then of course, there is loans. and loans have to be repaid over time. and the figure at the bottom of the page just shows, this is for undergrads attending public colleges in california, what share of financial aid is loans. and it's about 1/5, so it's a pretty sizeable share of financial aid. turning to the next page, i'll now go into the different types of student loans that are available. and broadly speaking, there's two different types. the first is federal loans that are made by the federal government. and then the second category, we categorized them all as non-federal loans. and these loans can be made in some cases by states, in some cases by colleges and universities, and in some cases by financial institutions. and throughout my presentation, i'll refer to loans made by financial institutions like banks and credit unions, i'll refer to those as private loans. loan terms including the credit requirements, the borrowing limits and the interest rates, can vary considerably depending on the lender. and the figure at the bottom of page two, shows you the different federal loan programs that are available, and all of the different terms. and i won't go through all of them as you can see it's quite detailed, and each program has very different requirements, different annual loan limits, different interest rates, loans fees and grace periods. but i just wanted to highlight a couple of the key terms for federal loans. so, most federal loans do not have any credit requirement at all, so they don't require credit or check. some of the loans but not all of them are need based. so, students have to qualify for them based on the information that they submit on their financially application, the fasfa. the interest rates tend to be fixed, or actually they are all fixed for federal loans. and the loan programs for financially needy students, tend to have somewhat better interest rates and loan fees than the other programs. also, the annual loan limits tend to be highest for the loans for graduate students and for parent loans. and turning to page three, a couple of points on non-federal loans, we found at least eight states that operate student loan programs. some of them limit them to certain students. some of them are financially needy students, or students in certain programs. we found those quite a variance in the loan terms across these different programs. some of them were zero interest, some of them had higher interest rates than the federal loan programs. and likewise, for the student loans made by colleges and universities, there is quite a difference in terms of loan terms. we weren't able to provide a comparable figure to the one on federal loans summarizing them all. and for private loans, the loans made by banks and credit unions, these loans are usually capped at the student's cost to attend college less any other financial aid that they receive. one key distinction is that private loans do consider a student or their co-signer's credit history and most of them do require a co-signer unlike federal loans, and they base their interest rates on credit worthiness. also the interest rates for private loans tend be variable where as the federal loans as i mentioned were fixed. on page four, we have some information on student loan volume and as you can see. federal loans are the vast majority of loans that are taken out by california students and this is for 2015/16, about an estimated 90% of loans were federal loans and only about 10% were non federal loans. the share has fluctuated over time in recent years, so the federal share was actually a little lower prior to the most recent recession and then it increased during the recession as private lenders tightened their eligibility standards. and now it's sort of rebounded a little bit back to about a 90/10 split. another point that we wanted to mention was the students attending private institutions tend to make up a great share of student loan volume, as compared to the overall share of enrollment in california. and that's because they're both more likely to borrow, as well as to borrow higher amounts than student attending the public colleges and universities in california. moving to page seven, we have a figure on different repayment plans that are available for federal loans. and this figure applies to most but not all of the federal loan programs and there is three main types of repayment plans that the federal government currently has. one is called income driven repayment plans, where the amount that the student repays each month is based on how much that student earns. by contrast, what we have labeled as the traditional plans do not take into account a student's ability to pay. the for income driven plans at the top are relatively new, they've sort of evolved over the last few years. each of them has their own specific rules and requirements to be eligible for them, but as you can see, generally the repayment period is somewhere around 20 to 25 years for them. and generally they require a student to pay somewhere around 10 or 20% of their discretionary income. this is in contrast to the traditional loan plans, which tend to have shorter repayment periods, some of them have fixed payments every month. and again, they don't vary by income level. for the non federal lenders, again they're going to vary, and we weren't able to prepare sort of a comparable figure. a lot of the state and college lenders do have programs that are similar to the federal income based repayment programs. so each one has its own offerings. private lenders typically do not have these income based repayment plans although some of them are starting to offer them currently. and on the last page, we had some information on student loan default rates. so the federal government and private lenders define defaults quite differently. the federal government typically considers a loan to be in default if the borrower hasn't made a payment in more than 270 days. and currently the federal government tracks defaults over a three year period and it finds that about 10% of loans made to california students are in default which is slightly lower than the national rate about 11%. by contrast, private lenders tend to define a student loan to be in default if the borrower hasn't made a payment in 30 to 90 days. that's a much shorter window of time that they look at. and we were able to find some data from the six largest private lenders indicating that about 3% of private loans are 30 to 90 days past due. and an additional 2% are more than 90 days overdue. so about 5% of private loans are in default. so a little bit lower than on the federal loans. and with that, i'll conclude my presentation and happy to take any question.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Natalia Abrams: yes absolutely. am i on? okay fantastic. hi chairman dodd, vice chairman vidak and members of the committee. thank you for the opportunity today to speak on the process that student loan borrowers go through when they are unable to pay their loans. through our organization's interactions, we have concluded that the number one problem between student loan borrowers and their services is failure to communicate. failure to communicate, incorrect information, failure to notify borrowers give conflicting information, and the list goes on. these problems in communication lead to repayment roadblocks that make default all too common. in fact, there are 3,000 preventable excuse me, default today. and these are preventable on the federal loan side because of the repayment plans that we're just mentioned where many borrowers can have a $0 payment. in fact, many of the 8 million borrowers that are currently in default could apply for $0 payment that is not having to be in default. my name is abrams, i'm a lifetime california resident. ucla alumni, and i serve as the executive director and co-founder of student debt crisis, a national organization that is based here in california. we represent over 925,000 supporters nationwide, with 125,000 in california alone. and we offer a place for struggling borrowers to understand their student loans, especially federal student loan programs that can often be complicated to the borrower. so what happens when a borrower can't pay? the first thing that a servicer should do is recommend these income based repayment programs that were just mentioned. however, we find that more borrowers are being put into forbearance. which interest accrues and is capitalized. the borrower can be in the process for years of not making any payments to their loans. thus, adding thousand of dollars to their loans. it can be counter productive to be in forbearance. technically after the first miss payment, borrow falls into delinquency. the big timeline to remember is 90 days and to delinquency on federal loan defaults it is reported to the credit bureau. for private loans it's after i believe. just double check. for private loans the charge off is after 120 days. we find that a lot of delinquency happens because of misapplied payments that can force even the most responsible borrower into delinquency. in addition, the servicer must communicate within 15 days of delinquency to the borrower in writing, and we've found that, that doesn't happen. so often borrowers are unaware that they are delinquent. after nine months, of 270 days, borrowers then go into default. the full loan amount becomes due, plus fees and this is reported to your credit for seven years. again, we feel that failure to communicate the income driven repayment programs is something that leads to default. at this point, this is where things get really bad. wage garnishment can start, and it's important to understand the difference between direct loans and the ffel, or the federal family education loans. so, for the ffel which is the older loans primarily before 2010, borrowers are given a notification at 270 days that they have 30 days before wage garnishment starts. with direct loans, it's 425 days after their missed payment. as you can see, many borrowers don't know actually what loan they have. either they don't know if it's ffel or direct, so they don't know which one of these policies applies to them. at that point, its 15% wage garnishment is added. and the federal government will take their money anyway they can. so social security can be garnished, your tax returns can be garnished. in about 20 states, you can lose your professional license if you're in default. less than that you can lose your drivers license. you also lose your ability to retain anymore federal financial aid unless you get out of default. one of the only real options for federal loan borrowers is default rehabilitation. that is a program where a borrower can pay nine on-time payments of 15%. they use a similar calculation that they do for income-based repayment programs. you have 10 months to make those nine payments, so they allow you to miss one payment. it is good to keep in mind that you're also having probably 15% wage garnishment at the same time. so you're having 15% wage garnishment and 15% payment into default rehabilitation. there was also collection fees. just last week the trump administration rolled back a former obama policy where they are adding 16% collection fees to ffel loans, f-f-e-l loans. so that 16% is added to the borrower's loan. after completing rehab, borrowers should be recommended to go into income-driven repayment programs so they don't fall into rehab again, or default again, excuse me, because you can only complete default rehab one time. so while the fact that servicers, for the most part, are not notifying borrowers of these programs, we have seen a 75% re-default rate over the lifetime of the loan. many borrowers have struggled getting out from under this issue. i would say that there is bankruptcy for student loans. it's a misnomer that people think there is not. however, it's infrequent and rarely attempted. and also, the former administration had pointed out that due to the increase of new repayment programs, it's less likely for borrowers to be able to obtain bankruptcy. i don't know if you're familiar with the brunner test, but that is what borrowers need to go through if they want to get bankruptcy. that means that they need to prove that they cannot maintain a minimal standard of living. that's not going to change, it's going to persist for a long period of time and they have made good faith attempts to repay their debt. we have seen some borrowers go through the bankruptcy process. but as i said, it's just very rarely tried because of the misnomer. in terms of private loans, it's actually quite simple. i had heard that you go technically into default after one day, but i will defer to you on that of 30 to 90 days. as i mentioned, the charge office reported to your credit after 120 days. here you might have a little more flexibility in settlement if you've defaulted with the private lender. the federal government for direct loans usually does not negotiate more than 10% off the cost of the loan if you were to pay it in full. and when you calculate in fees, that 10% really isn't much of a discount. for private loans as well there's no guarantee of any type of repayment options or default rehab. however, they cannot, well, it's very difficult to garnish wages because they need to do so with a court order. and they cannot take your tax return or your social security in the way that the federal loans can. so, thank you so much for, again, for letting me speak. i just want to point out that i think i've been speaking for five or six minutes and then that period of time, we've had an additional three borrowers default. so this is why we need strong consumer protections at the state and federal levels so we can alleviate the student loan crisis. thank you.
[{'start': 53, 'end': 57, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 73, 'end': 78, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 996, 'end': 1002, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2983, 'end': 2987, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4455, 'end': 4460, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Seth Frotman: Thank you very much for having me. Chairman Dodd, Vice Chairman Vidak and Members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to be here today to discuss the magnitude of the student debt crisis that we're facing in this country. Its impact on the millions of student loan borrowers throughout the State of California, and the critical role that student loan servicing plays in their financial lives. My name is Seth Frotman and I service as the student loan ombudsman at the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, where I lead the Bureau's office for students and young consumers. As I sit before you today, more than 44 million consumers across the country collectively owe $1.4 trillion in student loan debt, that's $1.4 trillion. Over the last decade the total volume of outstanding student loan debt has nearly tripled. Adding $900 billion on the back of student loan borrowers. This increase can translate into very real financial consequences. For example, a recent study found that today's average student loan payment for a millennial is $351 and amount more than 50% higher than it was a decade ago. Rising monthly payment burdens can further strain household balance sheets for young consumers, especially for those struggling to balance sluggish wage growth and increase in other expenses such as healthcare, housing, and child care. One study shows that here in California, the average student loan balance of college graduates has grown by nearly 30% over the last decade. In fact, over 50% of California students who enroll in a bachelors degree program now graduate with over $22,000 in student loan debt. Recent data further demonstrates that student loans borrowers in communities across the country are struggling under the weight of student loan debt. For example, despite the range of default prevention options available, over 8 million student loan borrowers are now in default, a number larger than the population of 38 states. And in the last year alone, nearly 1.2 million borrowers defaulted on a Federal Direct Student Loan. This translates to more than two per minute. Additionally, despite improvements in the labor market and the economy, the share of delinquent student loans remains stubbornly high. Over the last decade, the share of consumers with past due mortgages, credit cards and car loans are now at or below pre-recession levels. In contrast, the share of borrowers with delinquent student loans remains near its recession era peak. And while struggling student loan borrowers are widespread, data shows a strong relationship between the zip codes of minority population and its delinquency rate, at both the city and national level. Recent research shows that zip codes with higher shares of African-Americans and Latinos suffered disproportionately higher rates of student loan delinquency. However, some observers have questioned the negative impact of student debt, citing the widespread availability of affordable repayment options, like income-driven repayment plans. But these assertions only tell half of the story, while it is true that most borrowers with a federal student loan have a right to pay based on how much they earn. Borrowers report a wide range of industry practices and policy pitfalls that create unnecessary barriers to payment relief, contribute to borrowers financial distress in the short run, and extend borrowers debts by months or even years. Taken together, these observations paint a bleak picture, millions of student loan borrowers face severe, but avoidable consequences. Borrowers depend on private companies known as student loan servicers to help them manage this debt. High quality servicing can help borrowers enroll in affordable repayment plans, take advantage of forgiveness and other benefits, and avoid delinquencies and default. But for far too many borrowers, their student loan servicers fall short. A wealth of recent data from government agencies, researchers and regulators offer insights into the scale of this problem. For example, a 2015 government audit found that 70% of borrowers in default may be eligible for a substantially lower payment, some even as low as $0. And for borrowers who are actually able to enroll an alternative repayment plan, data shows that servicing challenges can still hinder their ability to maintain an affordable repayment with nearly 60% getting knocked off track. Servicing breakdowns can wreak havoc on service members, veterans, and military families. The bureau has released several reports documenting complaints from military borrowers who report being guided into more expensive options than their student loan servicers. The bureau has now heard from tens of thousands of borrowers every single year who are struggling to keep up with their payments because they are unable to access essential costumer protections. Clearly, the status quo is failing. But to understand why, it's important to understand how we got here. Conventional wisdom often points to the rise in college tuition as the sole driver of increased student indebtedness. We also know that increase enrollment at career, high cost career, and for profit schools has directly contributed to increased student borrowing. While there is no question that the rising costs of college contributes to the recent increases, this observation downplays the effect of a cost shift from parents to students. For much of our recent past, families have oftentimes shared the economic burden of paying for college. In part, because parents drew on a combination of income, savings, home equity, retirement savings, in order to contribute. The family contributions, when combined with the student's income from part time work and paired with a combination of loans and grants were usually sufficient to leave a typical borrower with a modest debt load. When the recession hit, millions of families, particularly middle class families, and those in African-American and Latino communities suffered an economic shock with many families seeing their net worth cut in half. While with household's balance sheets battered, particularly for middle class families and communities of color, many students faced the choice of taking on student debt or not going to college at all. For many families and for many borrowers carrying unprecedented debt loads, this is a hole that we have yet to dig out of. Researchers, policy makers, and advocates have cited the college wage premium to make a public case for why increasing levels of indebtedness shouldn't deter students from attending college. And college does pay off for many. However, observers too often confuse the soundness of the supposed investment in college with an assertion that increased student borrowing is not a problem that demands immediate attention. This misses the mark. Millions of borrowers are struggling under the strain of historic levels of student debt. And a growing body of evidence suggests that rising levels of student loan indebtedness are having a spillover effect on other segments of the economy. Potentially limiting borrowers access to credit, reducing home ownership, and threatening their retirement security. Student loan debt may also inhibit far worse from pursuing careers such as entrepreneurs or as health care providers and educators in underserved communities. The debt burden students are shouldering is increasingly a lifetime one. We should not be cavalier about the burden we're asking these students to shoulder. Notions like, other people may have it worse offers little solace when far too many of the borrowers who have done everything we have asked of them still struggle to afford a down payment, start a family, or save for retirement. Nor should we ignore the potential risk to society and the broader economy as rising student indebtedness influences changes in saving and spending by an entire generation of consumers, we must do better. And thus lending and burrowing has changed, so as the regulatory landscape. Today, the Department of Education owns over $1 trillion in outstanding student loans, and relies on a number of non-bank student loan services to manage this debt. These companies historically had been subject to limited oversight and regulation in their capacity as services providers to, or affiliates of, the banks and other lenders that made federally-guaranteed loans. When Congress eliminated the bank-based Federal Loan Program, this already limited-oversight regime, no longer covered servicing of the vast majority of new loans, exposing important gaps in the patchwork of federal and state oversight. In effect, because there was no formal role for regulated entities as lenders, the student loan servicers managing debt for tens of millions of Americans fell outside of the existing framework for oversight. However, the Bureau has brought to bear a unique set of oversight tools in order to change this, both strengthening supervision of student loan servicers, and increasing transparency in the student loan market. For more than five years, the Bureau has been building an examination program that focuses on compliance at both banks and the largest non-banks in the student loan market. And we have made it a priority to take action against companies that are engaging in illegal student loan servicing practices. In my written testimony, you will find a dozen examples of the bureau's findings of illegal practices in this market. Violations uncovered through our supervisory and enforcement actions, indicate there is much more work to be done to clean up and reform the student loan servicing. And to help fill this regulatory gap I discussed, state policy makers across the country have considered steps to expand their oversight and accountability tools. California has been a leader in this approach. Building on the foundation laid by this Legislature, and by Governor Brown and this Committee, the State of California has positioned itself to protect the over 3.7 million Californians that are burdened with student loan debt. With the passage of the Student Loan Servicing Act last year, they now have a strong ally in the State of California to ensure that student loan servicers comply with federal and state consumer laws. And I'm pleased to join Senior Deputy Commissioner Scott Cameron, who leads the Department of Business Oversights, Division of Financial Institutions. And we'll share a data-driven vision for how California can continue to lead on these critical issues. So I just want to highlight three key areas, where our continued federal and state partnership offer immediate benefits for consumers. First, by providing rigorous oversight in every corner of the student loan servicing market. Although expanded state oversight over the largest and complex companies, is welcome news for borrowers, states can also play a key role in overseeing the dozens of smaller companies that service loans made by private lenders, and by keeping an eye on new entrants in this market. This role maybe particularly important as private lending and refinance activities continue to grow, and if policy makers at the federal level consider new policies that may drive families to borrow more from private lenders outside the federal aid system. Because of steps taken by California, federal and state regulators can now cover the water front, ensuring Californians are treated fairly, regardless of the size or location of the companies managing their loans. Second, by driving better practices and demanding better data, both federal and state regulators depend on accurate and timely data to better examine how servicers operate, and identify practices that pose risks to consumers as well as inform additional law enforcement and oversight's work. As California continues to build out its oversight function and assess its own needs, data from student loan servicers can help inform oversight work across the country. I think the old cliche is particularly apt in this context, sunshine can be the best disinfectant. And lastly, by sharing knowledge and insights from state oversight to inform federal policymaking. California examiners and law enforcement officials have a unique ability to work on a granular level, while simultaneously spotting trends in systemic issues, at a state or regional one. Through close state and federal coordination on student loan servicing oversight, the bureau and other federal policy makers can have the benefit of unique insights, developed on the ground by states in a historically opaque market. So in closing, a series of economic and policy changes over the last two decades continue to drive historic levels of debt owned by students and their families. And we continue to see the consequences of these decisions. We have also seen student loan servicers engage in illegal practices, adding insult to injury for struggling student loan borrowers. If we ask our citizens to take on student debt to get the degree, we must also redouble our efforts to ensure a road to repayment that is free from harmful or illegal practices. When loan servicers can operate in the shadows, free from rigorous federal and state oversight, consumers too often pay the price. Policy makers and regulators at all levels, have made strides to improve oversight and halt illegal student loan servicing practices. And learning important lessons from the last crisis as we work to prevent the next one, we can't go back. Thank you again for the opportunity to address the Committee today and discuss this important topic. The bureau looks forward to continuing our important work together, and in particular, our work to increase accountability. Thank you. Thank you Mr. Frotman, appreciate that. Mr. Cameron.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 48, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 64, 'end': 69, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 416, 'end': 428, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 9904, 'end': 9909, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 10314, 'end': 10327, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 13730, 'end': 13737, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 13760, 'end': 13767, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Scott Cameron: Good afternoon, Chairman Dodd and Members of the Committee. I am Scott Cameron, I'm the Senior Deputy Commissioner of the Division of Financial Institutions for the California Department of Business Oversight. Commissioner Owens sends her regrets that she can't be here, but I would like to say on behalf of the department and the Commissioner, thank you for the opportunity to participate in this important informational hearing. Chairman Doug through his Committee staff has asked the department to answer seven questions, and I'd like to proceed with those questions. So question number one, what are the major requirements of and protections contained in the Student Loan Servicer Act? The law provides for the Department of Business Oversight to license, regulate and provide oversight to student loan servicers. In general, the act requires servicers to adhere to specific borrow protections, prohibits a person from acting as a student loans servicer without a license unless exempt. Specifically, with regard to protections. Servicers must notify borrowers 15 days prior to transferring the service of a loan to another provider. When the servicing is transferred, servicers must provide borrowers with the new servicer's contact information, effective date of transfer, the date when the current servicer will stop accepting payments and the date when the new servicer will begin accepting payments. Servicers must provide on their websites information about alternative repayment and loan forgiveness options. At least once a year, servicers must provide the information about repayment and loan forgiveness options through written correspondence and/or email. When a borrower sends written correspondence in which they either state they believe their account is an error, or request specific information about their account, servicers must acknowledge that correspondence within five days of receipt and respond within 30 days. Such correspondence is considered qualified written request, which is important. When an account is subject to a qualified written request, servicers cannot provide adverse information to any reporting agency regarding that account for 60 days after receipt of that request. Servicers must provide accurate information about borrowers payment histories to the National Credit Bureaus. With certain exceptions, servicers must ask borrowers how to apply excess loan repayments and follow those directions. In addition, the act prohibits servicers from misapplying payments. To a borrower's outstanding balance. Finally, the act contains other provisions that prohibit unfair, deceptive, and fraudulent practices by servicers. The act also includes provisions governing the licensing, examination of servicers, and enforcement of the law requirements. For example, licensees must file annual reports with the Commissioner. They must be audited annular by CPA. They must maintain a minimum net worth of at least $250,000 as well as a surety bond of at least $25,000. And licensees must undergo an examination by the department, at least once every three years. And with regards to the law itself, the department has the authority to issue administrative orders, impose civil money penalties, and suspend or revoke their license. At question two. What entities are required to obtain licences in California under the act? Basically it is any entity that services students loans in California or for Californians in any other state must be licensed with exceptions of course. This includes, for example, the nine large US Department of Education contract servicers plus other private loan servicers. Question three, approximately how many entities do you believe will be required to obtain student loan servicing licenses in California? Department estimates approximately 25 to 30 entities will be required to obtain licenses from DBO. Question four, how many staff has DBO requested to implement the act? The department is in the process of creating a new unit to handle the responsibilities of the act. Currently, we are considering a staff of five. That staff includes one attorney, one manager, one senior program analyst, and two senior examiners. Once established, the cost of administering the program will be covered by the licensing fees. No general funds will be used in handling this program. Question five, when does the department expect to release draft regulations implementing the act? The department plans to submit for publication the proposed rules and related documents by July 1st 2017. Once we publish the rule making package there will be a public comment period that will run a minimum of 45 days. Based on the comments received from the public, if we make substantial changes, the public will have an additional 15 days to comment on those proposed changes. The final rule will be submitted, of course, to the Office of Administrative Law for final review to determine whether it will be approved or not. And that will be done within a year of our publishing. Which I indicated we plan to publish July 1st 2017. Question 6, does the department anticipate, it won't occur any significant challenges implementing the act? The department does not foresee any challenges, that being said, it is a new industry that will be, the department will be a supervising. However, we have the expertise in regulating loan servicers. We currently supervise mortgage loan servicers. And we know how to protect consumers with regards to financial services. So we feel confident that we'll be ready to implement this new act. Finally, question seven, would the department like to share any additional thoughts regarding the Student Loan Servicer Act with the Committee? I'll be brief here. The student loan debt obviously is a major issue for the country. And the California Student Loan Servicing Act is an important financial services reform. We look forward to working with the policy makers and the stakeholders to make sure the act is implemented in the way that the Legislature intended. Thank you again, Mr. Chairman and members, for giving us the opportunity to testify.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 29, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 65, 'end': 78, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 223, 'end': 228, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 440, 'end': 444, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brian Gunn: chairman dodd, committee members. thank you for your time this afternoon. my name is gunn, managing director at measure one. we're a student loan data and analytics company. primarily focused on the private student loan market. so i'm going to take a couple of minutes and provide a little bit more clarification of the private market and how it's differentiated from the federal loan market. i know that paul previously talked to this a little bit then, but the opening panel but i'll hopefully dig a little deeper, and if you have any questions feel free to ask at the end. in terms of measure one background, we work with the majority of the private student lenders and services. we collect data on an ongoing basis, and we report that data back to the market. both the lending community, the servicing community, and the policy making community. just, this has been stated before, but primary difference between private student loans, and federal student loans, the private student loan programs really exist to fill the tuition gap not covered by federal loan programs. grants, scholarships, and personal savings. i know that's been said before, but it's really important to reiterate that. in terms of the private student lending landscape, it's examined by several large players. but the market does include a diverse group of participants. the large lenders in the marketplace and some of these lenders service some of them, outsource the servicing to other third parties, but the largest lenders are sallie mae, discover, wells fargo, pnc, and citizens. there are other regional lenders and new entrants always coming into the market. there are hundreds of credit unions that participate in the private student lending market. and they typically operate via credit union service organizations like student choice, lendkey, campus resources, and others. as mentioned before, there a number of nonprofit state agencies that participate in the private student loan market. and so these are state agencies that have their own private student loan programs. there are about 20 states across the country that offer their own private student loan programs. a couple of the largest ones are in the states of massachusetts and new jersey. community banks participate on a smaller scale and then finally, as many of you probably read there a good number of new student loan refinance players in the market led by social finance, also known as sofi. common bond, drb, and earnest, and they have been extremely active since 2013 in refinancing both private and federal student loans. the size of the private student loan market is relatively small when compared to the federal student loan program. based upon data that measure one collects twice per year for the federal reserve we estimate the total outstanding private student loan balances to be about $102 billion. so that's a 102 billion, relative to the $1.4 trillion number that often read out there in the press. so that represents approximately 7.5% of the total student loan balances outstanding with the remaining 92.5% beyond the federal student load programs. in terms of loans originations, prior students lenders made approximately $10.5 billion of new loans in 2016 compared to approximately $125 billion in federal student aid dispersed over the same period. next, i want to cover private student loan underwriting standards, there's a very big differentiator between the private market and the federal market. private student lenders conservatively underwrite their loans and follow strict credit guidelines compared to federal student loans that are achieved purely based on a borrower's need, financial need. as mentioned before, private student loans are schools certified, meaning that lenders check with the school before this person funds to ensure that the student is not borrowing more than the cost of attendance. private student loans also rely heavily on cosigners. also previously mentioned, cosigners typically a parent and these cosigners have stronger credit scores than the student. this is especially true with the undergraduate loans where the primary borrower lacks a long credit history and in the undergraduate market we see a cosigner rate greater than 93%. so that is a big component of the under-writed standards in the private market and then finally, borrowers are urged to use all other forms of financial aid prior to taking out a private student loan. this really is a loan of last resort. strong under rating principles and guidelines have resulted in loan repayment performance since the financial crisis, so we read a lot about defaults increasing in the student loan market, but in the private market, we actually see the opposite trend post financial crisis. measure one has detailed the improve performance in our private student loan report that we published twice per year. this is the report, it's a little bit lengthy, but you can go to the measure one website, measureone.com, and download the free report and again, it's there intended to inform the market of what's going on in the private marketplace. the performance information of the report is contributed by six of the largest holders of private student loans. navient, sallie mae, discover, wells fargo, citizens, and pnc, all contribute data to the report that measure one's big goals in life, is to bring more clarity to the student loan market. that's something that even post-crisis when a lot of us realize, more transparency was necessary in the financial markets. the student loans base still struggles a little bit in terms of transparency, but a big part of this report and the contributions of the participants is to bring transparency to the private student loan market. i'll conclude by talking a little bit about the performance trends that we're seeing through the third quarter of 2016. that's the last time we published the report. 74, and these are stats in terms of outstanding loan balances. so 74% of loans are in active repayment, 18.2% of the loans are in deferment. that's typically while the borrower is in school. 5% of the private student loans are in their grace period. that's typically the six month post-graduation period before the repayment term starts. in terms of delinquencies, 2.9% of loans are 30 to 89 days delinquent. to give you some perspective on that, over the last five years, that delinquency rate has declined 71%. on the 90 plus days delinquent, also known as seriously delinquent, the 90 plus delinquency rate is 1.9%, that is a five year decline of 51%, and on an annualized basis, the charge off rate in the private student loan market and, to be clear, most of the lenders charge off at 120 days. that's what they're required by the regulators to do. one servicer charges off slightly later than 120 days, but for the most part it's 120 days when these loans are charged off, and that charge off rate is 1.9%, and that represents a 61% decline over the last five years. and then, finally 2.2% of the loans are in forbearance, and forbearance is typically offered in the private student loan market for those borrowers that are experienced in some sort of financial hardship. so in conclusion, the differences in repayment performance can be really attributed to two things. one, are the strong credit under rating criteria applied by the lenders, and two, generally improving economy especially in terms of decreasing unemployment rates. thank you for your time and open to any questions.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 13, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 85, 'end': 89, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 405, 'end': 409, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark Belongia: good afternoon. once again, i'm mark paul belongia. i'm a partner with the global law firm of duane morris. i'm here on behalf of capps which is a trade organization of private post-secondary schools. my practice focuses on consumer lending regulatory and compliance. i'm here to talk today on a topic that i find many folks familiar with student loans aren't even familiar with and that is what's called gap financing and a great example of this activity, not being well known and well understood is actually pointing to the legislative and analyst's office handout we got by panel 1. which on page three lists the various types of non-federal student loans, but doesn't include importantly, a vehicle that's utilized by the private postsecondary schools on a regular basis. that's called gap financing. what is gap financing? great example of gap financing is using a hypothetical, cosmetology school, tuition is $10,000. a student is able to apply and get $5,000 of title iv federal student loans, but doesn't have the other $5,000, has credit issues at wells fargo, the others aren't going to lend to that student.  they don't have the wherewithal within their family to borrow the other $5,000, so the school, in order to maintain its enrollment will then extend credit to that student. so that credit will be $5,000. no cash changes hands, but essentially it's a payment plan, and schools utilize really three forms of borrowing instrument, a promissory note, a payment plan, or what's commonly used is a retail installment contract, and so it's not well known that retail installment contracts are utilized in the student loan arena, and let's talk about the regulatory environment for use of that type of borrowing. well, at the federal level, the federal government, under reg z, considers that use of a retail installment contract, payment plan, promissory note, all to be one and the same. it's a student loan. through a private student loan. so there's no distinction at the federal level on the paper, the contract that's utilized. so as a result, all of the regulations of reg z, truth and lending, require that that process be followed. so if the students are given all of the disclosures, they're given self-certification forms, and that process is followed. now importantly, the use of the retail installment contract in the state of california is also, itself, regulated. there's additional protections for students. what is that? it's called the unruh act. what does the unruh act do? well it regulates the use of retail installment contracts. it regulates the late charges that can be charged. it regulates all aspects of the transaction, the notice to buyer, the form itself is highly regulated, what terms have to go where, what the student has told, it's weight out in great detail, and there is no discretion by an institution on whether or not they can utilize certain portions or not utilize certain portions of the unruh act. it all has to be filed to the word of the law, including 8 point type, 12 point headings on the top. i mean, it is a highly regulated business, and so schools use these on a regular basis in order to provide the necessary extension credit to students who otherwise would be unable to afford to attend school and further their education. let's talk about what happens next. well, in most instances, these schools then turn around and actually service that paper themselves, why? well, most of these schools are small, and utilization of a large national servicer, monetarily, doesn't make sense. they can't afford to. so as a result, they then turn around and service that relationship with the borrower, their student, and we find and i find in my experience as an attorney for the schools, they have a very low default rate because of their constant interaction with the student, the relationship they have, and the ongoing daily interaction between student and school. there is a secondary market that does exist, mainly hedge funds that do en masse, purchase portfolios of these retail installment contracts. that does exist, those then do end up usually being serviced by your national loan servicing companies. there's another aspect that is relatively new which i wanted to touch on briefly so that the committee was aware that this vehicle was now being utilized. that is new, interesting, but essentially unregulated, and that's called income share agreements. now we talked, the committee heard testimony earlier around the fact of the income deferral programs, that sort of at the point of a default you then switch off into a different payment program. this is, what i'm talking about is entirely different. its actually utilizing that essential concept but at the front end of the relationship. there are several schools that i've worked with that are now utilizing, at the very outset of the relationship, instead of a traditional student loan, instead of a retail installment contract payment plan, entering into a relationship with the student, which in turn will share in the post graduation academic upside of the relationship. as of now, there isn't one state in united states that has classified this as a loan. as of now, there are essentially no regulations federal or state, in any state, regulating this type of relationship. as we move forward you will begin to see, and the committee needs to be aware of, utilization of these programs because i foresee, and i think we all can, specific and unique issues that will arise on the servicing of that relationship post-graduation when the student suddenly now say is making $100,000 and now looks to see what they're repayment is, and now suddenly decides that the student doesn't want to repay based on their income, and so there are going to be those issues, and i think importantly for this committee to be thinking about how to be out in front of these issues. how to look at the future as more and more schools are analyzing whether this type of arrangement makes sense for them and it's even occurring in not for profits. purdue university in indiana is now utilizing an income share agreement, isas some of their programs at the school. so this isn't going away. it's only going to continue to grow and i think it's important that everyone be thinking ahead on how their going to regulate this type of activity. one of the other aspects i just want to add is going back to the act. i think it's important to understand, again, how highly regulated this activity is and how the for-profit post secondary schools utilizing the retail installment contracts adhere to the law. the penalties are pretty dramatic, any violation of the retail installment act is a misdemeanor. you can have a fine up to $1,000 or both, which is up to six months in jail, for violations of the retail installment act. i don't know other areas of consumer lending that are that stringent and the penalties that high. so the schools that do utilize this process, which are many, take it very seriously and know and adhere to the letter of the law and i would say from my experience, utilizing a retail installment contract is even more highly regulated than most aspects of consumer lending. now on the servicing side, what's unique about california unlike other states, other states have not adopted the rosenthal fair debt collection practices act, or a version of it, most have not. so the federal fair debt collection practices act does not apply, if you collect on your own debt. in other words, if you extend the credit, and then you go to collect on it, the fair debt collection practices act does not apply to you, but in california that's been modified that it does in fact applies to you. so, schools that are collecting and servicing their own retail installment contracts are held to a high standard, are held to the equivalent of the fair debt collection practices act. so, they're highly regulated on the extension of credit and highly regulated on the servicing of that debt. with that, thank you and we're all available for any questions.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 7308, 'end': 7317, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Suzanne Martindale: Okay? Okay. Mr. Chair and Members of the Committee, my name is Suzanne Martindale and I'm an attorney with Consumers Union, also a two time Berkeley alum, so I had to put in that plug. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today about problems that students and families are facing in repaying their education loans. And how to move forward with solutions. So I'm at Consumers Union which is the policy and mobilization arm of Consumer Reports, where we have about 8 million subscribers, members, activists who engage with us on a number of different issues. And we work to advance economic justice at the state and federal level. To try to make the financial system a little fairer for working families. And for the past five years, I have focused much of my advocacy work on higher education and debt. Especially focusing on repayment and servicing challenges given the enormous impact that this type of debt has had for years now on millions of households around the country. I have debt of my own from good old University of California. I know first hand how tough it is to navigate it all, even with a law degree. And so, I dig and heard today from many of the other speakers sort of how challenging, confusing, complex this system is. We've heard about challenges with communication, communication breakdowns, leading people to slide to a default even when they are in a federal loan that has by law, the right to access different types of repayment plans for balance or suspension of payments, that should give you a reprieve and not let you slide back too far. You've heard from the CFPD that they get lots of complains from people who don't understand what their rights are, who feel that their payments are being misapplied. In some cases, they pay a partial payment because that's all they have that month and then it's applied pro rata across a bunch of loans. And then they get maximized late fees which kind of exacerbate, it's the problem. You also heard from loan servicers who have worked with people who didn't complete their programs, and are very much at risk of default. And so I want to pause and say we have to ask ourselves, given that this is a very complex System, much of it is statutory at the congressional level. I am not that optimistic that we're going to see the Higher Education Act reauthorized anytime soon, given everything else that they already have on their docket for this coming session. So we have to ask ourselves, where should the burden primarily lie? And my concern would be that we put too much of the burden on the student, especially someone who has not completed. Maybe they just did a year at community college and they are not going to be in a good position. They're not going to have a lot of power to do much to figure out a good repayment solution for themselves, particularly if the gatekeeper in all that. The person who probably knows more about it then they do is that loan servicer, which is why the efforts to date at the federal level through the Department of Education and the CFPB to try to create explainers, toolkits, model forms to try to improve the servicing portals that people use when they're trying to figure out how to navigate the system. All that work is incredibly valuable. The only Ombudsmen office of the CFPB has tried to educate people, to hold town halls around the country, to give people a sense of you're not alone, this is really confusing and we want to try and demystify it for you. Groups like Student Debt Crisis, doing webinars and trainings to also try to break down the misunderstandings and the myths is incredibly important. But that said, there is a lot of uncertainty about what would be able to change at the congressional level, at the Department of Education which was in the middle of working on a universal portal that I think would've can clear a lot of the confusion in the between. Wait, is the Department of that or my server? Who should I talk to? That is, it's pending and we don't know if it's going to move forward, given the change of administration. The CFPB, of course, faces its own challenges in Washington. They've been a very powerful partner, but they are just but one actor in this ecosystem. So we do believe that California is doing the right thing by leading and by setting forth a new supervision program that will assist what the feds are already trying to do, but that will ensure that here in the state. We are doing precisely what should we be doing. We just get the data. Figure out what's happening to people. Where are those most vulnerable populations that are falling behind? How delinquent are they? How frequently do people fall in and out of these different kinds of repayment plans which are very complex? And if it's an income driven plan, you have to re-up every year and that creates new hurdles. These are the kinds of information that we sorely lack and really need, and I think that this kind of supervision licensing program is really going to enable us here in the state where almost one of every 10 Americans resides, to in fact, shine more of light on what's going on. Good or bad and help us figure out how this to move forward, but I also want to point out here what we've talked about there are certain ways in which lenders and services are regulated and there are certain truths in lending requirements and so forth. This isn't the mortgage servicing market. We don't have industry wide standards that set forth clear conduct requirements. So for example, when we passed the Home Owner Bill of Rights, one of the things we did here in California was say, someone started to fall behind they miss two payments. You're going to assign them someone, whose their main point of contact and their going to have continuity contact and their going to have a lifeline and someone who is required to proactively help them. Stem that tide, so they don't slide further back. We would like to see the same thing for people who are falling behind on their education loans. We don't want to see people pushed into forbearance, which we know for the customer service rep who's not getting paid a lot and wants to get you off the phone, that may be the quickest thing for them to do. However, it is not, that is actually posing a barrier to someone, certainly in this federal system to accessing alternative repayment plans that they're suppose to have a right to access under law. What's the point in having these plans if you can't access them, because the person you're talking to isn't telling you about them. So, we believe there should be some requirements here that insure the people aren't necessarily sliding into to default. So, I guess it's really important point into stress. We've asked the CFPB to consider writing, industry right rules for servicing. We know that they're looking into it, they have a lot on their plate. So, we do think that it's wonderful that the state has now created authority for the Department of Business Oversight to license supervise and we're appropriate such forth certain requirements. The services will have to follow here in California to ensure that we're getting clear, actual information to borrowers, so that they don't fall behind. I can even tell you from personal experience. I was serving on a negotiative rule-making Committee at the Department of Education working on financial aid issues. I am on income-based repayment. And while I was serving in these marathon sessions, I got an email from my servicer that said, you have a message in your inbox. So okay, there was no deadline. There was nothing respond by ex-date. So when I got home from my marathon rule-making session, I'm helping draft, the repay plan, the new number payment plan is now available at the federal government. I open the thing and it turned out it was my renewal notice. I didn't know it was my renewal notice. I had the click two or three times into my online inbox and discover that if I don't submit my income paper work again by ex-date, my payment will go up six fold. Now I'm a lawyer, but I work at a nonprofit. So, that's a huge pay increase and that happened to me. And again, I want to stress I have a law degree and this is what I work on for a living. If I have almost missed my own income recertification, I shudder to think what has happened to the person who had to dropout of cosmetology school, because they couldn't get childcare and couldn't go to the night school in order to get their certificate and now they don't know how to manage loan repayment and it's really important that we do everything we can here in California to stand up a strong licensing and supervision regime. That works in close coordination with the CFPB and other government agencies, so that we can actually provide some consistency here. Because what we hear from borrowers all the time and I hear from borrowers who are not just 18 to 22, I hear from Consumer Report subscribers who are about a generation. Sometimes two generations older than that and they have their own loans, maybe they got a masters degree or maybe they changed careers and wanted to go back to school. Some of them have kids, they have grandkids that have loans. They're trying to help them with their loans and they have questions too. And so, there are multiple generations of people who are struggling. It's not simply, I think the oversimplified picture that you get. Certainly in major media outlets as was mentioned previously of an 18 year old who borrowed $100,000 and now they're just, don't feel like repaying. I mean, that's really not the average college student today. A lot of people are working parents. They're in and out of school. They may have multiple loans with multiple servers from their different stints at different schools. And so, it is very complex and the people who are most vulnerable to falling behind are people who don't even have enough of an advanced education to at least read those notices that some lawyer wrote at a 13th grade reading level and that's why this work is so important. So, I'll simply close by saying that I think that what Mr. Frautman put forth in his written testimony is also really crucial to look at. There's a study that the Washington Center on Equitable Growth did and they have a website called Mapping Student Debt, mappingstudentdebt.org and what it shows is that in low income ZIP codes and in ZIP codes that are primarily housed in communities of color. People are falling in behind. So this really is a civil rights issue. These are people who are trying to get an education in order to rise above the historical inequalities that have kept them behind, that have made their generations of families less able to acquire assets. To develop the kind of wealth and prosperity that we all seek as Americans and some of these same communities are the hardest hit. They're burrowing small mounts and they're still more likely to fall behind. And so again, this loan servicing and repayment is the gate keeper to the solutions, to the answers, to the information, to the repayment plans that can help people successfully repay and I think although Frautman counselling Committee agree. You don't know what your future holds before you even start your education. So, that's why servicing failures are a near term emergency problem. And here in the state, the State of California, we have the opportunity to lead here. And so, we really appreciate the Committee opening up with its first hearing of the session to cover this topic. I thank you very much for the opportunity to testify today and will be happy to follow up with any further information, and I look forward to working with you going forward on this.
[{'start': 63, 'end': 81, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 10122, 'end': 10130, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Kent: department, yes, sorry. jennifer jonah kent, i'm the director for the department of health care services, and i will let mari introduce herself.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 121, 'end': 125, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mari Cantwell: cantwell, i'm the chief deputy director and the state's medicaid director.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ben Johnson: ben, legislative analyst's office.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Newton: and mark jennifer newton, lao.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Metzker: And Brian Metzker, LAO.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Hamilton: Mary Hamilton, Department of Finance.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Guadalupa Rodriguez: Guadalupa Rodriguez, Department of Finance.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Hamilton: so again, mary mark hamilton, department of healthcare services. so for the medi-cal program itself, we have a proposed 17-18 budget of 102.6 billion. so most of the budget that the director mentioned is in medical and again, about two thirds federal funds and $19 billion in general funds. i'll touch on just briefly a few of the major policy proposals. some of them will be addressing today in the hearing later and others in later hearings. so we obviously have the coordinated care initiative. where the department of finance did trigger the poison pill, but the governor is proposing to continue the cal mediconnects program the managed long term services and supports as well as enrolling duals in managed care in those seven counties. we have a proposal we'll be talking about today to expand the affordability benefit wrap program for newly qualified immigrants. we also have a proposal related to our nursing facility acute hospital transition waiver, this is a trailer bill proposal that reflects the waiver renewal submission that we had a stakeholder process on last year. those two key changes really relate to the use of care management agencies to help have more better on the ground care management for our beneficiaries, as well as expanding the slots for that waiver so that more people can actually enter that waiver. we also have a proposal related to the san francisco community living support benefit waiver. san francisco notified us earlier last year that they would not be continuing the waiver, which expires this june. so we do have trail a bill proposal to expand the assistant living waiver into san francisco county, so that we can transition those folks on the san francisco waiver. into a similar home and community-based waiver, so those individuals do not have to end up going into institutions and then, we have the managed risk medical insurance fund proposal, that we'll be talking about later. so, those are really the major policy proposals and then from a fiscal perspective, some of the big changes that we're seeing outside of those proposals, relate to the change in the federal matching percentage for the expansion, since we're going from, 95 to 94 percent, so that increases the general fund from 800 million to about 1.6 billion. we have the cci issues that we'll be talking about, i think, in the next item as well as the drug rebate repayment and then, again, also talking later about the chip reauthorization and the federal matching for that. so, with that i'm happy to take any question.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ben Johnson: i'm johnson, lao. we have reviewed the medi-cal estimate and overall just want to note that we do find it to be reasonable. most of the major drivers in spending, both current year and budget year, are not really policy changes but are funding year over year growth primarily related to the aca optional expansion, the higher state costs around there and then the administration's assumptions regarding chip with a lower federal matching percentage there to a large degree. medi-cal spending does depend upon case learned projections. so, we're continuing to look at those and believe there is some uncertainty there, so the may revise will provide us a clear picture when we do have updated data to better assess what case load is going to look like. both in 16/17 and 17/18. available for any questions.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 13, 'end': 16, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ben Johnson: ben mary johnson, here. i'm sorry could you repeat the first part of that sentence? if the authorization part goes away?
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ben Johnson: ben ben johnson, lao, not to my knowledge. i could check with some of my colleagues who work more closely on the criminal justice side to ask, but i don't know myself.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 17, 'end': 20, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sergio Aglo: sergio with the department of finance.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brianna Pittman: Good afternoon, Brianna Pittman with the California Dental Association. Just want to echo the comments of my colleague with the Medical Association. The access crisis in dental is one of the reasons that CDA joined the coalition pushing for Prop 56. And we think that the clear reading of the language is that that is supposed to go to increasing the access of care above and beyond the current program. So happy to engage in discussions with this Committee and the department on exactly what that looks like. But we do think that it's the responsibility of the state to follow the will of the voters. Thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tan Moll: us, before the november election we had a different wish list for how we would go about accomplishing those goals. and of course that has shifted quite a bit in the new environment that we are in. and i guess since we're talking about dhcs budget, and what not, i would like to share that the house has delayed the vote on the exceed appeal act today. mr. chair and members, tan with health access. we were also one of the organizational supporters and proponents of proposition 56. and we do believe the language does make clear that this, the funds are meant to improve the medical program. and improve access which can be done in any number of ways. and i think like many of so i couldn't resist but also it is relevant to the discussions in terms of what fundings might be available in the future, thank you.
[{'start': 375, 'end': 378, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Connie Arnold: Thank you, Connie Arnold, thank you Chairman Pan and Members of the Committee. I agree that the will of the voters for Prop 56 should be followed on the dental part of things and on the CCI. My comment is to get rid of it because many dual eligibles have been very unhappy. There's been discussion about litigating the state for the ability of people to opt out that wanted to opt out. But it was so complex for people to figure out how to opt out, they couldn't opt out. And many people were dissatisfied with the coordinated care initiative. I don't want to be part of it, so if it comes to my county, I'm opting out and that's my comment there. And of course, I did read the same tweet from the AP that there's been a delay. And so we wait until this evening to see what happens in Washington, DC. But many of us persons with disabilities are very very concerned about what will happen to long term care services including in-home supportive services. Including the waiver that I get through the in-home operations program for additional attendant care. We're scared to death that we're going to be sent to nursing homes. And those of us that lack families or our families are aging and wont they're not going to be there for our back up support. What is needed is back up services. I know Cap is discussing back up services today. But sometimes the Legislature has put the cart before the horse when they adopted rules to implement sick leave for IHSS providers without ensuring there's back up services for IHSS recipients under MediCal. It's a problem because when you're provider says they can't come. And if you don't have a back up family member that will support you, you're being left without care. And when you need help to get out of bed, take a shower, get dressed, go to bed, use the toilet you know it's a real big issue. And so I want to bring that home to you is that these other issues are being discussed today. And adapt American disabled for attendant programs today took over the capital yesterday. To fight for National attended care which we've continued to fight for years. And so we're all very concerned about what's going to happen in Washington DC. And some of your questions are very relevant about the Sanctuary City. And what the President can do to withhold funding and there's the people that expanding this comment that are on SSI. That we're getting, I'm not one but I'm sending letters.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 45, 'end': 48, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mary Campbell: so again mary ben campbell. department of healthcare services. so as the agenda laid out.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jacob Lam: jacob mary lam department of finance.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Department of Finance: We agree with, Mary Campbell, Department of Finance, we agree with what Miss Campbell have described. It is an error unfortunately in the estimate, and no one is more intent than avoiding this area than the administration. And so we hope that going forward, this will be avoided.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 28, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 77, 'end': 85, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark Newton: Excuse me, Senator Pan, Senator Monning and staff Mark Newton with the LAO. Just one thing to add and I think generally our offices has a very good working relationship with administration and the Department of Finance. And I think really do try to be forthcoming. One point though is in terms of giving the Legislature very, timely notification I guess of budget risk and in this case I appreciate theirs were initially discovered I think in early November which is prior to our doing our physical forecast. Appreciate that the administration spent actually quite a few weeks in order to determine sort of the source of the error and naturally it's size. I think at one time it was even thought to be quite a bit larger. But nonetheless, the Legislature was given notification and our office was given notification essentially when the Governor's Budget was released or maybe a day or two before. So perhaps maybe in an on going basis would be very helpful if the administration would perhaps even they're still in the midst of analyzing a potential budget risk. Perhaps given the Legislature in our office through notification that this is something that they're looking into be just very helpful in our process and we can perhaps sort of help out, too. But just a timely notification would be extremely useful.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 22, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 32, 'end': 39, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 50, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Connie Arnold: Yes, thank you, Chairman Pan, Connie Arnold. I'm a member of the IHSS consumer union, too, which is a Facebook page. And my comments are going to be on that basis and also from Nancy Becker Kennedy, who can not be here today. She's a quadriplegic who runs that Facebook page. It is unfortunate that the CCI is linked to IHSS funding. If it is not connected to IHSS funding, and consumers would like to see the CCI come to an end. Consumers feel there must be increased IHSS funding before paid sick leave can morally go into effect. We feel it is immoral and improper to fund sick leave without companion legislation providing all authorities with funding for professional emergency back up agencies with 24/7 capacity to provide component replacements especially for those with severe disabilities. Consumers ere opposed to CCI as evidence by the 70% up down rate by those who choose to stay within those special
[{'start': 25, 'end': 28, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 30, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 177, 'end': 197, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jacob Land: jacob, department of finance. your point is well taken and we'll certainly continue work with the lao and the legislator moving forward in these discussions. in regards to the point has brought in public comments we just like to know that these impacts were specific to the current and didn't have an impact in the break even analysis for the budget year. so regardless of these changes the break even was showing costs and not savings. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 98, 'end': 101, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Laura Ayala: Laura Ayala with the Department of Finance. So regarding your first question about county administration funding, the government's budget maintains the same level of funding for 2017, 18, as well as provided in 2016, 17. The ACA-associated augmentation of 655.3 million total funds, $217.8 million general fund, was agreed upon by the administration and the county Welfare Directors Association for both fiscal years. And now the caseload associated with ACA and Cal Years system is stable the department is in the process of developing a new county adminstration budgeting methodology which would fold in the base allocation and the ACA associated augmentation under one budgeting methodology in the future.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christopher Galeano: christopher from the california immigrant policy center, echoing those same comments as my colleague from health access. we also want to thank the department and the state legislature for expanding and efforts for undocumented children to have access to health care. and also share the same concerns as senator monning in terms of ensuring that that data is protected and continue to push forward and preserve all that california's gained. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 311, 'end': 318, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kimberly Chen: kimberly jacob chen with the california panethic health network. i want to echo and join in the course of comments before. and the fear is real. we may not have, documented within the system, but the fear is real and there's a lot of missed information out there that's driving this so we appreciate the effort. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Metzker: Brian Metzker, LAO. We find that the Governor's Budget proposal could generate additional general fund savings from increased federal funding for the additional NQIs. And it is consistent with the concept driving the original 2013 legislation. We would note that the administration's rationale for the proposal to protect the additional NQI's from potential tax penalties under the ACA. It is uncertain, as it is unknown, whether or not NQIs are paying, or could in the future pay tax penalties because the coverage they received through the state only Medi-Cal program is not formally certified as minimum essential coverage. However, because of the potential general fund savings from the additional federal funding and the consistency with the prior legislation, the proposal warrants serious consideration by the Legislature and we would provide the Legislature some issues for legislative consideration, depending on the action that the Legislature would take. If the Legislature were to approve the proposal, it might consider expediting the development and approval of Covered California health plans for all NQIs, including those transitioning to Covered California under the 2013 legislation. The Legislature might also consider directing relevant agencies with input from insurers to regularly report on how they're addressing some of the administrative complexities of the transition, as well as how many NQIs have been or currently are subject to tax penalties under the ACA. The Legislature might also consider requesting DCHS to establish procedures for re-enrolling NQIs in the state-only Medi-Cal program should reductions on federal funding of state health benefit exchanges result in less general fund savings. If the Legislature chooses to reject the proposal, for example, because of legislative concerns around the federal uncertainty around the ACA. The Legislature might consider whether or not to continue the planned transition of NQIs under the 2013 legislation. This is because any concerns about the transition proposed under the Governor's Budget are likely also to apply to the planned transition under the 2013 legislation. If the Legislature decides to repeal the authorized transition under the 2013 legislation. The Legislature might also consider directing DHCS to apply for CMS to certify the state only Medi-Cal program for NQIs as minimum essential coverage. This action would protect NQIs enrolled in the state only Medi-Cal program from potential tax penalties and there would be, of course, a fiscal tradeoff to that decision as general fund costs could increase by an estimated 100 million annually, as NQIs would no longer qualify for federal funding through Covered California.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Ayala: Laura Ayala with the Department of Finance. Since the implementation of this legislation in 2013, the implementation of the NQI wrap has been delayed due to CalHEER's system issues. As of release of the Governor's Budget, we believe we could proceed with implementation and the administration has heard from stakeholders since then and are continuing to discuss the issue internally.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Chen: Yeah, Kimberly Chen for California Pan Ethic Heath Network. On behalf of over 90 immigrants rights and health consumer advocate organizations, I'm here to express our opposition to this proposal. It's been the long standing policy of the state to cover newly qualified and immigrants and full scope MediCal and this program would go in the wrong direction and to build off of my colleagues points. Let me highlight again some of the challenges that folks will be facing in this. So, this program would take people who are currently in full scope MediCal, take them out, ask them to enroll in another plan, in Covered California, and to meet the enrollment requirements of both. To, ones they are in there, again, picking a new plan. Probably pick a new Doctor, because we're not sure if they're going to be able to retain the same Doctor. We'd hope they might, but it's unclear at this point. And then, they have to make sure that they're still getting services through MediCal that the plan, the Covered California plan, might not cover. And when it comes to renewal time or tax season, most folks, because of their income level, won't have a tax liability and likely won't be filing taxes and because Covered California is a mechanism of the tax system, they're going to have to now. And for this population, there may be fluctuations in their income. If you're that low income, you get a couple of new shifts, your income goes a little higher, you could potentially be on the hook for subsidies that you had received. And for many folks, they may be in mixed status families, so there might be confusion there why is x person in MediCal, but I'm in this RAP program, right? These are only a few of the operational challenges that we raised and for those reasons the program was delayed last year. And we spent along with other advocates, which we'll hear from trying to work through these challenges and at the end today I don't think there are very many new solutions that we've heard of and in fact the expansion that has been proposed in this budget really goes in the wrong direction again. I want to close by really, I can't stress enough how perilous this program is going to be for newly qualified immigrants to be pulled out of full scope coverage to navigate an untested system and potentially to be on the hook for tax subsidies paid by the Feds in this political environment. And we know that this Federal Administration is looking for any excuse, any reason, a clerical error, to ding folks and take immigration action against them. So, placing this vulnerable population in an untested system that may have disruptions in care does not align with our California values and we welcome immigrants and increased access to care, and this does not move in that direction. So, we urge the Legislature to reject this proposal and keep folks in MediCal.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Alley : Good afternoon, I'm Jennifer Alley with the California Association Health Plans and I'm here today to talk to you about our opposition mainly due to technical reasons for the proposal. You know, my members that provide coverage and through the exchange they filed their plans with the Department of Managed Health Care, Covered California and with DHCS. And so, that plan has to be before they file that, of course, they go through the application process which is going on now. Those applications for the 2018 budget year are due to Covered California on May 1st of this year. And so, that ramp up for next year's already started and the application doesn't include the plan that will be used let alone designed to implement the NQI RAP program. And that program, that plan actually has to be approved by CMS as well. And so, when we look at the federal approval and we're talking about the MediCal budget, we typically talk about waivers of federal rules for the Medicaid program. This time we're talking about asking the federal government to approve the use of subsidize plan in the exchange for a population that they're getting designed one for initially. And so, without that approval, my members with Covered California would be attempting to build a system that may not reach that federal approval and one that can't realistically be developed. We're talking about the contracts, the shared cost, how will that be funded and because these are zero cost beneficiaries now. When in the exchange, they may have a cost share that they would be responsible for, and so how that would fit into an existing system that wasn't designed to have a third payer, which in this case would be MediCal covering that, becomes very technical and complicated. And so, to implement something like that, we do need more time and so that's kind of the basis of our opposition. But I'm willing to answer any questions that you may have.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 34, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jen Flory: good afternoon chair and members. i'm jen kimberly flory on behalf of western center on law & poverty. i concur with the comments about the difficulties for beneficiaries in using the wrap program. two other things that i wanted to mention were some things have changed since this program was initially passed into law. one of the key things is there was originally another wrap program, the pregnancy wrap program, and cms decided, once it became clear that medi-cal was offering all of the essential health benefits through the pregnancy wrap program, that you can't actually do minimum essential coverage and a wrap program at the same time. we're in the same situation with the nqi wrap program. the only reason is not minimum essential coverage is because a form hasn't been turned in to certify it. that doesn't mean that the services aren't minimum essential coverage. and even with the expansion of adding more people into it, there are still immigrants who are in state-only full scope medi-cal, who would not be included in the wrap and would still have this minimum essential coverage problem. and then the other big factor that's changed since then has been the president that we have now, and specifically his executive order that considers abuse of public benefits a grounds for deportation. and that's even for lawfully present immigrants. so the idea that we would move forward with a program that takes people who are on full scope medi-cal and encourages them to apply for federal tax credits is a really risky proposal for the people who would be required to do that. so for that reason, we oppose it as well.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Valdez: mary jen valdez with health access. echo the concerns of cpenn, cipc, and western center on this issue. health access has had long standing policy concerns about whether it makes sense to transition newly qualified immigrants into a wrap program, and even more so now that we're expanding it to adults with children. as our colleagues mentioned before, we risk moving people into this program where they will likely experience disruptions in coverage when we don't know what's happening with federal funding and we don't know what's happening with aca. we echo concerns from our partners and support the staff recommendation to hold this open. that being said, we remain opposed to the budget issue and we urge the legislature to maintain coverage for newly qualified immigrants under full scope medi-cal, indefinitely. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alfredo Medina: Good afternoon, Chairman and members. Alfredo Medina here on behalf of Ultimate Services, the nation's largest federally qualified health center servicing over  150,000 patients and families throughout Southern California. Here to also echo the comments of all the panelists, and urge all members to keep the newly federally qualified immigrants under indefinite Medi-Cal coverage. Thank you.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Victor Christy: good afternoon, mr. chairman, members. victor mary christy on behalf of california health+ advocates. representing 1200 community health centers from across the state in opposition to the governor's proposal. thank you.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michele Stillwell-Parvensky: michele victor stillwell-parvensky, children's defense fund california, in opposition to the governor's proposal, echo the comments made by a lot of our colleagues. and really think that we need to make sure that we have healthy parents in order to have healthy children, thank you.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 34, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brian Metzker: Brian Metzker, LAO. We find the Governor's approach to budgeting CHIP funding to be reasonable given the uncertainty around Congressional reauthorization and across the range of potential actions Congress may take on CHIP funding. The Governor's budget assumes a middle of the road scenario.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Valdez: Mary Valdez with Health Access, we support the staff recommendation to hold this item open, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michele Stillwell-Parvensky: Michele Stillwell-Parvensky, Children's Defense Fund-California. As we know, dental care is one of the greatest unmet health needs among children, particularly low-income children and I want to underscore a point that was mentioned in the agenda around the 2014 audit that showed that more than half of children in California that were in Denti-Cal had not received dental care in the past year, such as their annual checkup. We know that lack of dental care can lead to dental disease, expensive ER visits, missed school days. And we, along with our partners in the Children's Health Coalition, really think that we need to be doing more to make sure that children are getting access. We appreciate the Dental Transformation Initiative and the actions of the administration to try to increase access to dental care but I think we also need to be taking additional steps, which includes making sure we have enough dentists that are accepting Denti-Cal, and looking at our low reimbursement rates, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brianna Pittman: good afternoon, i believe it was morning when i talked with you earlier. brianna michele pittman with the california dental association. i don't think i need to repeat any of the things that have been said. denti-cal has had a lot of problems that's been highlighted in the rate reviews, the little hoover commission report, the state audit, along with the lack of children getting dental visits. we know that the rates are about 30% of the commercial rates. we do appreciate the work that the department has been doing over the last several years. i want to acknowledge that, the outreach, the streamlined provider enrollment form which we were able to work with them on and really, very much appreciate that, as well as the dti, which is focusing on prevention and kids. we have been able to partner with them on that, i think as it was mentioned in the domain, too, and we've also been doing outreach to our members to let them know about the new opportunities, and trying to encourage them to enroll if they're not already enrolled, and to see more patients if they are, and really encourage that. i would say that we're cautiously optimistic. i think we're waiting to see exactly what happens, and if those really do provide the incentives. we're looking forward to seeing the data on that. also, recognizing it focuses on kids and prevention. there's very little treatment, and it doesn't really touch on adults. so we know that there are some remaining concerns. there are still kids out there and adults out there who can't get in, can't find a dentist. there aren't any in their area, or they're not able to get the services that they need because they're not covered. so i mean, i think if we talk about improving denti-cal, i probably can't talk about that without referencing prop 56, which i know we discussed earlier. but i think we'd like to see that go towards increasing access and for denti-cal to be a priority within that. and as far as the anesthesia in pediatric dental patients, we're working very closely on that legislation as it moves forward from the dental board's recommendation. i think we're very aware of the current access issues, in regards to sedation and anesthesia and want to be very cautious about what the implications will be on the denti-cal side. so we would be interested to see if there are any costs, or when there are cost estimates of that. and depending on what comes out of that, want to make sure that we can ensure that there's access for this population, thank you.
[{'start': 73, 'end': 96, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 299, 'end': 305, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Tannehill: good afternoon, jennifer brianna tannehill with aaron read & associates, on behalf of the california dental hygienists' association. the legislature spent a decade creating the independent dental hygienist program, known as the rdhap. the program was created after a successful pilot project, working with cal state fullerton and ucla and the legislature passed the program with bipartisan support in 1997. but last summer, denti-cal changed the longstanding rules for these independent dental hygienists treating special needs patients that have periodontal disease. these patients are elderly and/or disabled, in nursing homes or home-bound, and are treated at the bedside. denti-cal now requires a hygienist to get approval from the department before treating these patients for periodontal disease. over half of the requests for treatment are being denied. additionally, the reimbursement for the treatment was cut by 60%, and the funds used to increase a different treatment that's not appropriate for the patients with periodontal disease. if fraud exists, denti-cal has the ability to stop the providers who are overbilling. however, denti-cal's sweeping new rules are destroying the lives of fragile patients and the women who own small businesses providing care at the bedside. it's unconscionable bureaucracy. cdha requests that the department's new rules be suspended and that the original rules, which had existed for almost 20 years, be reinstated. we look forward to working with the legislature and the department to resolve this.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Nguy: thank you. linda jennifer nguy with western center on law & poverty. access to denti-cal services has been a long standing issue for both adults and children due, in large part, to low reimbursement rates. we do appreciate the legislature's efforts in partially restoring adult dental benefits, but would also note that there are still clients being asked to pull all their teeth because partial dentures are not covered whereas full dentures are, and so would make that note.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sergio Aguilar: Sergio Aguilar, Department of Finance.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Guadalupe Manriquez: Guadalupe Manriquez, Department of Finance
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Metzker: metzker, lao. we find the governor's budget proposal to be reasonable, particularly given the high remaining fund balance and ongoing revenues that could be used for medi-cal expenditures.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sergio Aguilar: yeah, sergio linda aguilar, department of finance. so to the extent that the resources do not cover the mip cost, we would look at other revenue sources to cover the remaining of the cost. could be general fund, could be another fund source. previously, we've prop 99 for mrmip. we have stopped doing that, but it's to the extent that there is a need, we'd look at other revenue sources.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Valdez: mary sergio valdez with health access. we support funding for the 1,300 people remaining in the program. and while we ask the legislature to consider other uses for the fund balance within medi-cal, it's not clear in the proposed language, so we would also respectfully ask that you clarify in the proposed language to make sure that the funding goes to mrmip first, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Nguy: linda mary nguy with western center on law and poverty. we echo some of the concerns the chair raised related to what would happen if additional funds were needed, considering what's going on federally. although we're not a huge fan of high risk pools, there may be an increased need and so we'd like to raise that.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marta Green: Thank you Mr. Chair and Committee Members. My name is Marta Green. I serve as the Chief Deputy Director of the California Department of Managed Health Care. And with me today I have Cassandra McTaggart, our Deputy Director of Administrative Services. And Jenny Phillips our Deputy Director of Legislative aAfairs.
[{'start': 54, 'end': 65, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 182, 'end': 201, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 255, 'end': 269, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark Newton: Legislative Analyst's Office. Mark Newton LAO.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 45, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Noah Johnson: good morning, noah linda johnson from the department of finance.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Guadalupe Manriquez: guadalupe noah manriquez, department of finance.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brandon Hanson: Hello, and my name is Brandon Hanson from the Department of Technology.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tam Ma: Thank you, good morning Mister Chair and members, I'm Tam Ma with Health Access California, we're the Statewide Healthcare Consumer Advocacy Coalition working for quality and affordable healthcare for all Californians. And first Mister Chair, I want to thank you for making note that today is the seventh anniversary of the Affordable Care Act. And thanks to the ACA California has reduced its uninsured rate to historic low. And I want to take a moment to commend the work of the Department of Health Care Services, of Covered California and Department Managed Health Care, for getting folks enrolled and making sure that they have access to care. And so having access to coverage is something that's always been very important to health access, and along with that, once people get coverage we want to make sure that people are able to get the care that they need when they need it. Which is why the timely access reporting and provided directory is that so important to us and why we both sponsored pieces of legislation that we've been talking about this morning. First starting with the timely access standards. Health plans licensed under Knox Keene have had the obligation to provide timely access to care since 1975 when the Knox Keene Act was first enacted. The side was taking, you have to probably timely access, there wasn't any very stringent standards. Which is why in 2002, we sponsored legislation to ask the department to establish, actually a clear standards for timely access that was authored by then Assembly Member Rebecca Cohn. And it took, essentially, three administrations, for the timely access regs to get finalized, which I believe were done in either 2009 or 2010. And that's when there were time elapse standards, like clear appointment wait times, where consumers have to have by law, access to a primary care provider within 10 business days. A specialist within 14 days. And so these are actually measurable standards that we can hold the plans accountable for. So in about three years ago, we sponsored SB 964 because we wanted to make sure the plans are held accountable for this time elapse standards. And so SB 964 required plans to essentially file reports based on the standardized methodology so we can do apples to apples comparison. What is anthem doing versus blueshield versus Kaiserr versus Healthnet versus Molina and so on. And the bill also requires plans to separate out their timely access reporting by line of business so that we can see, our people in the commercial market able to get timely access care versus medical manage care. See what the differences are, and so this year, the report that DMHC just released, based on measurement year. 2016 is only the second report, and it's the first report done under the standardized methodology. We are very disappointed that the health plan has such a high error rate. We find 90% to be absolutely outrageous, especially for things as simple as not following instructions. We are very frustrated that after about 40 years the plan still can't show whether it's providing timely access to care or not. So we are optimistic that with the department and the changes they've made and the supporting process, that we'll finally be able to get, in the next round of data, some more reliable data to be able to gauge whether consumers are actually getting timely access to care. And we have called on the department to take the strongest enforcement measures possible between corrective action plans and heavy fines to hold their plans accountable to this very basic consumer protection that they are required to follow. And I think, as you alluded to, Mr. Chair, hand-in-hand with timely access is provider directories. Consumers need to be able to know who is in that work, where they can go and get care. And they can't do that without accurate provider directories. Which is why we also sponsored SB 137. Because plans, again, have had provided directories for a very long time. And so, we wanted to make sure that consumers have access to those. And then, the final point, Mr. Chair, on the agenda, makes mention of a consumer participation program. That's something that's been very important for the consumers to be able to participate at the DMHC. And we encourage the Legislature to make that program permanent. Thank you.
[{'start': 54, 'end': 60, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1537, 'end': 1549, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Linda Nguy: I'll be Shorter. Linda Nguy with Western Center on Law and Poverty. We share the Chair's concern regarding inadequate data for regarding timely access. This indicates the plan's seriousness or non-seriousness in terms of reporting on timely access. This was to be the first year, as mentioned, that the plans were to report on lines of business. And so we have no indication of whether across the board timely access standards are being met or based on lines of business. So, we echo those concerns as well as support for the CPP program.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Chen: welcome. chen with the california pan ethnic network. i also want to express our support for the consumer participation program and also share the concerns of the chair and the department on the timely access reports. i think one thing i do want to highlight is in addition to the information we didn't get, we also didn't receive information on whether individuals who speak a language other than english are also receiving timely access. it is existing law that individuals receive timely access to care alongside language assistance. and it's not an either or, it's an and. and that information is also not available. so we express our support for the measures touched on and request that the department also work on the timely access for folks with limited english proficiency.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Annie Arnold: annie guadalupe arnold, disability rights advocate. and i agree 100% with chairman pan. and also the last two speakers and what they've stated. i, myself, am not on managed care. but i know a number of people with disabilities that are on managed care. and there are problems within the system to access care, major problems for people accessing care. i, for one, would like to see something similar if it isn't already existing in fee-for-service as far as the requirement of access to specialty care or doctor visits within 10 days or 15 days, as well. i, myself, am never interested in being part of managed care and will opt out every chance that i get as a dual eligible person. because i need access to care at stanford university where they have specialists. and when i have to undergo surgery, i have to be intubated while i'm wake because my neck does not tilt back. so i have to be awake while they throwing tubes down my throat. and they have a very difficult time finding ivs. and so i won't even go to sutter where i normally see physicians and expect any kind of medical treatment there on a surgical basis. because i can't be guaranteed of a specific anesthesiologist being used to difficult cases for intubation purposes. and so i would like to live. so i would like to go down to stanford. but on this, there's obviously problems with access to care and the data that's been collected. the inaccuracies is obviously a problem. and then i do know lots of people, including quadriplegics, that are having problems, including with the cci, which we'll get to that later. but thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 83, 'end': 86, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Alley : good morning, i'm jennifer annie alley with the california association of  health plans. and i just want to clarify that my members do take their responsibility to following all the rules and regulations including timely access. that they meet those obligations. i would like to note that 2015 was the first year that standardized process was used. there are some questions about those process. for example, my members weren't aware that some other filings that they have with the department would be used in conjunction with those. and that plans were notified that there were some inaccuracies with their initial filings, for 2015. but when they submitted corrections, it's our understanding that those corrections weren't necessarily used when the report was finalized. and so, we're having ongoing individual and bi-weekly meetings with the department to address the standardization and the process. and how that's going to work. to make sure that we're on the same page for this very detailed and complex information. i would just like to note that the 2016 have already been filed. and so we think that there's going to be a lot more going back and forth for the next report. and our ability to provide care, it's kind of what we do. there's been a lot of questions about this report, and i don't think that it's because of lack of effort of both parties. it's just it's very very, complicated. and it's very complex. and so we're working to address those issues to meet the obligations that we have. thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 38, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Randy Hicks: i'm randy, and i'm a consumer. and i used managed medicare. kaiser is my program. the thing that happened was, they really went electronic. and they decided that to put everything on the computer, and nothing comes in the mail. so how many times you checked your email to see if you got an email from kaiser.org? and they have a nice system for appointments and all this stuff. but if you lose your doctor and they decide that you don't have your physician anymore. i lost a great psychologist. i don't have him anymore. so they tried to put me in with another one, but they always set it up at a time where i can't get there. or they set it up at a time where that doctor's way out there. and i had to move my services all the way down to the other side. the consumer protection board? i'd like to have heard about that. i would've wrote reams and reams of paper about what happened to somebody who got caught right in the middle because they've moved location and they want to move service. and they say, call this phone number. then they hope you call your back. and there's no guarantee of that. so for my primary care physician, i didn't have a primary care physician because they moved his service all the way up to elk grove. and i think that's something you guys to take a look at is when a physician leaves their practice, and they're no longer your doctor, they move all the way out to somewhere else. they sent me a letter and said, we still like you to be my patient. while you're delgrove, i can't get delgrove. there are chances that they don't even get delgrove. i also like to see if, for consumer protection, that they also send them something written in the mail, not a packet that's about this big that says, you go through this. i'd like something small and concise saying these are your benefits, these are your options. nobody's going to read a packet that's this big. i guarantee you and are this thick. and then the other thing is, i want some kind of follow up. i like to have somebody to call me from managed care and says, did you get your doctor in time? are you covered on their services? because when they i really didn't find anything is out until they could, we have not heard from you in a long time, will you follow up with this? that long time was about a year since i moved from kaiser south to kaiser. and then they're going to close that hospital now. now, they're going to close that hospital and they're going to move patients again. so managed care, i like it, it works sometimes for me. but when it comes to getting physician, when it comes to getting new service, when it comes to moving to new location that something you're going to have to work on. so again, back to emphasizing about that consumer protection board, i wish i heard about it. not of us don't hear about it. people who go, they go to member services and so that something you guys need to work on.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1515, 'end': 1523, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
 : providers with complains and concerns related to their health plan.
[]
Linda Nguy: Linda Nguy with Western Center on Law and Poverty, we support the department's proposal, and encourage outreach to the medical population as they represent over third of the population that the department regulates but only about 20% of help center calls. We do appreciate efforts to hire bilingual staff, I believe that's the step in the right direction but more outreach. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tam Ma: Tam Ma with Health Access in support of the department's request for sufficient resources to staff the help center and IMR process. We are glad that they are seeing an increase in number of calls, and IMR's. However, 16,000 calls for an agency that regulates care for 25 million Californian seems to be very low numbers. So we need to do more, to make sure that people know that the DMHC's help centers are resource that's available to them if they have problems with their health plan.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Connie Arnold: thank you. connie jennifer arnold. my comment is i'm not against them getting additional staffing for resolving complaints but as a consumer, there was resolution of complaints would be good if it was something like call courtesy and they were actually resolving the complaints to the satisfaction of the consumer. and so, it's just resolving complaints by denial process of those complaints, then i think you're creating another separate problem. so, if it's resolving the customer or consumer's complaint, it should be to make sure that they're getting the health care services that they need, and not just another denial process which is what i often see. and then also, i would like to know if they've also had any calls, if they're from deaf users, or is there a tty access on their website, and do people know how those services are accessed? and there's been a lot of dissatisfaction in the medi-cal user community with managed care services and loss of care. so, some instances it's been positive, and some instances it's been negative, so i would like to see more information on that out of this whole process if they get additional staffing.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 17, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 18, 'end': 33, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Randy Hicks: yeah, i echo her comment. randy with cdr. and the other thing is i want to see is, what happened when they got the service and if it was accessible. was all the accessibility things happen? they got the service. they went to the hospital. they didn't have a bed that raised up. they didn't have a wheelchair scale. there's a whole bunch of issues that the department of justice says that managed care must do in order to make sure that this service is accessible. so when they call your department and they say they didn't have an adjustable scale. some hospitals don't have adjustable scales and some managed care plans don't understand accessibility. so i think it would be good for you having more people working for you but you want to make sure that they're trained for accessibility across the board. thank you very much.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Chen: chen with the california pan-ethnic health network. we support the department's request, and appreciate the effort to hire additional bilingual staff. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brandon Hanser: thank you mr. chair and committee members. my name's brandon, department of technology. and we have reviewed this budget request and department of technology is in full support of it. we are collaborating with the department and with the health and human services agency on innovation and some of the efforts around information security and cloud first. so this is in support of those future plans. if they end up becoming it reportable projects, they will go through the project approval lifecycle and we'll be working in collaboration with them.
[{'start': 53, 'end': 60, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Connie Arnold: Connie Arnold, I support the IT department and IT security because we have too many breaches in California of our private information. And I would also say, please don't design it like co.ca.govcaliforniaonlinedirectory because now that it's been changed, it sucks. Thank you. Plain English.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stuart Thompson: mr. chair, members, stuart connie thompson on behalf of california medical association. we do have some concerns with the implementation surrounding this bill. most specifically the tie into the timely access and network adequacy discussions of earlier in the committee, there's a fear that on our side that we have set up a statutory system that incentivizes health plans to carry exceedingly narrow networks and rely on the ab 72 statutory rate to fill in those gaps. and if there's not robust timely access and network adequacy enforcement, and by my interpretation of the hearing, it almost seems like we don't even have the data to look at that step. we've really created a system that allows health plans to carry narrow networks and kind of rely on providers to fill in those gaps. and if there's not proper enforcement, it really kind of will be a race to the bottom. these are typically for profit companies and profit margin is kind of what they're operating on. so to that effect, we have already seen, specifically in anesthesia in san diego. certain health insurers dropping contracts, freezing contractual rates, and there's really nothing that the providers can do other than take what they offer or rely on the ab 72 statutory rate. so it's a big concern for us, i think we'll share that information with the members as it continues going forward, but for us, it's going to be a major issue. i did also want to touch briefly upon the may stakeholder meeting. i think for us that's a little late, because based on kind of the testimony i've heard. the vendor contract will all be signed, the template to extract information from the health plans will be finalized. and obviously we're having problems getting the required data from the health plans already on timely access and network adequacy. so i think the fear, from cma's perspective is we'll not have proper enforcement of network adequacy. and additionally, the average contracted rate that the department will arrive at, will be done without stakeholder input from a lot of the specialties that are affected by this. so for us, we kind of would ask that the stakeholder meeting be moved up a little bit. so we can provide input before that template is finalized. and secondly, just to raise that kind of general fear with our organization that we're setting up a statutory scheme here, that's really going to hurt providers, hurt patients, and really benefit health plans. thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sara Flocks: thank you, mr. chair, member, flocks from the california labor federation. we were one of the co-sponsors of ab 72, we're in very strong support of this request for adequate funding for the enforcement of ab 72. this bill was the product of a lot of negotiation to achieve a delicate balance that of protecting consumers and making sure they never received a surprise medical bill, of also making sure that providers and doctors were adequately compensated, so we had enough providers in the system, and making sure that there wasn't a rate pay that would drive up costs for payers like union trust funds, and employers, and individuals in the market. so this is a very delicate balance, we feel ab72 really got there. so, and there were protections put in the bill to look at network adequacy to make sure there were reports of the legislature, so that as the bill proceeds there will be enough oversight. we want to make sure that there's enough funding for the help line and for the idrp process. i'd like to also say that we have had a provision on balance billing in emergency rooms for quite a while now, and we still have emergency rooms that are functioning and adequately staffed. so we hope that the same will hold true for ab72. thank you.
[]
Tam Ma: tam stuart ma with health access. we were co-sponsors of ab72 very pleased to support this request so that the department has a resources to enforce the law. and we just want to note that ab72 provides nation strongest protections against balance billing, and surprise medical bills where a consumer should never get a bill from out-of-network, provided that they did not consent too. so we look forward to working with the department, and to this engaging the stakeholder process on this.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Chen: Kimberly Chen with the California Pan-Ethnic Health Network we supported this legislation, and support this request.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Autumn Ogden: Hello chair members, Autumn Ogden-Smith with the American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network also strong supporters of AB72, and in support of the department's request. Thank you.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 39, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Linda Nguy: Linda Nguy with Western Center on Law and Poverty, in support of the legislation as well as this request.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Hicks: randy tam hicks, california disability rights. we're in strong support of the positions. i think this is a good idea. the only thing i would like to see, was mr. stone said the office and patient advocate could help them with that the fact is that you buy a car and then you got all these forms. you have to sign your name 20 times and the patient doesn't know what's happening. they're just told they got a bill. they don't know where it came from. i think we need to have some consumer protection with this from the office of patient advocates and come protect them. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 162, 'end': 167, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Christy Ballmer: Mr Chairman and Members of the Committee, Christy Ballmer on behalf of the California Professional Firefighters. We too are strong supporters of AB 72, support this request for staffing and enforcement. Thank you.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Connie Arnold: arnold, disability rights advocate, in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Nguy: nguy with the western center on law and poverty we appreciate this item being kept open. as we do have some concerns. two concerns. first, shifting responsibilities. we'd prefer that the oversight remain within the dmhc as they have institutional knowledge and neutrality. and two, in regards to the rural expansion and the cci on budsman in our review of the dhcs's proposal we haven't seen a corresponding increase in either of those programs. and so would be concerned if oversight of that was eliminated, as we have certainly heard of the issues of network adequacy in rural areas and note that partnership healthplan covers rural areas, and is not a knox keene license, as well as with the cci the continue need for consumer assistance there. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tam Ma: tam randy ma with health access. we also share the concerns of western center has raised. i want to point out that with regards to the medicare, medical manage care mega-rule with regards to the network adequacy,  we disagree with the administration and the departments approach to do this through a sub-regulatory process. and we think that along with every other network adequacy standard we have that's exist now, that the standards for specialist and other provider types are delineated and the final rule should be done through at least the regulatory process if not a statutory process so that you have consistency in terms of where the rates are and who's enforcing them and everything. and also want to note that what the new administration in d.c they have indicated that they are going to be revealing all the regulated, you know, medicaid managed care regulation so the landscape maybe changing. so, we request at the committee hold this item open for the time being.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Connie Arnold: connie tam arnold and disability rights advocate. thank you. i agree with the last two speakers. and i would like to see the item held open. as an individual on a medical waiver and watching the things happening in washington d.c. and seeing on here reductions related to the 1115 waiver, i have major concerns about what's coming if there is changes in the medicaid block grants that if it gets medicaid get shifted to the states what's going to happen to long term care services and things like that. and i think i'll just like to see this open.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tamara Armstrong: hello, good afternoon, chair, vice chair and members. my name is tamara. i'm with the office of statewide project delivery within the department of technology as director tong mentioned. well, i'm excited to be here to talk about a difficult subject but something that also has great rewards and that's our project delivery. it is a priority for our organization and our priority is to see it projects be successful so that is the thing we're all working to. we have a couple of functions in order to enable that to happen. and i'll provide a little bit more detailing to those, but to just review them quickly. first of all, we have authority for a project approval and oversight. we also have approval and authority over state wide technology procurement. and lastly, we provide services in the area from our california management office and so let me touch on what those three items are. you have a handout in front of you that is titled california state white it project delivery and that's what i will be using to briefly walk through how it is that we help projects and facilitate our project success. so that first bullet there where independent project approval life cycle, that is the process that department of technology uses to ensure that projects are laying a solid foundation. and that is what our emphasis is. we know through both private an public sector on studies, that the probability of success for a project is highly correlated to the sufficiency of planning, sufficiency of thinking through challenging areas. and so our initial focus is to make sure that projects are getting off on the right foot. thinking very deliberately about the business case. what are the business problems that we are attempting to solve? we want departments to spend time with their business areas. we don't want something that just has been thought of and brainstormed by it. but really we want to, to see a partnership between the business areas and the it folks to really satisfy the business problems or paying points or opportunities of an organization. so once we have ensured that they have those business problems articulated and they understand why they are doing it, then we move on to what is the best solution for your specific project, for that specific department? what are the characteristics of that project that would affect the different alternatives that are under available and the ones that they would choose? and then we look at are they ready, right? given the projects that they're hoping to achieve. given the outcomes that they're hoping to achieve. what is their readiness to take on that particular project? and how does that a line with the approach that they're looking at using? california has typically using a certain approach to developing it projects. and we're even looking at partnering with departments for determine what is the right approach for a project. instead of doing large, big, what we call big bang we've developed over many years and implemented all at once. we're encouraging projects to spend their time investing and understanding the customers of that system, and then absolutely breaking the products down into smaller pieces, right? where we can approach those various iterations very deliberately. and that is one of the approaches that we're currently leveraging within department. one of the key of our, key success i think or key benefit of our project approval life cycle is that it is a partnership. we are working with departments very actively, working with their agencies in discussions. the prior fsr process had frequently had the departments working and someone in isolation preparing a feasibility study report, what we call an fsr. and then sending that over to cdt. and that really laid out what their plan was. but we, the department of technology, has learned a lot from interacting with other departments from providing oversight to projects. and so we have a lot of information that we can share and support departments as they're planning for projects. and so, we partner with the departments with their respective agencies and with our subject matter experts such as peter, right? in terms of laying the foundation covering those key areas right up front rather than trying to bolt them on later when quite frankly it's more time consuming and more expensive. so once we go through, looking at those various alternative approaches and we select an approach, as the department selects an approach that they think is the right approach for their project. then we go into our procurement phase. and we look at what is the best way to procure the solution for this specific project. and so cdt partners with the department again to really look at things from the perspective of those project requirements. our team again is very experienced in this. and we again, work with the departments and with the agencies that the departments fall under to make sure that we are putting in the procurement strategy that makes sense for them. and lastly, we have the california project management office that is heavily focused on enabling projects to be successful. as peter mentioned, you know to describe how to do something and then to provide examples and coaching is a different thing. so cdt is focused on not only providing oversight capacity of are you doing what you're supposed to be doing, but here are some examples of how to do that, here are some lessons learned, here are the areas that we commonly find challenges. and we look at challenged projects and we like to make sure that you address those early. and here's a tool, here's a resource, here's someone that you can talk to that may be helpful. we use a four stage project approval process, where once they want to have a project, they go through these various gates, what we call gates. and it shows that each portion of their project plans, their project planning activities, have been sufficiently completed. once they've moved through those four gates, that project is considered approved. department of technology will approve that project. and then the department of technology's responsibility transitions into monitoring the health of the project, monitoring the project to make sure that they are indeed on target to achieve those business outcomes that the project was intended to achieve. and we monitor that throughout the life of the project and that is what our oversight responsibilities are. we again, have an independent responsibility to monitor those projects but we also are well positioned to provide them with valuable insight and feedback to help them to be successful because in the end that is our mission. so in order to run this project, in order to run this organization, we are looking at how can we create the best business value for the departments. what do they need, and how are we providing it? and so in addition to revisiting the project approval life cycle, which we recently implemented in the last few years, and this new process, we're also looking at our procurement and saying how can we allow departments to get the solutions that they need in the most efficient and effective way possible. and we've leveraged that on several projects recently. we've established what we call our pre-qualified vendor pool for one of our projects so that they can get access to resources that have very specific knowledge in an efficient and effective way. and we're looking at working with the it community in the state to be able to say what else do you need? and that is our mission, is to define what they need and then to be able to enable them and support them as much as we can. so this document that you have here provides a little bit more detail into that, but i'll try respect our time constraints here and allow you to move on.
[{'start': 65, 'end': 71, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 171, 'end': 175, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4146, 'end': 4151, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5134, 'end': 5139, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Laura Kearney: Hi, good afternoon, my name is Laura Kearney. I'm with the California State Auditor's office. And I was a supervisor on our performance audit of the Department of Consumer Affairs' BreEZe system. We made 16 recommendations to CDT, all related to project oversight. And as the Chairman indicated, there were five recommendations that were outstanding as of December 2016. And based on our recent correspondence with Miss Armstrong, we Learned that three of those have been fully implemented. That was as of the end of February 27, to be precise. However, within the past week, Miss Armstrong has provided my office with additional information. And now it appears that five of those recommendations are, indeed, fully implemented. There are just a couple of remaining items that are very minimal. Specifically, there are some draft documents related to the State Administrative Manual and the timing of when IVNV and IPO should begin on a project that we are still waiting for finalization, and to be included in the State Administrative Manual. And according to Miss Armstrong, we expect those documents to be finalized in March of this year.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 420, 'end': 429, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 581, 'end': 590, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1066, 'end': 1075, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ben Ward: Good afternoon, my name is Ben Ward, and I am an IT audits manager for the California State Auditor. And as was previously mentioned, we had six recommendations that were outstanding as of the last public followup in October. We've been working with department to obtain documents and asses the current status as of the end of February. And based on our assessment one of them is fully implemented and that would be recommendation 11. And it relates to providing training through webinars or other online training. What we found during the audit was, entities thought the training was helpful. But for smaller entities that maybe weren't local, it was harder to attend. So they've now implemented some webinars and some online training that you can do on demand. So the other five based on our assessment are still outstanding.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Cruz: Thank you, Director Tong. Members of the Committee, Mr. Chair, Vice Chair, members of Committee, welcome. I'm Chris Cruz, I'm the Chief Deputy Director for the Department of Technology. One of my primary responsibilities is to oversee the functions of the statewide data center that's part of our operational area for the state. Currently, we provide reliable, effective, and secure services to over 300 state agencies, boards, commissions, some cities and counties, and some levels of the academia institutions. That comprises, transverses through our California enterprise government network. We have 3,000 touchpoints within 58 counties here in California. So I guess you kind have an idea of the complexity of our network for the common network services that we provide from the Oregon border down to the Mexican border in terms of services. One of the core competencies and areas that we want to distinguish as we move forward with operations is really look at our strategic focus for year one. And that's around organizational sustainability. As Director Tong mentioned, we want to improve service delivery of the services that we provide. We want to foster innovation and we want to develop citizen and centric quality assurance. And to make sure that we're able to effectuate those services on time on budget and make sure that there's efficiency from a security perspective. Some of the areas that we're really looking at to achieve greater capacity in sustainabilities around our workforce ensuring that we have capable and confident folks in our services. So as folks retire, we can attract the millennials and make sure that we have the necessary technological capabilities for them to continually engage in civil service. Another area that we're looking at too is promoting and fostering our operations capability to steer more beyond just state government. Recently, we signed an agreement with an organization called CENIC. And they're the Cooperation for Education Networking here in California. They provide networking for the academia on K through 12 institutions, as well as the CSU and UC systems. So what that means is really now we have a peer to peer networking agreement with CENIC to provide services to all those institutions. What does that mean for the people in the State of California? It means more efficient and effective service delivery if we work together on common services across a common infrastructure in the state. And effectively regulating ensure that necessary security mechanisms are in place, again to secure the state's most critical data. Part of the network operations of the data center also is to really ensure that we're enshrining the state's most critical data. We have 80% of the mission critical systems that are running in the State of California reside in statewide data center in Rancho Cordova. We have backup recovery and disaster recovery in Vacaville, in a tier-three delivery data center. So it has the necessary physical safeguards as well as administrative and IT network security safeguards that are in place. One of the other areas that we've talked about too, is the inclusion of CalCloud services. And I think it's important to go back to the evolution of CalCloud when CalCloud was first adopted back in August of 2014. We call that CalCloud 1.0. And really what that was, is, the state with its partnership with IBM, stood up an infrastructure as a service cloud on premise at the statewide data center. Since then, we've evolved now, we have 17 different providers that are providing cloud services within CalCloud. So CalCloud today, think of it as CalCloud 3.0, is more of a hybrid cloud with services from the private sector providing private sector services across the state. We're continuing embark the private sector given their capabilities to meet FedRAMP security at a high level, which is the highest level security certification you can have in terms of services. And their ability now to provide audible data in case there's a breach or security incident. So we can see this playing into the state's core infrastructure now, and really expanding our cloud services across the area. Where we can come up with effective cost containment points and provide a variety of services. So today currently we have 17 different cloud providers across software as a service, such as Salesforce, DocuSign and Adobe, with digital and electronic signature. And obviously, with Microsoft, we've adopted the Office 365 platform to move the State of California to a single statewide email system. And today, we have transitioned over 70,000 state email boxes to Microsoft Office 365. And our goal is to have up to 200,000 done by the end of the calendar year. What that means is we're also retiring legacy hardware and software of email systems that will no longer be relevant. And also to moving us to a common email system that allows us FedRAMP compliance, sieges compliance, and again, the highest levels of security compliance. So we can manage that data through the state's data center and our statewide general network. So I think that these are some specific progress milestones that we've been able to make working with information security, again to secure our state's email systems. One of the areas too that we are also looking at is our security operations center. We're now starting to adopt a SOC if you've heard the word SOC, Security Operations Center at our statewide data center. We believe with the firewalls and the connectivity of all the data that comes inbound and outbound in the state data center, that setting up a security operations center there makes the most sense. To do incident response and security level management and also remediation if necessary, should it come up with data that resides in our data center. So obviously working in coordination with our partners at CALSEC, with Department of Military, with Cal OES and CHP, and our own information security officer. We're starting to look at that transition now to set up those kinds of tools to ensure that we have that in place for eventual monitoring and remediation. So all in all I think we're made some significant strides in terms of the statewide data center, in terms of consolidation and capabilities. I think an area that we could make probably some more inroads, where maybe the committees could help us, is with the academia. The UC and CSU systems, about us providing cooperative and collaborative services through that period of paired networking engagement. I feel like there's efficiencies and effectiveness that could reside from that, that would result in the state security area, but also volume pricing in terms of infrastructure moving forward. So, with that being said, that's kind of my overview and I'm going to turn it over to Peter Liebert, the Chief Information Security Officer.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 24, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 110, 'end': 120, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1061, 'end': 1065, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6809, 'end': 6822, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
William Welch: Good afternoon. My name is William Welch and the Secretary of State is requesting $2.4 million in spending authority from the business programs monetization fund for the fiscal year 2017/2018 to continue implementation of the California Business Connect project. California Business Connect is a comprehensive technology solution that will increase online services for business filings and requests for information. California Business Connect will allow the Secretary of State to process business documents within a few hours or days and avoid processing fluctuations depending on the time of year. The spending authority request is to continue contracting for the project management services, independent project oversight, independent project verification, temporary help to backfill behind redirected staff, and other operating expenses related to the project. Additionally, spending authority requests will allow consultants and the Secretary of State to complete project re-planning and development of the request for a proposal, and work in procuring the new systems integration vendor. Contract Award is planned for September, 2018, after approval of the new special project report, and project funding.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nick Schroeder: LAO, Nick Schroeder with the LAO, I have nothing to add at this time.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kim Gottier: certainly, kim jonah gottier with the secretary of state's office. so what i would describe is that we were underway in the requirements gathering process and under contract for approximately $8 million with the systems integrator, bawtree. bawtree was a experienced vendor in the state in that they were experienced with small projects in the state, but not larger high criticality projects such as california business connect. the project was behind schedule significantly and then consultation with the department of technology. we recognize that there were problems and moved to terminate the contract to our reach, an agreement to terminate mutually the contract with bawtree rather than move forward with what we thought would potentially be a failed project.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : thank kim you. kim i kim just kim want kim to kim point kim out kim to kim our kim colleagues, kim that kim we've kim been kim working kim together kim for kim just kim a kim few kim weeks, kim but kim there's kim already kim a kim pattern kim i kim think kim we're kim seeing, kim just kim within kim the kim subcommittee kim of kim continuations kim of kim it kim projects kim that kim are kim not kim going kim to kim where kim they kim should. kim so, kim it's kim going kim to kim be kim an kim ongoing kim interest kim of kim mine, kim and kim i kim certainly kim hope kim that kim if kim the kim department kim of kim technology kim is kim watching kim this, kim that kim they kim will kim also kim see kim the kim pattern kim and kim just kim come kim to kim this kim committee kim to kim help kim us kim understand kim what kim we're kim going kim to kim do kim to kim not kim waste kim billions kim of kim dollars kim from kim my kim estimate.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 9, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 15, 'end': 18, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 21, 'end': 24, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 30, 'end': 33, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 39, 'end': 42, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 46, 'end': 49, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 56, 'end': 59, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 64, 'end': 67, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 71, 'end': 74, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 79, 'end': 82, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 95, 'end': 98, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 104, 'end': 107, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 123, 'end': 126, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 135, 'end': 138, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 148, 'end': 151, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 156, 'end': 159, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 165, 'end': 168, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 190, 'end': 193, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 198, 'end': 201, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 210, 'end': 213, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 222, 'end': 225, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 228, 'end': 231, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 240, 'end': 243, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 246, 'end': 249, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 256, 'end': 259, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 266, 'end': 269, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 278, 'end': 281, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 287, 'end': 290, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 298, 'end': 301, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 306, 'end': 309, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 323, 'end': 326, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 330, 'end': 333, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 348, 'end': 351, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 355, 'end': 358, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 362, 'end': 365, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 375, 'end': 378, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 384, 'end': 387, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 392, 'end': 395, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 400, 'end': 403, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 410, 'end': 413, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 417, 'end': 420, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 427, 'end': 430, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 436, 'end': 439, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 448, 'end': 451, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 456, 'end': 459, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 465, 'end': 468, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 475, 'end': 478, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 482, 'end': 485, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 489, 'end': 492, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 496, 'end': 499, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 508, 'end': 511, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 521, 'end': 524, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 528, 'end': 531, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 538, 'end': 541, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 546, 'end': 549, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 552, 'end': 555, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 566, 'end': 569, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 575, 'end': 578, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 584, 'end': 587, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 591, 'end': 594, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 599, 'end': 602, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 614, 'end': 617, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 621, 'end': 624, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 636, 'end': 639, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 643, 'end': 646, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 656, 'end': 659, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 666, 'end': 669, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 675, 'end': 678, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 684, 'end': 687, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 693, 'end': 696, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 702, 'end': 705, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 710, 'end': 713, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 718, 'end': 721, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 730, 'end': 733, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 738, 'end': 741, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 747, 'end': 750, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 756, 'end': 759, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 763, 'end': 766, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 772, 'end': 775, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 786, 'end': 789, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 793, 'end': 796, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 802, 'end': 805, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 809, 'end': 812, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 824, 'end': 827, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 833, 'end': 836, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 843, 'end': 846, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 853, 'end': 856, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 860, 'end': 863, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 867, 'end': 870, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 874, 'end': 877, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 882, 'end': 885, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 892, 'end': 895, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 905, 'end': 908, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 912, 'end': 915, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 924, 'end': 927, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 933, 'end': 936, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 940, 'end': 943, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Susan Lapsley: Thank you, Mr. Chair and Committee Members. Susan Lapsley from Secretary of State's office. The Secretary of State requests $7.1 million for the VoCal, which is the Statewide voter registration database, and this funding comes from the Federal HAVA Trust Fund, The Help American Vote Act. The bulk of that funding goes for 1.2, approximately, for staff salaries. 1.2 for software, maintenance, and operation, and then another 1.2 for interfaces with other agencies. The statewide database interfaces with CDPH, the Department of Corrections and DMV, most are the three big ones. We also have in there 1.5 for local assistance to the counties. So I would be happy to answer any questions that you have.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nick Schroeder: lao. nick  schroeder, from the lao. the one comment i would make is that, the administration's making no proposal for any fundings towards the elections administration. so for the counties to be improving their voting systems or otherwise, they're suspending the elections mandates, and they're not funding sb 450, and as a result of that, i think that the comment that the staff included here, saying that the committee may wish to consider this issue again, with may revision is probably a sound recommendation.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5, 'end': 19, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cindy Helverstat: thank you. good afternoon. cindy with the secretary of state. pleased to meet you. so, the question. we have moved forward with implementing the requirements of ab 2263 and we are notifying participants in the program of the new provisions that allow them to record real property with their designated confidential mailing address, as well as irrevocable living trust and legal name change. we are also putting in notices into the new participant packages that we send out with the applications. the workload that we're not certain that will be absorbable is we don't know how much workload there will be involve with working with the county recorder offices. most county recorders offices don't know about our program. so we need to start opening up the lines of communication with them, working on a process with them for establishing a record of which participants we have in the program. we don't know how many of our participants might be interested in these new provisions. so there is some uncertainty about the workload that will happen in the future. so while we do believe that most of it is absorbable now, we do not know that for the future. what cost might the sos incur to implement this bill?
[{'start': 27, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tamara Johnson: Tamara Johnson, Department of Finance. We continue to support the administration's proposal. We believe that the proposal language would provide some flexibility to the Secretary of State, should they encounter some challenges in implementing the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jay Sturgess: good afternoon, chairman. i'm sturgess with the labor and workforce development agency. thank you for the opportunity to come talk to you about some of the work that's been happening at the agency. your staff have done an excellent job summarizing the issue, so i'll be brief. the proposal before you requests ongoing funding for one position, making permanent the associate secretary for farm worker and immigrant services position that was originally established in our 15-16 bcp. since the establishment of the position, the associate secretary's work has been focused on three areas. following through on the governor's commitment to mexico's secretary of labor to establish and implement a pilot program that protects the rights of mexican h2a workers. immigrant integration and immigrant services, which includes coordinating agency programs and resources that can be used to assist california's immigrant population in obtaining employment, labor rights protections, and assessing employment training resources. and thirdly, the coordination of state services to farm workers across the departments within the agency, as well as the departments outside of the agency. so this proposal will strengthen the rapidly growing h2a program by reducing exploitation and preventing labor law violations within this vulnerable community. and increasing in transparency and accountability in the program. further, it enables the agency to continue to focus on immigrant integration issues with the provision of equitable services for immigrant populations.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Hernandez: Sure, so Jennifer Hernandez, the associative secretary for the Labor/Workforce Development Agency. So the work that we've been doing around the H2A farmworker services, has been to implement a pilot project in the areas of Santa Maria and the Salinas Valley. And what we did was that we reached out to employers and we obtained voluntary permission to come on the property and conduct an interview twice. We did this and with the employees and provide them with information about their worker protections while they've conducted work here in California. In the immigrant integration realm, we coordinate with the Office of the Governor. We work with the Director of immigrant integration and our real emphasis is to ensure that our programs are providing access for immigrants in the state. So whether that be ensuring that we're doing proper outreach through the DLSE and other workers' rights programs, or whether it's expanding access through our workforce development programs.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christine Rodriguez: Good afternoon. Christine Rodriguez with the Agricultural Labor Relations Board. We're here today requesting to convert 2 and a half limited term positions to permanent positions, an augmentation of $573,000. This would include one Attorney IV and one and a half hearing officers or administrative law judges. We're asking for that half time to augment with an existing half time. So if this proposal is approved, we would have a total of three administrative law judges and one Attorney IV.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Greg Sirko: greg nick sirko, department of finance. we support the administration's proposal. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ron Barsammi: i'm ron greg barsammi, and i represent guerrero and farming. we have been the alrb's workload since 2012. approximately one-half of its budget is spent on guerrero and farming matters. all of our matters are now beyond the board and are either with a court of appeal or the supreme court. there are no current cases or hearings now before the alrb involving guerrero and farming. as far as the general council's concerned, they're investigating charges all the way back to 2012, primarily because they devoted so much time on preventing worker's ballots from being opened, instead of investigating and revealing charges of unfair labor practices. now, that's supposed to be a primary duty. and yet, we're still investigating charges back from 2012 and 2013. that's a backlog created by the general council, not the current general council, the former general council, sylvia torres guyen. we provided you with information that was emailed on friday, delivered to your offices on monday. we're here to provide any other information. if there's going to be a review of their backlog of cases before the board itself, i would ask the members to note that they still carry cases that are decades old where the employers haven't paid fines or back pay, or what have you and yet, they're still being carried by the board on their agenda for open board meetings and i might add they've only had one open board meeting in 2016. we're still waiting to have the one this year, which is supposed to be coming up. chairman gould, a very experienced administrator of labor boards, having been the chairman of the national labor relations board. i've been at this for 35 years before the alrb.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 39, 'end': 47, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 155, 'end': 163, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 358, 'end': 366, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 868, 'end': 887, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1511, 'end': 1516, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Elena Gonzales: Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman. Good afternoon Mr. Chairman, Members of the Committee. I'm Elena Gonzales. I'm the Chief Administrative Law Judge at the Unemployment Insurance Appeals Board and the Executive Director. To my left is Lori Kurosaka, the Assistant Executive Director. We're here requesting a one time augmentation for our tax appeals program as well as permanent funding for positions moving forward. As I don't know how much background you might need in terms of the tax program at the Unemployment Insurance Appeals Board and actually...
[{'start': 89, 'end': 103, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 230, 'end': 243, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Matthew Siverling: Matthew Siverling, Department of Finance. We would just like to reiterate that currently employers are waiting approximately 26 months on average to have their hearings scheduled. This proposal would make that target 9 months, going forward.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Greg Edwards: thank you, mr. chairman. my name is greg ron edwards. i am the chief financial officer of the department of industrial relations. happy to be speaking with you today. the first proposal before you as you indicated is for the division of apprenticeship standards to accept the dollar specific to a grant. this is a new grant for the division. it would assist the division in a overall more comprehensive strategy, being spearheaded by the labor workforce development agency in conjunction with community colleges and other partners. the primary goal is to both expand the number of apprentices in the state of california as well as increase the scope of the types of apprenticeship programs that are supported by the division. a brief overview of those types of different program or industry areas is in the agenda in the second paragraph on page six, i'll just briefly note a couple. healthcare services, information communication technologies, transportation logistics and advanced manufacturing. so we are recommending approval of these dollars because they will allow the division to provide the services that it provides principally. those services are specific to training apprenticeship providers in how to stand up their program, ensure that they maximize apprenticeship graduations in the state of california.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ryan Woolsey: Good afternoon, Mr. Chair. Ryan Woolsey with the LAO. We don't have any issues with this proposal.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Louis Mirante: louis greg mirante, department of finance. this is the first time that we've heard about those specific proposals but we'd be happy to work with your staff to better understand them.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Angel Enraca: Angel Enraca from SEIU Local 1000 and we've been working with the apprenticeship program [for doing one of these new innovative grants where it's an LVN to RN program where we're going to be, and we're trying to do this, we're doing it with the Department of Corrections. And we're going to be increasing LVN wages, who are about 85% minorities, from 45,000 a year to 93,000. When they graduate in one year, we're doing this in Stockton, we want to do it around. So we're very supportive of these new innovative programs. Only 3% of apprentices are women, but when you look at women occupations like nursing where LVNs are, I think, probably 80% women. This will really increase by doing apprenticeships by going to where the women are and trying to give them these opportunities. We're also going to be doing ones with IT workers here in this state with bringing in people from community colleges and then taking people that are already within the work force and moving them up. And the Department of Apprenticeship Standards has been a wonderful partner with helping us navigate something where we're taking a motto, We know it works, it's a great motto and putting it into Professions and into occupations where it hasn't been used before. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julie Su: Thank you, and good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and Committee Members. My name is Julie Su, and I am the California Labor Commissioner. And I'm here to talk about the strategic enforcement approach that we have utilized in order to improve our enforcement efforts, to make the best use of the resources that we have as well as to use the most cost effective and smart way to gain compliance throughout California. So by way of background just a few numbers, there are some studies about the Incidents of wage theft. There's a 2010 study by the UCLA Labor Center that talks about how much there is, but there's a 2014 US Department of Labor finding that the minimum wage is violated in California 372,000 times per week. So if you take a look at the enforcement resources for the division, there was a long period, a few decades, of declining staffing, at the same time that there was a growth in the number of employers and employees throughout California. To make it more concrete, if you take all of the investigative staff that I have right now we have one investigator for roughly 84,000 Californians in the workforce. That includes all of our investigative staff, meaning not just our field enforcement deputies, but those who adjudicate wage claims, those who investigate retaliation, and those who enforce judgments for wages. By comparison, in 1982 and 83, it was about one in 76,000, one investigator for 76,000 Californians in the labor market. So over the last 40 years, there has been evolution in the economy, there's been obviously growth both in terms of numbers but also complexity. There's been growth in the protections that working people in California people enjoy. I know we're all proud of that here in California. And there's been a growth in the underground economy. So arguably, the ratio should not be comparable, it should actually be lower in terms of investigators to workers. And if you just take out the field enforcement deputies, the disparity is even starker. So to be more specific about that, we essentially have two field investigators for all of Alameda and Contra Costa County. Three investigators for all of the area from Sutter and Yuba Counties down to Sacramento County. So we're talking about a dirth in the meets verses required to fault the underground economy, to fight wage theft and to make sure that the protection that working people are suppose to enjoy in California are real. So we have adopted strategic enforcement approach, which eliminates the random inspections. We no longer go out and do sweeps, where we just count up the number of inspections we've done and call it a day and say that we've been successful. This approach has been embraced by employers, who we now do not just again go out there and use our resources and often times don't find any violations, right. One oft he biggest improvements by strategic enforcement is that the ratio of citations to inspections has improved dramatically. So in 2010 it was about 46%, 46% means that it is less than half of inspections conducted by the Labor Commissioner's office resulted in a citation of some sort. So you can understand why employers would say we're being investigated and we're not doing anything wrong, that's not a good use of government resources, and it's not good for employers of California. In 2016, that number has risen to 85%, so we've steadily improved that. Now that means that almost 9 in 10 of our investigations result in a citation. So we're targeting better, we're using our resources smarter, and we're going after law breakers rather than compliant employers trying to make an honest living in California. We also find more violations per investigation, so we're really focusing on the biggest threat to working people in California, which is wage theft, the systematic denial of a worker's right to take home what he or she earned at the end of the day. So our strategic enforcement not only includes better targeting, it includes more in depth investigations. It's no longer good enough to go in and look for whether there's a posting on the wall, or whether there someone's licences are supposed to be, or even whether they have workers' compensation, all of which are important but don't get to the heart of why working people remain in poverty in California. So what we do is we actually interview workers, we need to gain their trust in order to find out what's going on, we get payroll records, we do compress wage audits and we cite for wages owed and penalties associated with wages, and that changed the way we operate. It also requires far more resources to do an in-depth investigation into wage theft than it does into a violation that can be determined just by looking at paper. So our strategic approach has also involved us working more closely with community partners on the ground, whether they be community's organizations or unions, or employer associations, or industry representatives to again, find the bad actors. And I will say that one of the biggest pushes for more investigations, more enforcement has come from employers in industry associations, who feel like the level playing field cannot prove reality without more enforcement and more of this type of strategic enforcement. So our request is to build on the success. We've started this enforcement, but in order to really gain an impact in order to attack the underground economy and stop the bad actors from continuing to operate, in order to put wages into working people's pockets, we would like to take the strategic enforcement approach, replicate it, use it throughout the division, and make sure that the promise of a just day's pay for a hard day's work is real in California.
[{'start': 78, 'end': 86, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cesar Diaz: thank you, mr. chair and members, cesar louis diaz on behalf of the state building and construction trades council. i'd like to associate my comments with that of my colleague, mitch seaman of the labor federation. i want to say that the policy that is created here is very similar to the public works policy. where you have tolling and you have an extended sort of statute of limitations. because oftentimes, we are at a disadvantage when we're talking about protecting workers. most of the time, the workers don't have the ability to catch when they're actually violated. they're under the control of the actual contractor, in our instance. we see that a lot in residential construction, a lot of underground economy. that hurts all employers across the spectrum, it hurts the general fund as well, and including law-abiding employers. so when you have a worker that's working for a contractor in that scenario in the underground economy, they oftentimes don't report until after separation from their actual employer. so that could be that they get hurt on the job, or actually it could be that something else happens and they get fired. and at that point in time they're able to then go back and see all the different violations that they were under. so for those reasons, we urge your support for this bill.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 177, 'end': 189, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tia Koontz: good afternoon, my name is tia, i'm with the ucla labor center and we support the governor's proposal. one data point, because that's my job. the feds, the proposal is to cut the department of labor by 21%, which means unenforcement at the federal level. so i can't stress enough the significance of that for immigrant workers in california. and the need to fund the state labor commissioner adequately to do that job. thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Scarlet De Leon: Hi, my name is Scarlet De Leon. I'm a worker advocate with , we support.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Umberto Gutierrez: good afternoon, my name is umberto cesar gutierrez. i worked at a restaurant for more than three years.  six days a week, 11 hours a day without any type of break.  i went to the organization where they helped me file my claim. it took about eight months for the first conference where the employer didn't show up. two months later i had the hearing where we reached an agreement.  i felt pressured to reach an agreement, because the process is too long, and once the process is done, it's still not guaranteed that i was going to collect the full amount of 90,000. also the process is really intimidating, but with the support of  i felt prepared. this is why it's important for the dlc to work with community organizations such as, thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Urban: hello, my name is danielle. i'm special council at the legal aid society employee loss center now called legally aid at work and executive director of the center for worker's rights here in sacramento. here to support the expansion of the field enforcement unit, which we think is a vital component to wage enforcement here in california, especially for the employers that have multiple violations and continual violations. it allows those violations to be investigated at once and enforced at once. thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matthew Decarolis: good afternoon, i'm matthew umberto decarolis a staff attorney with bet sevec legal services in los angeles. we support this proposal. we're one of the strategic partners to make effective, thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rene Bayardo: thank you mr. chair and members. rene seiu california. we strongly support.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 42, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Scott Sia: Hi, I'm Scott Sia, Staff Attorney with the Wage Justice Center based in Los Angeles, and we support.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anell Flores: hi, my name is anell matthew flores, and i'm with the maintenance cooperation trust fund. we help non-unionized janitorial workers throughout california. we strongly support increasing the number of staff.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda De La Cruz: My name is Linda De la Cruz, I am a member of CIU Janitorial. And we're here to support the proposal.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Doug Parker: Good afternoon, my name is Doug Parker. I'm the Executive Director of Work Safe in Oakland. We strongly support the staff increase requested by the Governor based on the strong correlation between health and safety and wage staffed.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Barrera: Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and Members. Jennifer Barrera on behalf of the California Chamber of Commerce. I promise I'm not going to get into the substance, but I just wanted to mention that there were a few other items in the trailer building which dealing with the expansion of the time period in which to file a retaliation complaint. Labor Commissioner, the prevailing party retaliation action ability to initiate that temporary restraining order against an employer, as well as in addition to the other policy considerations that were raised that we have concerns with. We have had discussions with the Labor Agency, the Labor Commissioner's office, and we look forward to continuing those discussions. Thank you. And we are opposed, sorry.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Britney Sitzer: Britney Sitzer on behalf of the Civil Justice Association of California in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Belode: mr chair and members, mike anell belode for the california new car dealers association. we're opposed to the trailer bill language relating to the revocation of licenses. thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matthew Allen: Matthew Allen, Western Growers Association, also opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Miller: Michael Miller, California Association of Wine Grape Growers, also opposed, respectfully.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Margo Parks: Margo Parks, on behalf of the Western Car wash Association, we are supportive of the language making it easier to access the restitution fund. Believe that's very important, belongs in a trailer bill, that's an appropriate place for it. But on behalf of Family Winemakers of California, do have concerns with the revocation of license. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cesar Diaz: chair member cesar mike diaz, on behalf of the state building constructions trades council. i want to thank the committee and the department, also, for a very thorough analysis for the questions, as well. we've been at it since i started working at the building trades back in 2006. it used to be a third party labor compliance program that basically hired third party businesses to take the owners basically off of the public agency and to ensure that contractors on public works, who should be the most responsible contractors because they're being paid with taxpayer dollars, are abiding by all the labor standards, right. that wasn't happening, so we shifted to a different model of fee based on a bond. that didn't seem to work. we went to different iterations. all trying to take away the pressure on the public agencies. this is a model that actually does work. there are 30,000 or so estimated public works contractors. unfortunately they are not signing up. as you mentioned assemblywoman, the public agencies aren't checking and that behavior goes down the line. the general contractor then doesn't care if their subs are registered. the subs who are hiring second-tier subs aren't checking and so every single place along the line, a worker can be harmed. but also, the state of california is being harmed, because public works enforcement is going without the resources needed to ensure that the taxpayers are receiving the bang for the buck on these projects. so for those reasons we're showing support to this proposal. thank you.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Scott Governor: Mr. Chair and members, Scott Governor on behalf of the Construction Employers Association. We've had a dialogue with PIR and the building trades. However, we are opposed to this. We believe its a matter best left to the policy committees. For example the penalty increase is 1,400% from 2,000 up to $28,000 in penalties. That's extreme at best. The debarment division, under this proposal, if a subcontractor was registered at the time a job begins, but lets their registration lapse, the person who hired them would be debarred and put out of business. That makes zero sense. We've suggested an alternate approach to increase enforcement to Assemblymember member Caballeros point. There's a requirement in statute we have to list the CSLB number at time of bid, do that with the registration number. There are easier ways to do this that focus on the actual violator as opposed to this which comes across as a bounty hunter provision. We are opposed, we are happy to continue dialog but this is exceedingly punitive.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 664, 'end': 680, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rene Bayardo: thank you, mr. chair and members. rene, seiu california, also in support.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Felipe Fuentes: members, fuentes on behalf of the associated general contractors of california. for brevity's sake i will attach my comments to mr. governor's, but will say that the agc has a long history in this area, fully understand the need to fully fund these funds. but, we agree that the approach here is punitive and are eager to figure out how to work towards a solution that would be beneficial for everybody, would strongly suggest a working group approach. but, at the moment our legal staff is reviewing the proposal. so, we're currently neutral but we're very concerned. thank you.
[{'start': 132, 'end': 140, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Pete Conaty: Good morning, everybody, and first of all, I'm Pete Conaty and I represent the National Guard Association in California, as well about 20 military and veterans groups, and I really want to thank the committees for having this hearing because I think it's very important, and I also think that there are a whole host of areas and issues that the legislature needs to look at concerning the California National Guard. And don't miss, that probably came out wrong because they have been assisting our nation at war for the last 16 years, and yet you did not hear them mention that and maybe it's because they're modest, but they also briefly mentioned that they have a mission of assisting the Ukrainian Army and have had for a long time and everybody knows what's going on in Ukraine. So there is a lot in our guard to be very proud of and they've done a lot with not a lot of money and I should mention these remarks are my own and not necessarily my client's. But I think, for example, they do a better job than ADD, and those of us that have been around have had issues with how EDD has handled helping veterans get employment. So thinking outside the box, there may be ways you could transfer some of that federal funding from instead of going to EDD to go to the California Guard. There should be possibly state funding for their cyber security mission, because that is becoming one of the hottest issues in modern day warfare. Possibly educational dollars for their different academies to help our disadvantaged youth, possibly more mental health dollars could go to the California Guard, and I would encourage you to think outside the box because I just sat here and wrote a bunch of notes, but more explore the relationship with the federal military forces here in California. We have more active duty military in very important bases here in California. And possibly there could be some synergy or co-locations that would increase, be less expensive to put guard units on federal bases. Might also help bolster those bases reason to exist as it appears or it's going to be a brack with not this year, but probably pretty soon. So anyway, I just wanted to make those comments and thank you for holding this hearing. It's very important, thank you.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pete Conaty: good morning, everybody, and first of all, i'm pete jonah conaty and i represent the national guard association in california, as well about 20 military and veterans groups, and i really want to thank the committees for having this hearing because i think it's very important, and i also think that there are a whole host of areas and issues that the legislature needs to look at concerning the california national guard. and don't miss, that probably came out wrong because they have been assisting our nation at war for the last 16 years, and yet you did not hear them mention that and maybe it's because they're modest, but they also briefly mentioned that they have a mission of assisting the ukrainian army and have had for a long time and everybody knows what's going on in ukraine. so there is a lot in our guard to be very proud of and they've done a lot with not a lot of money and i should mention these remarks are my own and not necessarily my client's. but i think, for example, they do a better job than add, and those of us that have been around have had issues with how edd has handled helping veterans get employment. so thinking outside the box, there may be ways you could transfer some of that federal funding from instead of going to edd to go to the california guard. there should be possibly state funding for their cyber security mission, because that is becoming one of the hottest issues in modern day warfare. possibly educational dollars for their different academies to help our disadvantaged youth, possibly more mental health dollars could go to the california guard, and i would encourage you to think outside the box because i just sat here and wrote a bunch of notes, but more explore the relationship with the federal military forces here in california. we have more active duty military in very important bases here in california. and possibly there could be some synergy or co-locations that would increase, be less expensive to put guard units on federal bases. might also help bolster those bases reason to exist as it appears or it's going to be a brack with not this year, but probably pretty soon. so anyway, i just wanted to make those comments and thank you for holding this hearing. it's very important, thank you.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 64, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: thank you, mr. chair and members, ignacio jonah hernandez on behalf of the california attorneys for criminal justice, statewide association of criminal defense attorneys. and first of all, i want to apologize to the author and also to the committee for our late opposition on friday. it's not my standard procedure. having waited on over 1,000 bills over the last 15 years, i normally speak to the author's office much sooner than that. so my apologies for that. because of that, i'll keep my comments very brief. i think our primary concern, and i appreciate the comments of the author, i'll reach out and talk to the author's office going forward. primary concern is that the discretion of the judge is taken away, even for those reckless driving offenses. not the speed contest, but just simple, reckless driving. that could be just a simple fine for someone as low as $145. this bill would require the impoundment for 30 days. we think that's disproportionate. we think that there may need to be more of a filter as to when it should be mandatory and when it should remain at the discretion of the judge. and i'll just end my comments there. and i want to thank the committee and also thank the author.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Caan: Chris Caan representing Southern California Edison in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bonnie Holmes-Gen: yes, mr. chair, bonnie ignacio holmes-gen with the american lung association in california, also support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bonnie Holmes-Gen: great. mr. chair and members, bonnie bonnie holmes-gen with the american lung association in california. we strongly support this bill. california is home to the most difficult pollution challenges in the us. over 80% of californians are affected by unhealthy air and this pollution is driving costly health emergencies, ranging from asthma attacks, stunted lung development and function in children to heart attacks, strokes and premature deaths. we know there's huge costs that are imposed on the public because of passenger vehicle pollution. and clearly our state's emission control laws are critical, we need strong enforcement of those laws, especially in light of the vw scandal and the defeat devices. and we strongly support the measures in this bill that would direct arb to enhance our motor vehicle emission testing program and to recover cost of performing independent testing to make sure that the public is getting the full benefit of our emission standards. this is a public health and clean air bill. we strongly support and thank the assembly member for introducing this.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Magavern: mr. chairman and members, bill bonnie magavern with the coalition for clean air in support. the volkswagen corporation conducted a criminal assault on our lungs and our health. they did it deliberately. they were caught only when scientists equipped cars with emissions monitors and drove the cars around to check on what the emissions were when those cars were actually in use, as compared to how they were measured in the laboratory. so, it's essential that we routinely do this kind of testing of all the vehicles that have to be certified to actually comply with california's clean air standards, and that's why we support this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tom Knox: chair and members, i'm knox of valley clean air now. we've seen, there is a huge amount of excess vehicle pollution that is related to the lack of direct testing. we support any effort that will increase the direct testing of vehicles in california.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Carroll: yes, mr. chairman. mike bill carroll with the western center on law and poverty. we concur in the statements of the aclu, and we note that this is an appropriate day for the committee to be taking up a bill around access to justice and courts, since we're going to be hearing from the chief justice later today. we think it'd be appropriate for this to get an aye vote today. thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bob Nailer: Mr. Chair and members, Bob Nailer. I represent the transportation corridor agencies, the Orange County toll roads. We're opposed to the bill and one thing that was left out of the testimony in favor of the bill is we are already required by state law to investigate a toll if the driver asks for the investigation. They do not have to pay the fine before the investigation. So we look at the camera records. We look at whether there's a match on the license plate. We look at whether the car is in fact owned by the person who the DMV says owns it. And if we find that those things are not true, then there is no violation, there is no requirement to pay. What this bill affects is the next level of appeal. This bill says you can request an administrative review beyond that. This administrative reviews are in expense to the tolling agency. And not having the fine paid after that investigation is concluded at the person is in fact a toll violator is going to imposed an expense and via in sentence to delay payment and that, Mr. Chairman, is going to impose additional cost on the other toll payers or not trying to get other paying their toll. By the way, parking violations are treated the same way, there's an administrative investigation up front without having to pay the parking violation, and then if you want to go to the next level of review, you have to pay the parking fine. Traffic violations are different animals, they are complex facts situations, and when the Judicial Council made that change, we think it was just so we don't think we should be dragged into the same incentive not to pay the toll and the violation that this bill would create. Thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Samantha Contreras: good afternoon, mr. chair. i'm samantha jonah contreras, legislative advocate for sau local 2015. we are here today to present our budget proposal that would increase a minimum number of required nursing hours per patient day. and free standing nursing facilities from 3.2 hours per patient day to 4.1 per patient day. certified nursing assistants or cnas are the backbone of every nursing home. cnas are at the frontlines, providing the direct care services necessary to every nursing home patient. based on empirical data, our proposal requires nursing homes to have a minimum of 2.8 nursing hours provided by cnas and 1.3 hours by licensed nurses. now i would like to introduce nora garcia, a cna for 30 years, from fresno, who will share her testimony with you today. she will address the committee in spanish, and i will translate for her. thank you. good afternoon, mr. chair and members. my name is nora garcia, i have been a certified nursing assistant for nearly 30 years. currently i work in sunnyside convalescent hospital, but the majority of my career, i worked in fresno postacute care facility  first, i want to say we are suffering and so are our patients. i've travelled here today from fresno to ask for your help. we need your help to ensure nursing homes have sufficient staffing to provide our patients with the quality of life they deserve.  i enjoy caring for my patients, they are like part of my family. i see them everyday, i care for them when they are happy, angry or suffering from depression. i tried to speak with them and cheer them up as i'm providing care for them. but most days, i only have a few minutes between call lights and emergencies.  for 20 years, i worked the morning shifts in fresno postacute care where i cared for 10 patients or more. that same facility had cnas working overnight shifts with 20 patients. i left this facility discriminated and under defamation.  many patients in fresno postacute care are very aggressive. i had one resident who was a big man over six feet tall, heavy set and very strong.  he would hurt himself and he would also hurt me. he hurt my shoulder and he would throw things at me. this resident didn't allow anyone to bath him. every time it came time to give him a bath, it required three people. in 2011, i was out of work for three months because this patient threw a pitcher of water at me. i slipped, fell, and hurt my hip.  this fall damaged my lower spinal cord and caused severe pain and inflammation. the doctor said, i couldn't work for eight months.  i had to work, and so i transferred to the overnight shift to avoid inflammation around my spinal disks. but regardless of my injury, i still had to care for 20 patients.  i now have a new job in sunnyside convalescent hospital. i started working the overnight shift caring for 17 patients. now i'm back to working the morning shift, where i have nine patients under my watch. in sunnyside, i can give my patients more time and attention, without having to worry about injuring my spine. i'm here today because the current staffing standards at our facilities do not allow us to provide the quality of care our residents deserve. because we are usually stretched so thin. california must take action to increase the staffing standards so that patients can receive the care that they need and deserve. and so, that providers like me can do our jobs safely.  caregivers count. our work matters. please support our proposal. thank you so much.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 681, 'end': 692, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 906, 'end': 917, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Snyder: thank you. jennifer samantha snyder on behalf of the california association of health facilities. we do appreciate the opportunity to be part of the discussion today and give you our point of view on this important proposal. the california association of health facilities represents over 800 skilled nursing facilities in california and over 500 developmentally disabled. facilities for them, habilitative in nursing, intermediate care facilities for the developmentally disabled. the associates and members are ranked in the nation high in both quality and staffing since the inception of the medi-cal rates in a system back in 2004. which was developed in collaboration with sciu. our facilities have improved significantly with respect to compliance with regulatory standards, increased staffing, and employee wages. while we appreciate sciu's intent and we definitely very much appreciate the work of our certified nursing assistants in our buildings. and we respectfully disagree with the approach and encourage the committee to consider three key factors today in evaluating the proposal before you. first, we're concerned about the strict staffing minimums that scius is proposed today, especially with respect two looking at certified nursing assistant ratios over licensed nurses. we believe in many buildings they actually like to look at more lvn and rns, and the way that this proposal is structured. it would actually favor more cnas over more rns and lvns. second, the staffing resources required in the proposal, the 10,000 new cnas that would be required, we don't believe are available and need to be generated in our workforce. and three are states medical program is at risk of losing billions of dollars are watching very closely at the federal level. in any addition medical mandates and this one in particular is hundred of millions of dollars over all ears we think, i would be insupportable at this point in time. so to provide a little bit more background on staffing in skilled nursing facilities. the proposal before the subcommittee today would mandate specific staffing ratios for cnas that would be favored over rns and lvns. this one size fits all approach asserts that all patients benefit from more care from cnas rather than rns or lvns. it is also important to point out to the committee that there is no federally endorsed report or study that has been either approved or endorsed by congress or cms. i know the proponents talk about a federal report that was done back in 2001 that was never actually adopted by congress or cms. and cms most recently actually came out in november with a specific statement against any established minimums in nursing homes, or any established ratios and specifically talk about the fact that 4.1 nursing hours in particular, is not always the right standard for every facility. that some facilities are medicaid facilities, some do short term medicare, and they state specifically that they want their facilities to make thoughtful, informed staffing plans and decisions that are focused on meeting resident needs, including maintaining or improving resident function and quality of life. rather than specifically creating one size fits all approach. so we believe the state would be doing a disservice to patients to actually come up with a plan that is so strict in nature and puts holds on facilities that don't have the flexibility to look at staffing up in both rn, or lbn, or other areas, and actually being able to staff based on patient acuity. so our second most, as i mentioned, our second most important issue that we would talk about today is the fact that we have about 1,100 individuals who are turning 65 every day. our baby boomers are going to put an enormous strain on our nursing facilities. the california health care association estimates that the need for nursing home beds will exceed supply by 2020. and as per the planning development estimates that we already need 23,000 new cnas to meet the need of our baby boomers coming forward. so with this proposal before you today that would be an additional 10,000 cnas on top of the 23,000 that we would need by 2022. so our nursing homes are already at crisis point with retaining and recruiting certified nursing assistances, lvns and rns. i cannot talk to any facility at any conference that's not looking for cna and rn or a lvn. in some cases it's an rn, in other cases it's a number of cnas. in many other cases they're not able to actually admit patients because they are unable to supply the staff to meet the patient need. with the increase of the minimum wage to $15 in a few years, certified nursing assistants are paid fairly close to minimum wage, usually $1 or 2 above. with that increase in the state minimum wage that will put any more pressure on facilities to recruit and retain. and nursing assistant obviously is a very dedicated, and well-meaning, and very hard working individual. those are very hard to find. and if they had the ability to go work in a retail or restaurant environment for the same amount of money, it does become competitive, much more competitive for us to find cnas. so third, and also just as important, is we think that the recent action at the federal level will have a dramatic, if not devastating, impact on our facilities, and especially on medicaid funding in california as a whole. our facilities are two thirds medi-cal funded, if not 100% medi-cal funded, they rely very heavily on state dollars for their funding. and also they pay a provider tax which generates about $500 million in revenue to the state which is currently matched by federal dollars directly. so the state generates about $1 billion from the tax that our providers provide. we don't know what the future is of those provider taxes, whether or not we're going to have direct medical match, federal matches for those dollars. and so, we're obviously, as i know the state is and the committee is very concerned about our medical dollars and how we spend them. so if the committee is looking at spending, lets say, $150 million general funds, it would probably be over $300 total funds. which actually will probably end up being what our load will be because we no longer have a federal match, say if we had medicaid block grants, it'll be what we decide to invest. so if it's $300 million in new funds for nursing homes, we would really encourage the committee and the department of healthcare services to look at a medical minimum wage. that would pay our dedicated certified nursing assistants higher than the current minimum wage. let's say one or $2, if not three, or four, that mandates that they receive a certain wage. this would obviously help us to attract more cnas to our building, which would generate incentives for facilities to staff completely, have the number of cnas and also be able to retain those folks. so we think also with this infusion of new nursing staff it will be then possible for facilities to consider increased staffing in their buildings, but not until the time that we have the ability to get our workforce up and going. and our ability to actually provide patient care to those folks. so again, i appreciate the ability to add our thoughts today. and really do look forward to working with the committee. we believe this is a large issue that can't be solved overnight. we also think that there needs to be a fair amount evaluation about how services should be provided and what is the best way to provide that quality care. and we really very much want to work with the committee going forward. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Kedron: jennifer jennifer kedron for the department of health care services. i'm obviously not mary caldwell. she is at ill today, so if i flow the detail, i will take full credit for what she would have had much better testimony. i don't think that we have a lot to say in particular in regards to this proposal. the agenda and the write up does a really good job of noting some of the fiscal that we had worked on in cooperation with the department of finance. the numbers and the costs grow in the out years. our assessment of the the facilities that we work with today in terms of medical free standing facility is about 1,000 and the medical program and then from a federal perspective we would know that if this add on. and right now the current most of the facilities are over, the mandatory 3.2, our mandate if there's a mandatory add-on that is paid in the excess of their cost there may be some federal adherent limit problems. and so, that may be somethings that we would like the comity to be aware off as they consider this proposal but other then that we don't have a position
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 87, 'end': 100, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jacob Lam: Jacob Lam, Department of Finance. Just like to note that the fiscal analysis noted in the agenda is from our analysis of AB 2079, and we're happy to work on an analysis based off this proposal specifically.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Judith Larson: I'm Judith Larson, representing Jericho a voice for justice. And we're strongly in support of SEIU's position.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 94, 'end': 98, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Amber King: Amber King with the Association of California Health Care Districts. We do have some strong concerns about this proposal. We're concerned about the implications on the work force and also the cost to some of our free standing skilled nursing facilities.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erminia Ayala: hi, my name is erminia jennifer ayala, cna not-shift catherine health care in solinas california. i support the increase in minimum staffing standards and school nursing facilities. i've worked 9 months pregnant with somebody going and sick by myself on the floor with 32 patients. so i support and please support also.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Charlie Toddman: Hello, may name is Charlie Toddman. I'm licensed by the State of California. I'm an LVN. I've worked as an LVN for 14 years. There was a statement made that supporting this bill will help more for LVNs and RNs to be on the floor. These CNAs are the backbone of the facility and they do more of the direct care and they need more CNAs on the floor and they need LPNs on the floor. LPNs only pass meds and they do treatments, however the everyday care, taking a bath, brushing their teeth, combing their hair, getting them dressed, feeding them. It's not more important than them getting, but that is the function for them to live every day. Yes, they need pills, but they also need a bath their hair combed. They need to be loved and respected and not have to wait to go to the bathroom. because I can bring a pill at any time, but if they have to go to the bathroom right now, and the CNA is busy with another patient then their dignity, it's on the line because they may go to the restroom among themselves, waiting for a CNA because they don't have enough staffing. So what I would suggest that you do, please support this bill. The CNAs are needed more on the floor than the RVNs. Thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Urshi Taylor: hello, my name is urshi erminia taylor. and i support the staffing bill, as well. i felt like i worked in a facilities has a capacity of 120 people and they divided that between 3 people on the floor. on the night shift they have a unit in the back, they had one person back there and one person on each side for the whole entire floor with no head staff out there at all. and to be on the floor with just one person, if a light come on then another light come on, you have to pick and choose how you can get to this person and get to that person and it's only because it's not enough staffing. so somebody convinced them to the light on because they on the floor, but you're over here giving somebody a bath or making up a bed or something, so there's not enough people there. there's not enough people there. i don't care how you slice this pie. they need to come on in and put us some more help out there, to have people out there on the floor to help them people. to help these people and keep their dignity and we need to do this immediately.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sam Fuller: Hi, my name is Sam Fuller. I'm from the Oakland, California, and I work there. My facility is one of the better ones, we actually have adequate staffing of seven or eight patients per shift in the AM shift and more on the evening and PM shifts. You're supposed to check in with the resident every two hours to make sure you provide them continence care as needed. We have to get up 700 people each shift that takes about 20 to 40 minutes per depending on needs. We have 2 meals each meal takes about an hour, we might have 2 or 3 feeders per person so you might have to, sometimes it takes like 25 to 30 minutes to feed somebody. And then, we have two showers a day assigned for the morning shift so that's like 20 or 30 minutes. A shower. And I mean, I have an eight hour shift and a lunch break. And do the math on that, something's gotta give. Please raise the PPD to 4.1.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brenda Clen: Thank you. Good afternoon. My name is Brenda Clen, I am from Fresno, California, and I've been a nurse for over 40 years. My husband got sick in 2009, and I worked in many nursing homes. And I decided not to let my husband go to the nursing home. I kept him home because I knew that the nurses are overworked and it's understaffed. So I kept him home until the day he passed, and I hope and pray you guys support the bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kelly Everhard: Hi, my name is Kelly Everhard, I'm from Fresno, California and I'm a home care worker. My husband was in the hospital, nursing home, for a couple of weeks for him to recover. And I had to help more because there was not enough CDNs to do what needed to be done. So I hope you support this bill, please.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bruce Palmer: Chairman and members, Bruce Palmer on behalf of Sacramento Democratic Party, in support of this budget item by SEIU.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 111, 'end': 115, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kenny Dennis: hello. my name is kenny urshi dennis. i'm 200% support nursing homes. thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Abdulla Wad: hello my name is abdulla kenny wad, i'm a home care provider for my two sons. i support my brother and sisters, i see them more often, i go to the facilities sometimes because we do have some paper to sign. i go home depressed, i saw the whole thing first-hand. and when they lock the agency, we're going to get old. there's a lot of story coming even from jackson, 50 mile from here. some patient doesn't get their teeth brushed within at least after six, seven days. imagine me and you, for six, seven days we didn't get hygiene, the right hygiene and our toothbrush. so this is disaster and i urge you please to support this bill and i urge you please do. if you have a chance one day, visit any facility in any given day and you will see how the staff and the patient going through. thank you very much.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Olga Villa: my name is olga abdulla villa and i'm a home care provider. and i'm on staff with my brothers and sisters that are in the nursing homes. i have been there helping relatives who have been in nursing homes. i have been there when my friend's mother was there and i begged her please don't leave her alone because she's not going to make it if you leave her by herself. they are so understaffed, they have these beautiful banners outside. it said it was latest care. they were approved by the state and whatever, these big banners. and i tell her you know i'm so ashamed that people would let them have those banners there. i went to visit the facility and i not only her mother, but everybody else when you walk through the halls i could see they were in so much need. they weren't being attended, not the fault of the worker, but because there was so little bit of workers. so i support this bill, and i apologize for my voice breaking, but this is our family. this is yours soon if it's not hit. give thanks to god that it hasn't hit your family, but i ask you to make the right decision now. keep the bright foundation. do what's right in a time where politics is so dirty and nasty. we gotta start doing the right thing, not for the money, it's for us, for the people. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Snyder: Jennifer Snyder. If I can just do one more comment. Those quality assurance supplemental payments are based on a whole array of quality standards that facilities must meet. And these are high standards and the California Association of Health Facilities does a ton of communication with facilities, and facilities are attempting to obtain quality incentive payments. 43 million was allocated, and this last year 90 million in those quality payments, supplemental payments were allocated to facilities that met that series of standards. We think more should, again that's an obsolete pocket of money, but that doesn't mean if the facilities not meeting staffing standards it's just, they are incentivize to provide exceptional quality and that is over a number of standards then they receive these supplemental payments. Again, as part of AB 1629, it was to further incentivize facilities to meet certain standards and those are determined every other year, every year by the MediCal program and the Department of Public Health
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Kent: Great, so again, Jennifer Kent, Department of Healthcare Services. There was a bill that was signed by the Governor back in 2014, SB-1004, by Senator Hernandez to require the Department of Health Care Services to work with our managed care plans and the rest of our department, to implement, and oversee more palliative care services for beneficiaries. And I would like to say that it's been a really both rewarding and important activity that we've had. And a discussion that we've had with a lot of different stakeholders including both our managed care plans and the organizations that are really dedicated to improving care at the end of life. And obviously it's not just about hospice, but it's about working with individuals that have either complex or multiple conditions that are very difficult to manage. And so the provisions of this bill were really incentivizing us as a department to help plan Institute practices and implement programs that more rather than create new services, but knit together services in a more appropriate way, and how do you have conversations with both the patient itself and the family to better provide those services. We are seeking a slight delay via trailer bill because because of the provisions of the bill were to be effective July 1 of 2017. We are struggling mightily to implement the Federal Managed Care reg among other higher priorities not to say this isn't a priority, but there are some other more immediate priorities that have fiscal implications on a federal level. And so we're seeking a one year delay in implementation and we're happy to answer any other questions. I think that the questions in the agenda. I can only say there was a question around what percentage of beneficiaries are covered by managed care plans that have implemented the policy already. We're not quite sure what the percentage is because it also Is not just to the plans that are working on a proactive basis. Some plans have gone ahead and have been real leaders in their field in terms of implementing services and have been really committed. But we don't necessarily have a percentage for how many people are in those plans versus the overall population that would be available. And so I think that we're still committed to implementing the bill and to providing the kind of layer of oversight and coordination. But we're seeking a one year delay and so happy to answer questions.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 150, 'end': 159, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Judy Thomas: mr. chairman, members of the committee, i'm judy olga thomas with coalition for compassionate care of california. and we urge that you reject the proposed delay of sb 1004. we see this penny-wise and pound foolish and in this day when you're looking at how you can improve healthcare and you have limited dollars we think this is a cost effective way to keep this by keeping this on track. sb 1004 was passed as a cost neutral bill in 2014. i want to acknowledge all the work the department has done to get us to this point, where it is pretty much poised for implementation. all it requires is that medical managed care plans provide access to palliative care. and palliative care as ms kent has said, is health care that is patient and family focused addressing the whole person and improving quality of life when they're facing serious illness. since the passage the department has held five stakeholder meetings, released white paper guidance which has to my knowledge received pretty much universal support with it, and released a draft all plan letter which called for to it to go into effect april first. partnership healthplan did a six month pilot and that pilot showed that increased patient satisfaction lowered overall cost of care compared to matched cohorts and that lower costs was achieved through lower rates of hospitalization and ed use.  i don't know any patient that wants to go into the hospital or ed if they don't need to. the write up for the budget hearing today references the $50,000 dollars that california health care foundation provided. they provided that to a couple of medi-cal managed care plans so that they could put together all the elements that then have been incorporated into the departments guidance. so that was 50,000 that was invested to get us where we are today. it's not the 50,000 that needs to be replicated plan by plan because now there is a standard for all plans. this is the first time in this write-up we heard there would be millions of dollars that would be distributed for these services. previously the only expense we heard was just with staffing and perhaps some education. we believe that palliative care achieves the quadruple aim of better care, higher patient satisfaction, better quality of life and better value. and for those reasons we believe that as a small cost to help lay the foundation for the future of a better healthcare system and that we should keep this modest effort on track. as we know, we're in a little of uncertain times with future of healthcare and palliative care helps us to move into that future that we want. better value for our dollar. thank you.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 60, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 688, 'end': 692, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Autumn Ogden: Mr. Chair and Members, Autumn Ogden Smith with the American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network here and we support the comments by Judy Thomas. And we've seen where palliative care has been a critical aspect in saving many lives and many in the cancer arena and we strongly oppose pushing this back. We think that it will cost more lives and dollars in the long run. Thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 41, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 133, 'end': 144, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nicette Short: Nicette Short on behalf of the alliance of Catholic Healthcare in Providence, St. Joseph's Health. As Director Kent mentioned, this bill was chaptered back in 2014 and there's been quite an extensive two year plus process already. And we just urge you to not delay the implementation any longer. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 111, 'end': 115, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Barbara Glaser: Chair and Members, Barbara Glaser with the California Hospital Association. We, too, do not want to see the implementation of this SB 1004 delayed any further. Palliative care means good patient care coordination, takes into account most appropriate healthcare resources, the patient's wishes, and it is just good patient care. Thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stuart Thompson: Mr. Chair and members, Stuart Thompson on behalf of the California Medical Association. We'd like to associate ourselves with the comments made by Ms. Thomas and for the record state that we are also opposed to the delay in the program implementation. Thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 151, 'end': 157, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sergio Aguilar: chair and members, sergio judy aguilar with department of finance. the department of finance is opposed to the committee staff recommendation to deny this proposal.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Nguy: nguy with western center on law and poverty. we appreciate the staff's recommendation as we do oppose this trailer billing. which firstly, considering what's going on federally and disenrollment of undocumented children and adults in the program that are disenrolling in medical, we would raise concerns there although we do appreciate the departments efforts in implementing sb 75. in addition, considering the premiums that are paid for children, up to 160 to 200% of the federal poverty line, they are expected to pay premiums in medi-cal, and so if they're not able to pay those premiums, this provides an additional safety net for those children. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Janice Canalen: Good afternoon, Chair and members. Janice Canalen with Children's Defense Fund on behalf of my colleagues with the Children's Health Coverage Coalition including the Children's Partnership, the California Coverage and Health Initiatives, United Ways of California, and Children Now. And we agree with the staff's recommendation. This isn't really a great time to be eliminating a program for children when federal funds are uncertain, and also we applaud the department's efforts with SV75 but we know that there's still an estimated 80,000 children who are eligible for MediCal but haven't enrolled. And particularly with this climate of deportation, we're concerned anecdotally that families are not enrolling in SB 75 out of fear. So we'd like to have this safety net restored actually from the elimination in 2016 to provide an additional safety net for vulnerable children. Thank you.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kelly Hardy: Good afternoon, Kelly Hardy with Children Now, supporting the staff recommendation. We don't want to enlarge any of the cracks in the system at this point. Thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brenda Diaz: Brenda Diaz with California Coverage and Health Initiatives just echoing what our partners just mentioned. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kelly Hardy: Kelly Hardy, Children Now, echoing Terry Cowger Hill's comments. Just want to mention that we think the delay will allow us to continue to work really well with THCS and with the family members and youth who are involved in trying to shave program. And especially, to make the transitions between child level care and adult care Smoother at some point in the near future. So we are supportive of the delay, and please to continue working with DHCS.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 35, 'end': 54, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Janis Connallon: Janis Connallon, Children's Defense Fund. I'd like to echo the comments of my colleagues and we're supportive of the department's delay. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Nguy: linda with western center on law&poverty, echoing the previous comments in support of the delay.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Gibbons: gibbons with the county health executives association of california, we represent the local health departments who play a vital role in administering the ccs program on behalf, or in conjunction with the state. and we also are supportive of the delay and we recognize needing to be very thoughtful in how we do a transition and in ensuring that both the county side and the roles that'll be transitioned over to the plan are done so in a way that are in the best care of the kids, so thank you.
[]
Danny Brown: Danny Brown from CalHR, the sponsors of the bill, and Dr. Pan did a great job of explaining the bill. So we just appreciate your support of this resolution so that these state employees can get the balance of their awards.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 58, 'end': 61, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Seth Brambell: mister chair and senators, seth jonah brambell here on behalf of the california teacher's association in strong support. this was simply going to diminish the number of bad acting employers by applying some appropriate consequences. we urge your support.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Young: Michael Young on behalf of the California Labor Federation also here in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Cass: michelle seth cass with the service employees international union, also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ron Allen: Chair and Members of the Committee, thank you for inviting us here today. I'm Ron Allen, I work for the California Correctional Supervisors Organization, otherwise called CCSO. And I'm here to ask your support for SB 293, parity for unit seven law enforcement officers. I've worked many years, worked for the Department of Corrections. In fact I've worked 29 years for the Department of Corrections, and retired. And in my term working for them I've experienced this same thing that we're asking for a correction on unit seven where these excluded employees which I was, for many of those years. And we didn't receive the same benefits and salaries as the rank in files did through negotiations. A lot of times the Cal HR, when they go through negotiations they spend most of their money for the rank and file groups and they don't hold anything back for the supervisors. With the exception after parity begin the legislation in 1993 where unit five's, unit six, and unit eight will have parity. Or in other words, the excluded employees will receive the general equivalent to those that they supervise. Currently, we represent, CCSO represents approximately 5,000 members. Many of those are law enforcement officers, supervisors, including employees that worked directly for Department of State hospitals, police services. These folks here right now they don't have parity. And you can see that there is a great compassion that's going on where the rank and file during their negotiations have closed the gap of what the rank and file received compared to the, excuse me, employee supervisors. Now we're just asking today that we close this gap and we can do this through legislation where we can hopefully stop that issue and provide a better salary for these folks. Department of State Hospitals, we talked about not being able to hire and fill certain positions. I met with some people that represent CalHR just last week. The Department of State Hospitals, plea sergeants have 40. They don't have many, they only have a 100, approximately 140 sergeants that work for the Department of state hospitals. And 40 vacancies and they can't fill those positions because the rank and file don't want to promote. There's no incentive for them because they're receiving almost the same as a supervisor. So they don't want to have to go through that. They call it harassment or stress that's involved with being a supervisor. By your aye vote today and passing this, we can close that gap and I appreciate your support.
[{'start': 78, 'end': 87, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Lovell: john michelle lovell, representing the la county professional peace officers, la police protective league, riverside chair of ... association for lapd sheriffs. this is a good sense bill. doctor pan hit the nail right on the head when he said that if you, if parity is not provided, you actually create disincentives for people to promote, and really good people start to say, well, wait a minute, why should i do that. this is a good sense bill. and we commend doctor pan for bringing this forward. and we are in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 188, 'end': 198, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 462, 'end': 472, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Christy Bouma: Mr. Chairman, Members of the Committee. Christy Bouma, on behalf of the California Professional Firefighters. And first, our apologies to the author and the Committee, our letter was late, but we do have one on file. We are opposed to the bill. I think, just for a couple of reasons, transparency is important to all of us. It's important to our members when we're at the bargaining table and understanding the impacts of benefits that are provided. But I think what is important to note is that CalPERS, well, I brought one. Here's an actual evaluation for one single employer, it's 50, 60 pages long. They do scenarios like sensitivity analysis of five years, of five different return assumptions, from as low as -3.8% up to earning about 18%, almost 19%. So I think that the fact, to assert maybe that they're not looking, or advising employers what the risks are, I think is probably not necessarily true. But the second thing is that when you force reporting based on a number that has no direct correlation to the actual investment mix of the fund. So while the 10-year Treasury note might be important in some circumstances, I'm not sure what the value is if that's not how the fund is invested when you're trying to determine whether you're going to have enough money to fund the liability. So what we do share with Senator Morrell is, and I think all the members of this Committee is to make sure we have a pension system that's adequately funded. That the systems are making decisions, and employers are making contributions that will reach that end or that goal. So that's very important to us. But I hesitate to see what the extra value except more paperwork and more things to ignore, because of what may be there irrelevancy. So we would ask you to vote no today.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1332, 'end': 1339, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ted Toppin: chairman pan and members, ted for the association of california state supervisors and the california state retirees, also opposed. i think we would share the senator's desire for transparency at calpers, but we would contend that there is no more transparent organization in this state. they issue more paper about what their return and expectations are than any other organization in the country. i guess i would align myself with the firefighters, christy with the firefighters. this rate, which i believe is about 2.5% is an artificial rate. it has no relationship to what is the discount rate at the fund. and calculating it, we can only conclude, is for a purpose to generate a huge unfunded liability number that is, frankly just false, political, and bears no relationship with what the funds returns are. we would urge a no vote.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 12, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 26, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 450, 'end': 457, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jai Sookprasert: mr. chairman and members, sookprasert with the california school employees association. i apologize to the author that we were not able to get a letter in on time. but i do want to raise our concern at this hearing that we'd also raise the same kinds of issues. the moment you look at a different discount rate, and i would note that the system themself are now in the process of reviewing those rates and have lowered them. and there are many factors that come into play, as have been pointed out. the lower you go, the more investment you have to make, and are we prepared to do that for employees for the state, and other folks? and the fact that this system is trying to take out some risk, trying to deal with the long-term. this is about whether you can predict the future. and we don't have that perfect prediction, but the systems, themselves, are trying their best, at this stage, to try to address these kinds of cross-pressure, in the long run. and we just don't think the bill is necessary at this stage. thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ben Keller: Thank you, good afternoon, my name is Ben Keller. I'm a fifth year PhD candidate in Electrical Engineering and while I've served two semesters as a teaching assistant, I'm currently a research assistant at the University of California, Berkeley. My research focuses on improving the energy efficiency of processor chips. In my lab, I've had the opportunity to design and test cutting edge silicone prototypes with millions of transistors, using some of the most advanced technology in the world. My research, like that of many other RAs, has advanced the State of the art to the benefit of both the UC and the State of California. To understand the experience of RAa, it's important to understand the nature of work in an academic research lab. In each lab, the principal investigator or PI oversees the research direction, providing guidance, suggesting next steps, and presenting the work to funding agencies. However, PIs do not write code, do not bring up test chips, or painstakingly compile data for analysis. It's us, the front line workers in the lab, the staff and post-docs and RAs, that put in the long hours required for a breakthrough. And so I feel strongly that our work matters and we should have the same rights and protections afforded to those we work alongside. One of my colleagues in the chemistry department suffered a workplace injury as a result of inadequate lab safety. The university refused him adequate compensation and just last week, news broke of another RA, who says she was sexually harassed by her PI. It's clear that RAs cannot rely on the UC to fairly resolve these issues. We need a formal grievance process, so that our rights are clear and enforceable. Collective bargaining rights for RAs have led to healthier workplaces and stronger institutions at the University of Washington and here in the CSU system. With the Columbia ruling, these rights now extend to RAs at private universities across the country, leaving UC RAs as the only ones in California without the right to form a union. Even post-docs in our own labs working alongside us and doing the exact same work enjoy rights that we do not yet share. I urge you to remedy this unfair situation by voting in favor of SB 201. Thank you for your time and attention.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1554, 'end': 1557, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1727, 'end': 1730, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1959, 'end': 1965, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Young: michael john young with the california labor federation, we strongly support this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Chan: michelle michael chan from the university of california, irvine, school of nursing. i am also with seven other grad students here. i am in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Hofstein-Grady: My name is Rebecca Hofstein-Grady, also a UCI PhD student representing the Associated Graduate Students at UCI, and strongly in support of this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jasmine Surogal-Klein: Hi, I'm Jasmine Surogal-Klein, also with UCI. I'm a robotics PhD student, strongly in support of the bill.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Cass: Michelle Cass with the Service Employees National Union, also in support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Neil Sweeny: neil michelle sweeny, vice president uaw 5810, we represent 7,000 post-doctoral scholars, strongly in support of this bill, and many of us were formerly ras, including myself.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 153, 'end': 156, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Elise Vyers: Elise Vyers, student at UC Santa Cruz, also very in support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David McQuery: hi, david neil mcquery, president of uaw 2865, we represent 16,000 graduate student employees throughout the state, strongly in support of this bill. i was also a former ra injured on the job, who was unable to get occupational health treatment for my injury. so this is very important, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lo Vetruheels: hello, my name is lo david vetruheels, i am the financial survey study for uew 4133. we represent about 10,000 student employee at california state university. we're here to support and we co-sponsor this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gerard Ram: Gerard Ram, UAW2865, current research assistant at UC Berkley, strongly in support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brendan Gunnering: Brendan Gunnering on behalf of the Associated Students of the University of California, Irvine, which represents the 27,000 undergraduate students enrolled at UCI, as well as on behalf of The University of California Student Association, which represents the quarter of a million undergraduate, graduate, and professional students in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Bermudas: Hi, Danielle Bermudas from the University of California Merced. Also a graduate student researcher at UC Merced through the Center for the Humanities and also as part of the University of California Student Association and I strongly support this.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Murphy: Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and members. Jason Murphy on behalf of the University of California. We are not opposed to the Bill today. The Committee may be aware that we have opposed this Bill in past years, but we do not have position at this time. We've been working in good faith with the Senator and her sponsors on this Bill for the last few weeks. We continue to look forward to doing so in the weeks ahead. So, I just wanted to come today and let that we are not in opposition today. We will take a fresh look at this Bill as we move forward.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ford Canutt: Good afternoon, my name's Ford Canutt. I'm a representative of the California Correctional Supervisors Organization. We represent supervisors and managers in the Department of Corrections and Department of State Hospitals. I myself has assisted employees for 14 years with grievances. And like the Senator said, I've never seen a granted grievance out of 14 years. The rank and file, which is the bargaining units, all have arbitration rights in their contracts, and they have for many, many years. And their grievances are dealt with fairly, basically because if they're not dealt with fairly, then it goes to arbitration, and it becomes an issue of an expense. We believe that arbitration would fix our grievance system, which is virtually dead right now. It absolutely doesn't work. And with the arbitration at the end, it would give the incentive to the agency heads and CalHR to look for a fair answer to avoid arbitration, so our grievance system will start working. Thank you, I urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ted Thompson: Sure, I'll just, excuse me, Senator. Mr. Chairman and members, Ted Thompson for the Association of California State Supervisors, in support, a cosponsor. I apologize to Senator Nielsen and to the Committee for not getting a letter in on time, reflecting that. With that being said, I thank the Senator for doing the bill again, I am happy to partner with CCSO on this. Grievance procedures are illusory, they're unattainable, they're unsatisfactory and unsatisfiable. And for supervisors and managers that should change, and this bill takes a small step to do that. And I urge your aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 63, 'end': 75, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 177, 'end': 184, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Lovell: John Lovell representing the Association for LA Deputy Sheriffs, LA Police Protective League, LA Professional Peace Officers, Riverside Sheriffs Association. This bill is excellent employee relations policy. It encourages a timely and honest evaluation of grievances, it's cost effective. We want to thank Senator Nielsen for bringing this bill forward again.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 314, 'end': 321, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Britney Sitzer: Britney Sitzer of the Civil Justice Association, also in support for the reason stated that we believe arbitration is a cost effective, timely manner to resolve grievances. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christy Bauma: Thank you Mr. Chairman, Members of the Committee, Christy Bauma on behalf of the California Professional Firefighters. We're grateful to the author and our joint author Senator Leyva for bringing this bill forward. As well, spoke to by our authors, I would just add the current case load PERB relative to firefighter cases is about 33, 31 who are actually pending a board decision. A couple that are in litigation. And hopefully as a preemptive manner, PERB's the right place for us to be. They're experts in labor law enforcement. They have shown a record of bringing parties to settlement rather than protracted disputes. I just think this is a matter of priority for the administration and the Legislature on how to support this agency. But in the meantime, this has been an ongoing problem, the backlogs have continued to grow not decrease. And, in order to maintain these labor peace and good labor relations, having no access to any justice just adds more friction to this conversation. So this is just an option to pursue the Superior Court for a solution which is where we were prior to the enactment of SB 739 that brought us under PERB's jurisdiction. The bill was in 2000 and effective 2001. So we urge your support.
[{'start': 50, 'end': 63, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 177, 'end': 182, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ari Freilich: good morning. my name ari jonah freilich, appearing on behalf of the law center to prevent gun violence, and americans for responsible solutions. i want to thank chairman jones-sawyer for your leadership on this bill. our state's gun safety laws are predicated on the basic consensus view that some individuals, due to their criminal, behavioral, or mental health history, pose a unique, an intolerable risk to public safety if armed with lethal weapons. accordingly, under california law, the people convicted of any of roughly 40 separate misdemeanors are prohibited from owning or acquiring guns for a period of 10 years after conviction unless they successfully petition a court to demonstrate by preponderance of the evidence that they are not a threat to public safety. this list of prohibiting offenses, however, seemingly arbitrarily, does not currently include hate crimes. the large majority of which, according to doj records, are, in fact, violent or involving the use or threatened use of force. as the chairman mentioned, this leads to sometimes absurd results. these individuals present a unique and growing threat to public safety and are not the law-abiding, responsible citizens that the supreme court has said are entitled to exercise a right to bear arms under the second amendment. this is especially true because violent extremists and hate groups so often use fire arms as tools of violence and intimidation. recent mass murders targeting our nation's lgbt, african american, and religious minority communities. at a night club in orlando, a church in charleston, a sikh temple in oak creek are among the deadliest hate crimes of committed on us soil and one of the deadliest mass shootings in american history. these are just some of the most visable examples of a larger, national trend. between 2010 and 2014, roughly 43,000 hate crimes were committed in our nation involving the use or threatened use of a gun. and since 2014, hate crimes have become both more numerous and more vicious, with rising rates of hate crime driven primarily by rising rates of violent hate. research has found that individuals who have committed hate crimes in the past tend to escalate their conduct and the level of damage or violence they inflict, making them an unique and intolerable risk to public safety with lethal weapons. these patterns underscore the need to ensure that individuals have already been dually convicted, for escalating bigotry and acts of criminal intimidation, are temporarily prevented from possessing or acquiring guns after conviction unless they successfully petition the court to demonstrate they are not a threat to public safety. six other states prohibit at least some hate crime misdemeanants from accessing firearms. it's time that california joined them to make our state safer and freer for all who call it home. thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 171, 'end': 183, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Amanda Wilcox: good morning, it's almost afternoon. amanda ari wilcox here on behalf of the 28 california chapters of the brady campaign to prevent gun violence. as i've stated many times in this committee, our core goal is to make sure that dangerous people do not have access to firearms. i think it's common sense that someone with extreme hate has no business having a firearm. we all know the horrific mass shootings that have happened that were motivated by hate, including in orlando, at the gay night club, and the church in charleston, more recently, in a bar in kansas. those are horrific events that shake our nation. of course, many of the hate crimes we never hear about person to person, but anytime an individual is threatened or injured, of course, it shakes the community and harms i believe the fabric of our nation. hate crimes in california were actually on the decline. the trend was declining. then in 2015, they jumped up again, particularly hate crimes against hispanics and against religious groups, particularly those of islamic faith. sadly, i think the political rhetoric we are hearing out of washington and from our president is fueling more hatred and anger and i worry that the trend is now going to be upwards. i think it's very important to understand how hate crime escalates and first it may be damage against property and then threat of force. often that threat involves firearms and if that escalates, the intimidation and the fear. usually the firearm is not used but then in extreme situations, the firearm is used and someone is injured and killed. our goal is to get the firearm out of the equation early on, when someone's convicted of a hate crime misdemeanor. this is very personal issue to our california brady chapters. i'm going to read this just because i want to get the details right and then i will close. our cleveland school remember stockton chapter was founded by teachers who were working at the school, in the stockton school yard when patrick purdy shot and killed five young school children and wounded 32 others. it was later reported that purdy had hatred towards asian americans. the victims were predominantly cambodian, vietnamese children who had come with families to the united states as refugees. on august 10th 1999, a neo nazi wanted to kill jews went to the north valley jewish community center in grenada hills where summer day camp was being held for several hundred children. five people were injured, including three young boys, a 16 year old camp counselor, and a receptionist. after leaving the center, the shooter murdered a filipino american postal worker who was delivering mail. our san fernando valley brady chapter was formed shortly after that shooting, and has been in continuous existence ever since. this is personal for us, sadly, this is personal for many people in our state. again, extreme hate and guns are a lethal combination, not a good mix, and we urge your aye vote on this bill.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 107, 'end': 112, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1979, 'end': 1992, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2086, 'end': 2091, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sean Hoffman: morning mr. chair, hoffman of the california district attorneys association in support. thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Usha Mutschler: good morning, mr. chair and members. mutschler on behalf of the california state sheriffs association, in support.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jerry Coleman: good morning mr. chairman and committee members. my name is jerry. i'm a 38 year assistant district attorney in san francisco. i've been the indictment grand jury's legal advisor in san francisco for the last quarter century, and i'm a law professor at university of san francisco teaching ethical grand jury practice. on behalf of the state's prosecutors, i offer you ab 1024 to allow for grand jury transcripts in these fatal force cases even when there's no indictment after judicial review. as the assembly member says, current law allows transcripts only if an indictment is returned. and let me suggest that 1024 promotes the very ideals of transparency and accountability on the prosecution in law enforcement fatal force cases taken to the grand jury that 227 sought two years ago, but 227 was found by the court of appeal here to be unconstitutional. the supreme court has not yet decided to take that case. in that posture, 1024 provides the only bill this year to support community involvement and transparent understanding of these all too frequent tragedies. whatever your view on the merits of 227, consider ab 1024 as an insurance policy this year. in this way, if the supreme court declines to review the 227 unconstitutionality decision, 1024 is the only way to achieve these goals. if the supreme court takes the case but by year's end affirms the decision, 1024 will still be a positive step. even if the court were to overturn 227's decision, 1024 won't be a wrong idea, only a mooted one. so why not support a good idea now that solves a problem you tried to solve two years ago, under two of the three likeliest choices in the supreme court. i need to add a point from the committee's analysis today, it delved very deeply into the legislative history behind 227 and it strongly criticized the handling of the ferguson grand jury. i only note that that analysis does not mention that the president obama, attorney general, eric holder justice department issued an 83 page report in march of 2015, saying that that case was not prosecutable. but the bigger irony here is that we can debate, the ferguson grand jury precisely because of its public 5,000 page transcript, which was allowed under missouri law. it's not allowed under california law unless you pass this bill. so i urge an aye vote to fix our grand jury laws to allow public transcripts after judicial review even if no indictment has been returned. and i would conclude this way. please don't wait for the 227 court result. if we have a shared hunger for transparency and accountability half a loaf is better than none at all. thank you sir.
[{'start': 60, 'end': 65, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1832, 'end': 1840, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1920, 'end': 1925, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1945, 'end': 1956, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2116, 'end': 2124, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lizzy Buchan: good morning, mr. chair and members of the committee, lizzy amanda buchan with the aclu of california. i'm unfortunately in opposition to ab 1024. transparency, government transparency is a top priority at the aclu, especially in situations where an officer has taken someone's life or used excessive force, and unfortunately we do not think that ab 1024 will actually get us there. and so we're opposing for a couple reasons, so one is that we do think it is premature, and we don't think it's appropriate to legislate on this issue at this time. the california supreme court is considering whether to grant review in pearson the case that members described. and the aclu supported sb 227 for several reasons. one is that the grand juries not only lack transparency but that they also have no judges presiding over them. they have no defense attorneys. there's no cross examination. there is no opposition. so we find grand juries very problematic, especially when making these very important decisions. the aclu of california does believe that the third district court of appeal has erred and attorney general xavier becerra has agreed and so the three california affiliates of the aclu and the attorney general's office have all urged the california supreme court to grant review in this case. so at this time we do not think that it's appropriate to move this bill forward while this case is on-going, and they will be taking that up. it is currently on the may 10th docket. so they're making some decision on that case at that time. we are also concerned with the standard that this bill would set for when to prevent disclosure of grand jury proceedings. currently, the bill states that the court can withhold the proceedings if there's a continued need for secrecy. and this is a disturbingly vague and undefined term that we are concerned could be used to provide unfettered discretion to withhold the proceedings. so with that language in place, we are really not optimistic that any information of public interest would actually be released with this bill. so for those reasons, we are opposed to ab 1024. thank you.
[{'start': 54, 'end': 73, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1112, 'end': 1126, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Carla Verga: hi, my name is verga, and i am a legal immigrant that came here in 1958, brought by my parents. and i became a citizen, i didn't have a choice. when my dad became a citizen, i became a citizen too. and i remember that we were scared to death of violating any laws that we would be deported. and i don't understand when people come here and break the law, and then receive protection by our legislature, and people running the country for us. they're supposed to be keeping us safe. we come here for safety, so do all of the immigrants that come here. everybody in here probably came as second generation, first generation, coming here because it's the greatest nation on earth. it cannot be the greatest nation on earth when people are afraid to walk down the street like poor kate stanley. that she broke no laws, she's dead. and yet the person that killed her broke laws repeatedly. so i would, respectfully request a positive vote on this so that the people, and it's not just republicans being protected, it's democrats. it's legal and illegal immigrants being protected by getting law breakers off the street. so please vote yes on this bill.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 777, 'end': 789, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Larry Verga: My name is Larry Verga, and I'm a co-founder of one of the largest Tea Party organizations in Northern California, the Sutter Buttes Tea Party. And I would like to see an aye vote on James' bill because it would show that you honor your oath and protect the people you're supposed to be protecting and serving the people of California. And that would be the best way to protect them against the criminals. Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 183, 'end': 188, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jenet Senapatin: good morning chair and committee members, my name is jenet lizzy senapatin, i am the legislative attorney with maldef, the mexican american legal defense and educational fund. and i'm here to testify in opposition to ab 298 by assembly member gallagher, which requires that local law enforcement detain individuals for federal immigration officials. those folks that have been convicted with felony convictions or have immigration holds. ab 298 is contrary to existing law that says reasonable limits on local law enforcement participation with these deeply flawed detainer programs. california's trust act, ab 4 by assembly member ammiano, was passed in 2013 and ensures that those individuals with low-level, non-violent misdemeanor offenses are not unnecessarily held for deportation. and provides local discretion to not use scarce taxpayer dollars to detain immigrants beyond their scheduled release time. the trust act was enacted to ensure that immigration hold and detainer requests triggered by the federal government's controversial secure communities, or scom program. and ensuring that we do have some parameters over this program. it is a basic tenet of our justice system that no person should be detained without a valid reason. yet immigration and custom enforcement's detainer requests violate this key principle. as the committee analysis clearly states, ice detainers do not require reasonable suspicion or probable cause, and do not require a warrant. and are not based on any of these basic tenets that we hold important in terms of when we must detain someone. california's trust act limited the circumstances under which a hold could be responded to but also cautioned that there is no requirement for a warrant and no established standard of proof, such as reasonable suspicion of probable cause, for issuing an ice detainer request. immigration detainers have erroneously been placed on the united states citizens, as well as immigrants who are not deportable. just four months after california passed the trust act, a federal judge in oregon confirmed or held that ice detainers are unconstitutional, and violate the fourth amendment's protection against searches and seizures. in miranda-olivares versus clackamas county, the court stated that detaining the woman beyond her release date was a clear violation of unreasonable searches and seizures, and ordered that damages be paid. since then, hundreds of counties across the nation have adopted measures to stop submitting their local law enforcement to honoring these requests. furthermore, mandating the continued detention under circumstances, absent a warrant, without reasonable suspicion or probable cause, violates well established constitutional principles. just as recently as two weeks ago, a court in florida also held that ice detainers are unconstitutional, and the judge in that case ordered that ice holds on county inmates violate the separation of powers between state and federal government, and the constitution of the united states. the federal government is without power to compel state authorities to house federal prisoners. as stated previously in 2014, a federal court already found eskon to be unconstitutional, and in 2014 the obama administration acknowledged it's failures, and dropped the program all together. in january of this year, however, the trump administration reversed course and issued an executive order reinstituting eskom, and we've already learned these painful lessons in california. we had several cases of folks that had been, had no criminal history or had been convicted of low level offenses, who were detained for weeks, if not months, beyond what's permissible under the constitution. california and local entities would subject themselves to continued liability, given that the case law has stated that these detainers are unconstitutional, and do violate the individuals fourth amendment rights. and just as recently as last week, la police chief's beck, already reported that given some of these policies by the trump administration, we've already seen a decline in sexual assault cases and domestic violence cases. if we are really talking about enhancing public safety for all, we really need to ensure that immigrants can feel safe coming forward to work with law enforcement, and report crimes, service witnesses. this bill does nothing to enhance the public safety for anyone. and for these reasons i respectfully ask that you oppose. thank you.
[{'start': 53, 'end': 74, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 243, 'end': 252, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 632, 'end': 639, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3984, 'end': 3988, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ronald Coleman: good morning. coleman, director of government affairs with the california immigrant policy center, also here to respectfully oppose ab 298. the tragic events of a few years ago are extremely unfortunate, and we do hope that the people that were responsible are fully prosecuted under the law. however, with all due respect, these isolated tragic events have nothing to do with immigration. in fact at the time, the sacramento bee did an editorial about this issue, specifically the kate steinle case, and urged the legislature to denounce the misguided attempts to turn these cases into immigration issues. this bill, ab 298, is one of those attempts to gut civil rights provisions in existing law, that the legislature has put in place to ensure common sense protections for california's immigrant families. as you've heard from my colleague, though immigration detainers have been found by courts to be unconstitutional, this bill attempts to continue to legitimize that unconstitutional practice by removing these common sense protections for individuals, which as the analysis indicates likely violates, both the states and us constitution thus, violating civil liberties, and increasing local law enforcement agencies exposure to civil liability. to the author, it doesn't matter that a person may have already served their time, and now be a law-abiding, fully contributing member of society, that has paid their debt to us. it's just an opportunity to use an isolated senseless tragedy committed by one individual to simply attack and scapegoat all immigrants. at a time where immigration enforcement is being ramped up in ways that threaten california's families and our state economy, this proposal goes in the wrong direction. and we should instead be fortifying our commitment due to due process, any quality under the law, which will help build vital trust between local law enforcement, communities of color, and immigrant communities, specifically, so that victims of crime and witnesses can continue to come forward which keeps all of us safe. the center for american progress commission did a study that found mass deportation would result in a reduction of 17.4% to total employment in california, eliminate 3.6 million jobs, and shrink the economy by $301.6 billion. undocumented workers alone are 10% of california's workforce, contribute of 3 billion in taxes and also $181 billion to our state gdp, which equals about the state of oklahoma, and is a bigger gdp that our neighboring state of nevada. let's maintain our values today, and reject ruling back guarding civil right protections for those who keep our economy robust. and for these reasons we respectfully ask you to vote no in ab 298, by assembling member gallagher, which seeks to attack immigrant families across the state, based on the same discriminatory, prejudicial, criminalizing rhetoric we have heard for months, peddled by donald trump within the national discourse, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 482, 'end': 494, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2737, 'end': 2746, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2914, 'end': 2926, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lizzie Beacon: Thank you. Lizzie Beacon with the ACLU of California, we're in opposition.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kalifasa Guy: Kalifasa Guy with the California Public Defender's Association, also in strong opposition.
[]
Sharon Riley: good morning mr. chair and members sharon jenet riley on behalf of the judicial counsel. we are the sponsor of this bill. the idea for this bill actually came out of some courts who received recidivism reduction grant for pretrial programs. and they found that the existing law was creating some barriers to the number of individuals that they did actually release into the pretrial programs. i would like at this time to thank the author and her staff for working with us on this bill. and i will now turn it over to our expert, shelly curran.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 530, 'end': 543, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Caliph Assagai: caliph sharon assagai on behalf of the california public defenders' association, in support.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 21, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: ignacio, on behalf of the california attorney's for criminal justice. we are supporting concept, and we've been having conversations with the author and the sponsors, a primary issue that we're trying to work out is just to ensure equal access in all counties. and also, review what types of programs will be approved by the court, we want to ensure that as many people can take advantage as these remedies in all counties and not certain counties. and so i want to thank them for the discussions and the information. we're going to continue that discussion to get to a formal support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sean Hoffman: Morning Mr. Chairmember. Sean Hoffman of the California District Attorneys Association. We are opposed to AB 789 as presently drafted. We have concerns about the scope of it. This isn't limited to low risk individuals. In fact, the whole point of the bill is to have people who've already failed to appear at least twice be able to be released without a hearing. And this would include releases for any felony. So, there would be felony assault, gang crimes, things where we believe there should be an opportunity to appear before a judge and make the case against release and to also give victims the opportunity to petition for a restraining order. We've conveyed these concerns to the author's office and her staff and the sponsor. They seem open to working with us on that so we hope to resolve those concerns. That's not to say we think these individuals shouldn't, that the courts shouldn't have the opportunity to OR these folks. We think there should be a hearing, but for a particular class of individual, I think this is something that we could probably be okay with. If we can get it tightened up just right.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sean Hoffman: Morning, Mr. Chair and members, Sean Hoffman with the California District Attorney's Association. As Mr. Acosta said, this bill would provide the authority for law enforcement to obtain search warrants for evidence of misdemeanor invasions of privacy. These are offenses like using a device to look at someone in their bedroom, bathroom, dressing room, etc. Photographing someone without their consent in a State of full or partial undress, or photographing through or under someone's clothing without their consent. Currently, Penal Code Section 1524, which governs search warrants generally allows for a warrant to search for evidence of a felony or when the property or things are in the possession of a person with the intent to use them as a means of committing a public offense. Here, however, we're talking about offenses that have already been committed where law enforcement is looking for the actual images that have already been taken. Interesting to note that 1524 also allows for a search warrant to issue where the victim of one of these offenses is a minor, but does not have a similar provision for when an adult victim is photographed without his or her consent. But this is an important bill that will allow law enforcement to effectively investigate and prosecute these types of invasions of privacy. And we respectfully ask for your support.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 105, 'end': 111, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Usha Mutschler: good morning, mr. chair and members, mutschler on behalf of the california state sheriffs association, we're in support.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Caliph Assagai: It is kind of funny isn't it? Mr. Chair and members Caliph Assagai on behalf of the California Public Defenders Association in opposition of this bill. Under current law, California restricts the use of search warrants but as judicially sanctioned orders permitting police intrusion into our most private spaces to investigations generally involving serious felonious conduct. Thus, law enforcement is permitted to violate the privacy of the family home only when the need is significant, but is not permitted to do so when the alleged violation is minor. While law enforcement may seek court permission to intrude into the family home or access private computer in instances where the police wish to recover items used in the Commission of a felony, they are currently barred from doing so when the investigation is into a misdemeanor violation of disturbing the peace. AB 539 seeks to expand the scope of the offenses that permit police intrusion into the family home by authorizing the issuance of search warrants in cases involving any misdemeanor violation of 647J. I haven't had a chance to review the amendments. I know that that changed and narrowed, but I'm sure that we are still opposed. Such an expansion is contrary to the current statutory restrictions of such warrants to investigations involving serious offenses. Although CPDA understands the need to allow the police to investigate crimes, that need must necessarily be balanced against the public's interest in maintaining its civil liberties, including keeping its private areas including the home free from government intrusion except in the most serious of cases. For those reasons, we must oppose AB 539.
[{'start': 52, 'end': 66, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sean Hoffman: Sean Hoffman with the California District Attorneys Association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: Good morning, Mr Chair and members, Ignacio Hernandez on behalf of the California Attorneys for Criminal Justice. We are opposed. A couple of things. And one the Committee analysis appropriately points out about the funding mechanism that is already available for realignment. There's a lot of money going to the counties right now to house individuals. There's also, though controversial, a lot of jail construction funds that are already being made available to local counties to help address overcrowding issues. So there are other alternatives to addressing the issue of county jail overcrowding. In addition, there are other reforms that can be utilized to reduce overcrowding at the county jail system. One is we're having huge discussions right now about pretrial detention and bail schedules and all of those folks that are really driving up the population in county jails. The other thing is when there are probation violations, those individuals are being held without bail. They can't even get out. Those numbers probably outnumber the ones that will be affected by this bill. So there are other ways to relieve the pressures on county jails. The other thing is, there were lots of discussions about this ahead of time before we got to realignment, about what to do with these sentences. So there's been so much work done on this, there are other ways to do this, we just think it goes backwards. And of course I don't want to relive the drama that many in this room, many in the audience went through when we were trying to deal with the overcrowding in the state prison and the pending lawsuits. I mean it just took a lot of effort and time to figure out what to do, so this would just go the wrong direction. For those reasons, we're opposed.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Caliph Assagai: caliph caliph assagai on behalf of the california public defenders association, also in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Caliph Assagai: caliph, on behalf of the california public defenders association, in respectful opposition to this measure. i echo the comments of my colleague from the aclu. and i'll add that we have a choice every time we send somebody to prison, and that choice is to hope that they come out better, or know that they'll come out worse. and all this bill does is increase the time that that person will be in prison, and reduce their incentive to participate in programs that would allow them to get sentence reduction credits. what this guarantees is that individuals won't be motivated to take care programs. and that ultimately they'll come back as worse individuals than when they went in. rehabilitation should be a goal of our prison system. part of the reason that we're reducing prison population is to make it more reasonable and to create more opportunities for people to actually engage in these types of programs. by forcing them to stay in there longer, just as we're freeing the resources that might allow for us to better use our facilities, it's going to create worse outcomes for the population. i think when we passed prop 47, and we've been doing sentencing reform, and trying to reduce sentences and overcrowding. and find better ways to actually improve public safety. we have found that longer sentences do not work, and further they are not a deterrent to crime. so for those reasons, we ask for your no vote on ab 537. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Virginia Corrigan: My name is Virginia Corrigan, I'm a Staff Attorney at Youth Law Center. We're proud to sponsor this bill. And I want to thank Assembly Member Gipson for his leadership on this issue. You've heard from the Assemblymember, and shortly you'll hear from my colleague here,
[{'start': 11, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 142, 'end': 148, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jocelyn Monte: Hello, good morning to you all. My name is Jocelyn Monte, I was detained in the juvenile hall two different times. And I was handcuffed both times with my hands behind my back. They put the cuffs on me really tight and I felt like I had no control over myself. I had to walk that way to the hospital, to the medical check up area and I was scared for my safety. I was worried I might fall and not be able to catch myself. I was also handcuffed with my hands behind my back on the way to the holding cell before court. They took off the handcuffs in the courtroom but then they put them back on as I was walking out. Had to walk pass down my family like that, pass down the hallway. And my family saw me like that.
[{'start': 43, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : They took off the handcuffs in the courtroom but then they put them back on as I was walking out.
[]
Ignacio Hernandez: ignacio caliph hernandez on behalf of the california attorneys for criminal justice, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Sanchez: good morning, mr. chair and members, sanchez on behalf of the chief probation officers, regrettably in opposition today. i do want to note that probation has been very successful with the youth in california over the last decade. with arrest rates and detention rates dropping significantly. but what that means is that, as good as we are doing in diversion and programming. that the kids left locally do represent very high risk, high need minors. and so, it's important really that we're letting the policies and determinations of the trained probation professionals guide the use of restraints. the stated intent in our conversations with the author's office and the sponsors has really been to eliminate the indiscriminate use of restraints. but effectively what this bill does is say no restraints can be used in any cases and only handcuffs in specified cases. so rather than looking at individualized cases of when appropriate restraints are used and how, it's effectively saying, the majority of restraints can never be used. and that is certainly problematic from probation standpoint as we're charged with the care and custody of the minors that we are working with. and so, as we're transporting not just that individual minor, but other minors that are accompanying them, during that transportation, as well as our officers. we want to ensure that we are able to use the appropriate types of restraints when needed, and when risk presents itself. and so, we will certainly continue conversations with the author and sponsor. we've had very good conversations with them but want to ensure that the bill does not effectively eliminate the use of these restraints when necessary and appropriate. so for those reasons, we oppose today.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cory Salzillo: thank you, mr. chair. cory ignacio salzillo here on behalf of the california state sheriffs association similarly situated with the chief probation officers. we are opposed to the bill. we understand that there are amendments in a mock up, or that have already been adopted. but i mean, i think we first need to start with that this is adequately covered by case law. the need to codify it is unclear if the case law is working. second, i think if there are some situations where someone other than probation may be transporting someone. the bill does not contemplate what happens if probation, if say, for example, the sheriff is transporting someone. say someone's been booked into county jail, they're going to be taken to the hall. or if they're going to court or from court, there maybe sheriff's transportation. so the bill doesn't make clear that the sheriff has input in that particular situation. so we think that, at least, needs to be addressed. i think our bigger issue though is the court security sheriffs as you know handle court security. sheriff needs to be involved in the decision on whether or not to restrain a particular individual, may not always have adequate security personnel. we've been fighting for the, funds, you know that for a long, long time to ensure adequate court security funding. and so we just fear that this potentially adds to those challenges. so, again, happy to continue working with the author and proponents, but at this time we're opposed to the bill.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Arthur Bowie: thank you. mr chairman, member of the committee, my name is bowie on behalf of the california public defenders association. and as assemblymember stone mentioned, we've been here several times on reconciling bills for juveniles. but what we tend to find out is, we go through this process, there's different things that kind of pop up that were unexpected on previous adjudications of the bills. in this particular case, kids that have their cases dismissed for various reasons are adjudicated or acquitted in a jurisdictional hearing are unable to get their records sealed because those provisions aren't provided in the current statute. so it's our request, as assemblymember stone pointed out, that we close these loopholes. so the kids that who actually come to court, or are brought to court who actually have their cases dismissed or acquitted. should have the same benefit as those who have gone through the process on adjudications. thank you for that, thank you, i ask for your aye vote in this matter.
[{'start': 60, 'end': 65, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 146, 'end': 151, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 678, 'end': 683, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lexi Howard: mr.chair and members, lexi cory howard with california advocates here on behalf of the juvenile court judges of the california judges association in strong support, aware of the detrimental effects on youth of open records, here to answer any questions.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: Thank you, Ignacio Hernandez, on behalf of the California Attorneys for Criminal Justice in support of the bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sean Hoffman: Thank you, Mr. Chair and Members. Sean Hoffman with the California District Attorney's Association. Unfortunately, here in opposition to AB 529. We have worked with the author in the past on prior bills dealing with juvenile record sealing. The specific concern we have with this bill is under circumstances prosecutors will dismiss charges against the juvenile without prejudice. Meaning that if the juvenile re-offends, we have the option to refile that petition or consider that conduct in a future petition. Because of the requirement that the records would be sealed under this bill. Creates a very significant disincentive for us to agree to any petition being dismissed as part of a negotiated disposition. We've talked with the author's staff just last week and those conversations seem to be moving in a positive direction, so I'm hopeful that we can resolve our issues, but for now we are opposed.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Greg Stuber: good morning chair and members of the committee. my name is greg. i am the legislative vice president of the state coalition of probation organizations. for the past several years, california has enacted a number of public safety and sentencing reforms together, ab 109, prop 47 and prop 57 have created higher case loads for probation offices throughout california. in addition, our case loads are composed of more dangerous and often more criminally sophisticated individuals. notwithstanding these growing challenges, probation offices throughout the state remaining committed to making realignment work. in order to reduce the state prison and county jail populations, it is essential to reduce the recidivism rates. we know the only way to do this is by investing comprehensive and robust rehabilitation programs at the state and local levels. unfortunately, the collective reforms of ab 109, prop 47 and prop 57, have taken away the authority for probation officers to fully entice some offenders from complying with the terms of their probation. some offenders believe that the current deterrents for probation violations are not significant sanctions. this is making it difficult to entice these offenders to complete rehabilitation programs. ab1408 seeks to address this problem by requiring probationers to be referred to a revocation hearing upon their third prcs violation. this approach would give probation officers to go along with the carrot of early release and reduced supervision. as a result, the state correlation and probation organizations support ab 109. we believe it brings much needed balance to the recent realignment measure. thank you.
[{'start': 60, 'end': 64, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Lovell: john lexi lovell, on behalf of the california association of code enforcement officers, california college and university police chiefs association, california narcotic officers association, la county professional peace officers association. we are all co-sponsors of this measure. gilsedio, when he was in the legislature, a truly fine public servant, once made the comment in a hearing that one of the more challenging things to do is to manage major change. this bill is in that, it is in that category. it's an intelligent way of managing the major criminal justice changes. it provides needed alterations to enhance public safety, and also, frankly, to enhance the prospects of success for those people who are being supervised. we are very proud to cosponsor this bill, and we thank mr. calderon for bringing this forward.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 282, 'end': 290, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 793, 'end': 801, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dawn Koepke: thank you, mr. chair, members. dawn john koepke on behalf of crime victims united in strong support.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matthew Siverling: good morning mr. chair, members. matthew dawn siverling on behalf of the association for los angeles deputy sheriffs, the los angeles police protective league, the riverside sheriff's association and the los angeles deputy probation officers union afscme local 685 all in support, thank you.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 45, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 46, 'end': 55, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: thank you mr. chair and members. ignacio matthew hernandez on behalf of the california attorneys for criminal justice. statewide association of criminal defense attorneys in private practice and work in public defender offices. we are also opposed, i concur with the earlier testimony, in fact just about all of the points that i was going to make. so let me just add a couple of things. this also be looked at in a historical context. before realignment we spent probably about five or six years having discussions very similar to the one that we're having today. about what to do about individuals, about technical violations and the road that we are sending so many people back into custody for minor violations, even repeated violations, technical violations. and so i was in numerous meetings over about a five, six year span, over how to address those, and intermediate sanctions were key to insuring that the right people end up prison or in custody. and everyone else is put into programs or other intermediate sanctions which will work, which will be a part of rehabilitation. it took years for us to address some of those, ultimately realignment occurred and kind of did a major shift with it. but for years, and i include i think my colleague mr. lovell was involved in lots of those discussion i think he was a fan of flash incarceration if i remember correctly. what this bill is doing is taking away the discretion and we believe that discretion is critical because it has to be a case by case determination of whether or not an individual should be sent and referred for revocation. it should not be mandatory, it should not be automatic. and that was one of the key components that we've discussed and debated for years. this is really going to start to undo major change, and we do not think it's justified at this time. especially because probation can on its own discretion refer someone for a vocation now, this has taken away that discretion. so even if a probation officer does not believe revocation is justified, this would make it mandatory, and that's really a problem, and for those reasons, we're opposed.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1258, 'end': 1264, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Melanie Cuevas: melanie on behalf of cast, the coalition to abolish slavery and trafficking. cast is the first us organization to exclusively serve men, women, and child survivors of human trafficking, and our comprehensive services include shelter, legal case management, and we also a 24 hour hotline throughout california. our policy work is based on our underground experience, and today we are one of three sponsors in support of ab 900 to ensure that victims of human trafficking are eligible to receive compensation for lost income. each client that cast serves receives information about the cal vcp process and support in applying for vcp. traditionally our clients receive payments for things like medical services, mental health services, and relocation expenses. according to current statute, crime victims can also recover loss of income as a direct result of their crime. however to our knowledge no human trafficking victim has recovered loss of income. current regulations require an applicant to support their claim with a letter from the employer. requirements presume lawful record keeping, and cooperation of employers. no victim of human trafficking has the formal documentation required by current statue. at it's heart, trafficking is about the exploitation of human beings for commercial purposes. this means that lost income is frequently a victim's greatest category of economic loss and to be made whole, victims need to recover income they lost while being forced to work. ab 900 provides needed clarifying language ensuring that bcp has expressed guidance on its ability to compensate victims and ensuring that survivors are able to receive compensation for income lost that is a result of their being trafficked. lost income includes income lost during trafficking, and we cite existing california statute on how to calculate lost income, including the $70,000 lifetime cap. i cannot tell you how much ab 900 would mean to every trafficking victim, who would now know that the system recognizes their commercial exploitation. on behalf of the survivors we serve, we respectfully ask for your support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rafael Bautista: good morning, my name is bautista. i'm a survivor of human trafficking, and thank you for letting me speak with you today. i was forced to work into labor trafficking. i worked for every single day during two years that i was forced to work. he would tell me there was no day off. my work task was very consuming and i was forced to work a minimum of 18 hours a day and sometimes more. when i actually escaped two years later i have no money to my name, i escaped with nothing but my clothes. i have no papers or records that will show how much work i have done for my trafficker. he forced me to work without pay, and i know that some organization will provide some of the basic needs for survivors like housing, mental health, basic needs, but receiving of loss and wages from the board will help survivors like me to provide for their loved ones, like my son and my wife, just for the basic needs. and to become a self-sufficient individual that can be restored in a positive way into society. so, i'm in support for the ab 900.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Lovell: john ignacio lovell, association for los angeles deputy sheriffs, association of deputy district attorneys, california association of code enforcement officers, california college and university police chiefs association. california narcotic officers association, los angeles county probation officers, afscme local 685, los angeles county professional peace officers association, los angeles police protective league, and riverside sheriffs association, all in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Heather Scott: Thank you Mr. Chair and members. Heather Scott on behalf of state controller Betty Yi, a co-sponsored the bill. Strong support. Thank you Assembly Member.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 77, 'end': 85, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Delilah Clay: good morning. delilah on behalf of bet tzedek legal aid association in strong support. thank you.
[]
Sean Hoffman: Good morning, Sean Hoffman with the California District Attorney's Association, also in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dawn Koepke: Thank you, Mr. Chair and members. Dawn Koepke with McHugh, Koepke & Associates on behalf of Crime Victims United in strong support.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gregory Kramer: good morning, mr. chair and members. kramer on behalf of planned parenthood affiliates of california in strong support.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Megan Subers: Thank you, Mr. Chair and members. Megan Subers, on behalf of the California Professional Firefighters. I just wanted to make one additional point in addition to what the Chair said already. This provision is equitable for what is already provided for firefighters and public safety members who are members of other retirement systems, which is 37 Act retirement systems. So this bill would just create the equitability for CalPERS, firefighters, and other safety members and delete the sunset on the provision. So we are in strong support, proud to be sponsored, and would respectfully ask for an aye vote today. Thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Derek Lennox: Thank you, Dr. Arambula. Good morning, Chair and members, Derek Lennox, on behalf of the Fresno County Office of Education, I'll simply point out one additional thing, which was the experience down in Fresno County. When the school district that actually employed this individual, in our case, failed to pay the County Office, who owed the money to CalPERS, there were a few effects that we hope that this bill will remedy in the future. The first is that, the member, the retired member, who had retired based on many assumptions about what they're going to earn in retirement under their benefits, was not able to receive their full benefits, and we think that's the most detrimental part of the current deficiency in the law. The second is that the school systems, both at the local level and in the County Office, had to divert money from the classrooms to pay for these legal fees, and hopefully that won't be an issue in the future. And finally, it makes it more difficult for the CalPERS system to actually administer the Replacement Benefit Plan fund, and we hope that this bill will remedy that as well. Thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 23, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 58, 'end': 70, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cesar Diaz: thank you, mr. chair, members. cesar jonah diaz, we have the state building trades. i'll keep my comments brief as the assemblymember articulated the benefits of using our investment in california wisely. and safely as well, for the workers that are providing into the pension fund. the building trades participate in building investment trust and also the housing investment trust, which was mentioned by assemblymember levine. in commentary, we use our pensions to invest in various projects, housing and commercial. they create a profit margin for the developer, create great jobs for the members. create apprenticeship opportunities for young men and women coming out of our high schools, and i think it's a win win for the community. with this investment in california brings more job growth and more revenue. and will actually distribute wages around local economies of where these projects are located. so for those reasons, we urge your support.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 421, 'end': 427, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Isabel Miranda: good morning, assembly members. my name is isabel cesar miranda. i am an education assistant at sylmar elementary school in the los angeles unified school district. i have worked with the lausd for 22 years. i started working for this district after volunteering in my child classroom, and realizing how much i love being around students. my first job was supervising the students in the playground as a director. throughout the years i have also worked as a cafeteria worker, a cafeteria ticket clerk, an instructional aid, and as a coordinator assistant with the healthy family program. however, it was not until i began my work as a special education assistant that i found my true calling. for the past 15 years, i have been working with special needs children because i have a passion for it. i love seeing how children can grow and develop and how educators can have an important role in their early development. i remember, once a student in my class was having a hard time following the teacher's instructions. the teacher asked me to take him out of the classroom to see if he will cooperate. however, i knew he loved to draw so i negotiated with him. i told him if you pay attention i will let you draw and it worked. he began to trust me and pay attention. and today he's a student at california state university of northridge. i think it really does make a difference with educators to have patience and love for what they do. so children can love school from an early age. i have a student now who is autistic and has separation anxiety. part of my job is to greet the students at the door and make sure they feel secure emotionally and socially. so i work hard to comfort them and to demonstrate that the school can be fun and rewarding. before this, little girl will not answer any questions. now with my support, she is speaking and responding more. i also help the students with basic needs. half of the children i work with use diapers. so i change their diapers every day. i also help feed some of the students who have weak muscles, because it's hard for them to take the food to their mouths. they need help at first, but later, they can use the fork and the spoon by themselves. this is what i love about my work. i can see how education makes a big difference in the lives of students and their parents. some people think that the students with special needs cannot have success in class, but i know they can be successful. but as much as i love my job, there are times when i thought about leaving it. i don't earn enough because i am not paid during the summer when school is out. i have applied to work summer school, but the school district gives the summer jobs to those with more seniority. even with 15 years of service as special education assistant, i never get it. i had tried looking for other summer jobs, but nobody wants to hire you for two months. i have a friend who works for target and she says she could help me get a job there. she said it is a good and stable job. but honestly, i don't think i will love it as much as working with my students. because i choose to work with education, the summer is very hard. we live off my husband's pension and on the little money he makes by cleaning shopping centers. we struggle to pay all the bills. which include our mortgage, water, car insurance, and our vehicles. plus, we have a daughter at hastings university. and we help her some of her expenses. i also help my brother in mexico. he's sick and cannot work and has three children, age three, 5 and 7. i send him $300 a month. my husband and i we don't have money for savings. but we are one of the lucky ones. during the summer, many of my coworkers apply for food stamps or go to churches and pantries for food, clothes and shoes. they cry. they say, we cannot believe this is happening to us. we work hard. we are professionals. but we do not earn enough. assembly bill 621 will be a big help. it will help dedicated classified employees like me see the light. it will be the bridge that will help us fill the summer gap. we should not have to give up to the job we love. so that's why i urge you to vote yes on ab 621.
[{'start': 43, 'end': 63, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Rosenberger: kimberly isabel rosenberger here with service employees international union. i'm just here to answer any technical questions.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tristan Brown: Tristan Brown with the California Federation of Teachers again we will take an official position after our convention this weekend, but urging support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Young: young behalf of the california labor federation also in strong support.
[]
Yvonne Walker: hi, good morning mr. chair, appreciate your time this morning. so i'm yvonne kimberly walker, i'm president of seiu local 1000, and we're the largest union representing california state workers. and judicial council employees approach local 1,000 to represent them. and in order to do this, we have to do two things. we have to amend the dill's act, and this is what we're trying to do through assembly bill 83. and then we'll have to submit a petition to perb with the appropriate number of employee signatures. the bill and the petition are moving forward in a parallel track. ab 83 would allow employees to have a union that represents them. the bill itself does not specify that local 1000 would represent them, and it does not give them civil service status. we have met with and continue to meet with judicial council leadership including, the chief justice of the supreme court. and they are neutral on this bill, and we're working with them on possible amendments. the governor vetoed a similar bill last year, and his veto message noted some concerns, but he did not oppose the employees being represented by a union. but he did have concerns about how it would work. so we're working also with his staff to address his concerns on this bill.
[{'start': 70, 'end': 92, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Rosenberger: kimberly yvonne rosenberger with service employees international union state council, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tristan Brown: thank you mr. chair and members. brown of the california federation of teachers, we will take an official position at our convention at the end of this week. but we are recommending a support position, thank you.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Speed: Good morning chair members, Laura Speed with the Judicial Council, as indicated by Ms. Walker, we are neutral on the Bill, and continue to work with the author and sponsor on any amendments, thank you.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 87, 'end': 93, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Elaine Howell: elaine jonah howell, california state auditor. so status report that i like to present is we currently have 18 audits in progress. three of those are statutory audits that we're required to do. one is our annual financial audit, we issued a financial audit today. opinion on the financial statements and we commence the next year's audit immediately so that will show up on our audits in progress. we also are currently conducting an audit of the state bar. we're required to audit the state bar biannually, so this is the year we need to issue that report and are working to get that done by june. the jlac audits as i said, we have 15 jlac audits in progress. we have commenced all of the audits that the committee approved last year. so we do not have any audits that are awaiting staff. as far as resources that are currently available to commence any of the audits that are approved today. we have 10 teams essentially available between april and june. but i did want to clarify for the members, the majority of those audits can start in april. we have five or six teams freeing up in april. so depending on the number of audits you approve today, we will be able to commence those audits relatively soon, the month of april primarily. i did want to let you know, thus far this year, we've issued 13 reports. five of those are statutory audits, some are jlac audits that were approved, four jlac audits. one investigative report, we do have an investigative function, where we're responsible for administering the california whistleblower protection act. we try to issue at least two reports a year summarizing our investigative work. we did issue one of those earlier this year, and intend to issue another one later in the summer. and then we also issue some special reports that we hope you find helpful. a report of legislative recommendations that we've made in audits. and certainly some of the subcommittee reports, where we give a status on any of the recommendations we've made in previous reports. what action particular agencies have taken or in some cases not taken, to implement those recommendations. so we've already produced a fair amount of work in the first few months of this year. but again as i said, it's my understanding one audit was pulled from the agenda, so there are six to be considered today. and we do have the resources to start those audits as early as april of next week. with that members, if you have any questions, i'd be happy to answer any questions about any of the audits we currently have under way as far as timing, etc. i certainly can't talk about substance because they are confidential. but if there are any questions, i'd be happy to answer those.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shannon Bushey: My name is Shannon Bushey, on the Santa Clara County Registrar of Voters. I came here just to provide you a little bit of information. Our goal in Santa Clara County is to provide the best election experience for our voters. And we do try to strive for accurate in election, efficient elections, and yes errors do happen in the election process. Part of that, one thing I would like to say is the law is structured to allow limited time from when candidates statements measure information come in to then process and prepare the sample ballot pamphlets and the ballots. There's a lot of information to process. We have a high number of languages in addition to English. We translate all of our voting materials into four additional languages and we also translate facsimile ballots for the polling places in another additional four languages. So we do have very complex elections in Santa Clara County we have a large number of jurisdictions, over about 80 jurisdictions that we handle elections for. And a large amount of contests that we had over 100 contests on the one last November Ballot. But with all that said yes we have made mistakes throughout time, different unique situations whether it's programming or proof reading or missing a document, sending it to ballot layout. So we do agree with that we're very transparent. We have been very transparent for that. We do have a standard protocol in place depending on the size of the issue. Is it a few voters that are effected? Is it a district wide raise? We do such things as press releases, we send direct mailings to the voters in special marked, red lettered envelopes so that they stand out. We do media interviews, we put information at the polling places, on our website. We do everything we can to be very transparent about what just happened so I'm very confident in our response and outreach and more than willing to share all of that. And as far as the vendors and internally whether it is a vendor areas we try to do more oversight with the vendor. We've actually fired a printing vendor after the 2010 election, with smudging as being an error, and internally we've tried to develop some checklists and tools. Second set of proofing, maybe it's a different divisions that proofs the documents instead of the main division accepting, The documents. So We take those very seriously when they happen. So I just wanted to let you know that. And we're very transparent and very willing to work with an Auditor if you so order the audit. And thank you for hearing me.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Patrick Kennedy: thank you, member mccarty. i appreciate your leadership on this, and mr chair, congratulations, first of all, and members of the committee. my name's patrick elaine kennedy, i represent sacramento country supervisorial district two. if you have a secondary residence south of downtown, you're probably, i'm your secondary supervisor. here today to speak to the request and support it on behalf of the county. this is not a question of whether or not conceal weapons permits should be allowed, should not be allowed. it's simply from our perspective, a question of whether or not the fees are adequate to cover the costs of the permitting. as the assembly member said, we currently take about a quarter $1 million hit to our general fund every year to cover these costs. and so, i'm sure that an audit report would find that that is pretty much the same in other counties. and also whether or not those vetting procedures that are in place, are adequate to protect the public, within all 58 counties of california. so, with that i strongly request an aye to the audit request.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 25, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 150, 'end': 172, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Greg Rilersdam: Yes, sir? Good morning Mr. Chairman, perhaps, the board. My name is Greg Rilersdamn. I'm a Lieutenant and I am here on behalf of the San Diego County Sheriff's Department and Sheriff Bill Gore. We don't have a statement but we're here at the request of the Committee and willing to answer questions if you have them.
[{'start': 68, 'end': 83, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 183, 'end': 192, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Craig DeLuz: mr. chairman, members of the committee. thank you, mr chairman, members of the committee, craig patrick deluz with the firearms policy coalition. we have a number of issues with this request. as you note it has been brought up, first of all, that this is a fiscal issue. you notice that no one from the sheriff's association is here, making this request. no one from the police chiefs is here, making this request. no one from csac, which represents counties is here, making this request. no one from the cities is here, making this request. this seems to be only an issue in one county, with a couple of local electeds basically arguing back and forth. one being the sheriff, one wanting to tell the sheriff how to do their job. i think the media reports play that out. our other concern is we would very much like to see, make sure that sheriffs are in fact, implementing the process according to law. and it's relatively easy to do. in fact, civil rights organizations like the calguns foundation, the farms policy coalition, have been working for years, spending many hours analyzing and collecting public records act request information from those in order to put together information on every single country policy. and we would encourage the auditor to take a look at that information. we'd be more than willing to provide that information so they can see what every county is doing, but this right here, this request. just looking at the request, this is basically a local issue with one individual member of the legislature and a couple of county supervisors who for some reason decided not to run for sheriff, but want to tell the sheriff how to do their job. we don't believe that's an appropriate use of state funds, thank you.
[{'start': 90, 'end': 109, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Loraine Richards: Good morning, Mr. Chair and Committee Members. I'm Loraine Richards, I'm President of Montebello Teachers Association. I also would like to add that I'm a teacher for Montebello Highschool, and I am also a graduate of Montebello Highschool. I am a constituent. I'm also a parent of two that attend Montebello Unified School District in grades, fifth grade and also tenth grade. I'm also married to Mr Richards, who's a teacher at Montebello High School, and he recently received a riff after being a teacher in Montebello Unified for 14 years. I'm requesting that we look at these items more than just the President of Montebello Teacher's Association, but it's also hitting in many personal matters in my own life. Regarding an investment to Montebello Unified School District. I wanted to recap and kind of go back to the 90s, when Montebello Unified was stricken with very difficult financial times. And as a result, the Revenue and Expense Committee had come about and the members of that Committee are Montebello Teachers Association, CACA and also adminstration. Which would provide greater transparency for the employees and also the public. I've been actually part of the Committee for 14 years, and I've been able to see over the years how effective it has become, and how well it could be used. But as time has moved on, we've noticed that there has been some difficulty acquiring documents. Previously we didn't have to put in for public records request. And the Committee was pretty transparent, we would make a request at the meeting and then the following month we would have our documents to answer our questions. So the Committee has definitely a greater being of just a formality. It is a forum typically, for financials situations. Mostly, MUSD has greatly, I cannot express how much, it has created greatly benefitted from the LCFF formula. And since the inception, the district, it's claiming otherwise with a loss of funds. So there seems to be an inadequate process and controls over expenditures and also other financial activities. So not only is there a concern in the financial areas from the Montebello Teachers Association, we also see a lack of adequate resources and policies to deal with personnel issues and hiring within the district. Lastly, there's a great concern with recently voted upon bond GS from the community. MTA wants to ensure that bond expenditures are consistent with rules, laws and practices. So lastly, Montebello Teacher Association needs the support of the state during this time of financial need and truly involves the future of our students. Thank you.
[{'start': 51, 'end': 67, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 401, 'end': 409, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dolores Duran-Flores: Good morning, Mr. Chairman and members. I'm Dolores Duran-Flores with the California School Employees Association. CSEA represents the classified school employees in Montebello. This is the support staff that work in our schools and provide essential services there. There are also the staff, who are facing nearly 100 layoffs as a result of the Montebello financial problems. We are deeply concerned about the financial issues in Montebello, including the way that they are handling their layoffs. In December we were told that we would face 11 layoffs. Over the ensuing couple of months we were told now it's 77, and as of the last board meeting it rose to 89. We really don't understand how we got here. Because Montebello continues to receive money year after year, more than what they had received even in a declining enrollment situation. And I think part of that is the LCFF that was mentioned. We understand, from looking through the financials, at the field level that in 2014, 15, that between 2014, 15 to 2015, 16, they received over $40 million more. We also understand we've had field staff look at the unaudited reserves. And we see that they had 30 million in unaudited reserves which is 20 million more than what is required by the state. The other issue is in November Montebello received a triple A rating from a bond agency. The credit rating agency said, and I quote, based on the district's current spending profile and recent funding increases, Fitch expects district expenditures to be in line with revenue. Carrying costs for debt services and retiree benefits are affordable. Montebello CBO then followed with a statement the following month in December, which is just a few months ago, that said this is a testament to the strong fiscal management of the district. We will continue to make smart, fiscal decisions that allow our schools to thrive. LA County Office of Ed then reported that Montebello had a shortfall of about $30 billion over two years. Montebello then hired an Auditor, spent over $70,000 for that Auditor. And then the Auditor got laid off, or fired, or their contract wasn't pursued anymore and we weren't able to see what any of that other findings were. There is also as you have seen in many of the media reports and articles that Montobello faces serious questions about their hiring practices of their top administrators. And whether their contracting process had been adhered to with regard to the conflict of interest laws. CSEA's local chapter 505 has just lost trust with the school district. And they actually recently passed a vote of no confidence on the district's CBO. It is time, in our belief, that we need a state audit. So that we can make sure that we have the information that we can trust. We say, on behalf of the students, on behalf of the community, and the workers, they don't deserve any less. We ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 64, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1980, 'end': 1990, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Joanna Flores: Good morning, Honorable Assemblymember, Muratsuchi and distinguished members of the joint Legislative Audit Committee. My name is Joanna Flores and I sit on the Montebello Unified School District board. On behalf of our district, our parents students, employees, and stakeholders. And our interim Superintendent Dr. Anthony Martinez, we like to thank you for the opportunity to provide this testimony. As you may be aware, MUSD, like other 40 other school districts across California, are currently facing substantial budget challenges. And potential reduction in force, as we prepare for the next school year. Like other school districts in California, our budget challenges are rooted in a significant drop of student enrollment, salary and benefit increases, pension obligations, and less financial support of public education and the governor's proposed budget. Coupled with years of overspending by previous district board members and past administration officials, the current MUSD board has inherited a sizable challenge as we grapple this year with a reduction in force of teachers and district employees to keep the district solvent. For the record, MUSD has not faced any reduction force since the early 1990s. The district teachers, support staff, administration personnel, have enjoyed a steady raises year after year, unlike many other neighboring school districts to actually remain solvent. Today there are numerous public questions and unsubstantial accusations about MUSD budgets, protocol, and practices. As a board member, we are very conflicted by the possibility of teacher and district employee layoffs. It is not our position as a board that we must contend with the responsible elected representatives. First and foremost, this board believes our teachers, support staff, and administrators are very talented and dedicated. And we appreciate the work that they do everyday on behalf of our students. However, we are charged as the school district board to create policy, and insure that our budget remains solvent. It is not an easy job given the current budget challenges, and as a big part of the oversight, includes ensuring the districts budgets' money is spent appropriately. There is no room for weak budget protocols and practices, inappropriate spending, and less tolerance for potential fraud abuse and misuse of district funds. The coiffeur forensic audit is something that the board supported as a majority back in December 2016. It was in December that members of the board also began some preliminary discussions with, one of our Assemblymembers, Christina Garcia, to discuss a potential partnership in the State Audit. Later discussions among the board, colleagues, indicated a consensus on inviting the state to partner with the district as we proceed with this audit. So on behalf of the board, Montebello Unified School District, I thank you for allowing us to present this testimony. And I also want to highlight that as we've been waiting for this process, we have LICO who has assigned us a fiscal expert who is currently working steadily everyday with our staff and also PICMAT who also has come in to more proactively look at our current state budget crisis. Thank you.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 50, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 130, 'end': 143, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 316, 'end': 332, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2584, 'end': 2600, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3008, 'end': 3012, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3116, 'end': 3122, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Egan: mr. chair, members of the committee, good morning. i'm michael, on behalf of the california teacher's association. we're in strong support of the audit. thank you.
[{'start': 55, 'end': 62, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ryan Rice: Good morning. Ryan Rice, Montebello Teacher's Association, a member of the Revenue and Expense Committee, an English facilitator, been nearly 10 years on Revenue and Expense. I think one of my big issues, and I'm not hearing it here, is the change in accounting for the LCAP funding because of the goals, and its tie into the old- it's hard for me to get a grip, and I'm a former accountant with Pete Marwick. I don't see how anybody's managing their fiscal policy because they're using one set of numbers, trying to compare it to another. I'm not sure if the Legislature thought about that when they're counting. I think that's probably, that may find why people are actually in trouble across this state because they're not really being able to make judgements, administrative judgements based on the bad financial data that they might be using, because they are not necessarily meshing. That's my experience, and I, like I say, business degree etc., etc., everything you want to know. So thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 396, 'end': 408, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Steven Navarro: good morning chair. good morning committee members. my name is steven craig navarro. i'm currently a fifth grade teacher at montebello unified school district. last year i served as bargaining chair for the montebello teacher's association. it was a contentious year. we went to impasse, and at impasse and during mediation neither the school services or personnel who represents the board foresaw this coming. the mediator did not foresee this coming but we are here now. i stand here before you trying to humanize some of the devastation that we're experiencing. there are teachers who've been working for 17 years or more who've received layoff notices. these people have families, they have mortgages and it's very difficult for them to do their jobs when they are being faced with the possibility of being separated from their students, from their families, and from schools that they serve. poor leadership decisions have led us here. i'm here before you requesting that you audit our district, because at this point, we don't have all the facts. our students deserve better, our teachers deserve more. please help us. let's not punish the teachers and help us bring the teachers back, please. thank you.
[{'start': 63, 'end': 83, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alma Orta: good morning, my name is alma steven orta and i'm a member of the revenue and expense committee and we would like to the state to audit the district because we believe that funds allocated have not been managed correctly. the purpose of the revenue and expense committee is to oversee the district finances. in the time when the crisis was reported, we in the committee were never made aware that the district was in financial crisis. our committee should have been notified first so that we would have been able to work with the district. having an audit would provide a thorough and complete investigation of finances and operations. thank you for your time.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Suliman Ishaq: thank you mr. chair and committee members. my name is ishaq, political coordinator for eft 1521 a. i also have the honor and the privilege to chair the cfd educational technology committee. thank you for allowing me to testify on this very important audit request. this audit will help identify best practices in improving technology upgrade processes for community college districts. i work with disabled students at a junior college and basically my job is to use technology to help out the disabled students. properly functioning and updated technology is essential for such students, because it is the only way that they can access the classrooms and be successful in college, and compete with the mainstream students by using the accommodations provided by this technology. in order to remain on the cutting edge of technology, all stakeholders, including representative unions, have a duty and the right to share in the decision making technology policies at the work site and district levels. identifying and agreeing upon best practices to emphasize user input, support input, maintain equipment over long term, will allow for our best use of resources and time. currently, there's no uniform standards that provides districts with process and policies to ensure technology equipment upgrades. this audit will help address the aforementioned issues, and significantly improve technology upgrade process for community college districts. i respectfully ask for your support for this audit. thank you.
[{'start': 54, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mario Rodriguez: Chair and members, I'm Mario Rodriguez with the California Community College Chancellor's Office. So, I would just note that you could talk about these concerns with any local government or any state agency across the nation. The accrediting commission for a junior college, is the accreditor for the 113 colleges throughout the state. They look at the exact same stuff on a seven year basis. They look that you have a plan, that you have policies in place that are going to allow you to, when technology needs to be updated, that you are updating it. So our colleges, the accessibility concerns, buy in locally. It makes zero sense to purchase an expensive technology solution, if you don't have buy in from the right people. Not to say that any state or local government doesn't make mistakes at times. My point is that, we're already going through a review similar to this. This is important, this is something that we go through in order to to ensure that our students are getting the best service possible. So we just request is that while we're not opposed to it, and we're not incredibly supportive of it, that because it's already occurring, because our colleges are already inundated with requests from the accreditor, and this Committee in past years has also taken a look at how aggressive our accreditor is already, that they work with us and our colleges, to minimize the burden that this potentially audit could cause on just three districts. So that's what we would request, and we're happy to work with you guys on anything. I would just note that our office has done a lot of work in recent years to promote best practices, and to elevate them to do regional trainings. And so, whether that's done through this audit, or whether that's work that we do in coordination with Senator Pan's office, or with the faculty union, we're happy to have those conversations as well, so thank you for your time.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1798, 'end': 1801, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jason Schmelzer: Thank you Mr. Chair and members. Jason Schmelzer here on behalf of the California Coalition on Worker's Compensation, also I have been asked to speak on behalf of the California Chamber of Commerce. Both in strong support of the audit, and I want to thank Chairman Daly for all the hard work he's done on this issue. But also, I want to give a nod to the administration, the DIR and DWC, who've been spending a lot of time and effort on the actual mechanics of fraud, how to detect and prosecute fraud and help mitigate the effects that Mitch was just mentioning. A lot of good work is being done. One distinguishing factor I think that's important to understand, all of that work is, that work that's in the weeds that's getting it done aspect. The audit that Mr. Daly is advancing and that we're supporting focuses on the process. It focuses on allocation of resources and other more 100,000 foot issues. It's designed to make those efforts even stronger and even better. So with those brief comments, we strongly support the audit. Thank you.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 265, 'end': 269, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 537, 'end': 542, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 765, 'end': 769, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Christine Baker: Thank you. Christine Baker, Director of the Department of Industrial Relations. Thank you for the opportunity to-
[{'start': 11, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christine Baker: thank you. christine, thank you for the opportunity. we want to commend assemblymember daly for taking on the issue of fraud. it is horrific, and again it does both tap the worker and the employer very deeply so we commend him. now with more data as lien filings and transparency of medical decisions resulting from sb 863, sb 1160 and 1244, we have many tools needed to prevent, identify and prosecute fraud. we responded to questions posed by assembly member daly, and in may of last year, labor secretary lanier asked the dir to establish working groups, which we did, with key stakeholders, labor, employers, providers, insurers, tpas, enforcement groups to review the research to date, and also provide an analysis of the problem with strategic policy recommendations. those were considered by the governor, approved by the governor and by the legislature. in fact, when the da's advised us that the convicted providers were funding their defense with liens, we worked closely with your office, assemblymember daly, to really identify how we stay those liens. we now have 267,000 liens stayed in our offices. they are not moving forward. these are of the indicted folks. we have the convicted people, now, getting hearings to be suspended from participating in the worker's comp system. there still is an area of premium fraud that needs to be addressed. those are all outlined in our reports. we also are expecting a report from rand that was commissioned as a result of the stakeholder meetings. the rand report is subject to come out in the next two or three weeks. it's been peer reviewed and ready for publication. we feel very strongly that we're totally underway right now of implementing key laws, key issues that were identified through these policy works and we're working very closely with the department of insurance. we've entered into an mou to share information, to share data and to have periodic meetings. we've asked budgetarily for additional funding for supporting our efforts and we also have identified some cleanup legislation that needs to happen. i think that really, possibly the audit needs to be, if an audit is to proceed, really needs to be very narrow in its scope. i don't want it to interfere with all the work that's underway right now, because we're all the same people. we'll have to stop and focus, re-focus and do this instead of really addressing the fraud. that's my concern. resources will be deployed and redeployed to do that instead of what we've scoped out as implementation of addressing anti-fraud issues.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 87, 'end': 91, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 461, 'end': 465, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 508, 'end': 514, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1015, 'end': 1019, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1507, 'end': 1511, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Robert Herrell: Well, Assemblymember, I'm Robert Herrell with the Department of Insurance and we're one of the departments specifically mentioned in the audit request. So if I could, equally to Director Baker, take a couple minutes. And I believe Senator Roth I can be helpful perhaps in some of the questions that you just posed a moment or two ago. If I could just provide some very brief broader context, Commissioner Jones has made fighting fraud a very top priority of his administration since day one.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 187, 'end': 192, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 239, 'end': 243, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 405, 'end': 410, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jeremy Merz: i'll quickly register my support. jeremy alma merz, the american insurance association. we are in support of the audit.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Sektnan: Mark Sektnan, Association of the California Insurance Companies in support of the audit. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Scott Tsui: Good morning. My name is Scott Tsui, Assistant District Attorney from Santa Clara County. I just want to just support a little bit to Deputy Commissioner saying regarding the grant process the grant process is a county that's receiving the grant, and many of the county in the state do receive the grant. The grant is a competitive process where there are measurements set up to basically measure the proficiency of fraud fighting. Now, those funds are not promised or entitled, each county, including our county, which over the years our funds have increased because our programs have been deemed to be successful and our funding has been cut as well because our program has been successful. So there are measurements in place for the grant process rather than what I participate, other different programs where the grants are entitled, if you put out this many. you have this many drivers this year, this amount of money so it's a little bit different than the other grant processes that we work in. Thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Constantouros: jason jonah constantouros i think you see and the department of finance both laid out a lot of the issues involving enrollment in 2017-18. we would just also recommend that you start thinking about what your intentions are for 2018-19 given and continue that practice of adopting a target one year after the budget to better align the budget with emissions policies that you see. concerning with the actual level should be in 2018-19 we recommended in our analysis which we released in february, that you hold off making final decisions until we revise recognizing that some additional information would be coming down the pipe line. one of those things we were hoping would be in time for your budget decisions would be a study that the state is undertaking, estimating the proportion of students who are eligible to attend uc and to determine whether or not uc's current policies are in line with current state policy. the administration is indicated to us that the report will likely not come out in time for the budget process, probably around june or july. so unfortunately, we might not have that information on time to make decisions. we do think that best available evidence to date suggests that uc might be drawing from beyond its freshmen eligibility pool. uc also reports accommodating all eligible transfer students. the second piece of information that we did note was that in the beginning of march uc issued a report that proposed changes in enrollment, and changes in eligibility policies in order to increase bachelor's degree production. that was a report that was required by last year's budget. we're still reviewing that report. and depending on that report, that might influence your decisions for 18-19 as well. and then just one other thing to note on the issue of pre-funding enrollment. an alternative approach the legislature could take would be to appropriate the funding in trailer bill language to be appropriated in 18-19, rather than the budget bill, so that funding is released to uc in the year it incurs the enrollment growth, rather than one year before, when it hasn't incurred the cost yet. those are my comments. i'd be happy to answer any questions.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Capasapar: Thank you, Chair Randy Capasapar of the Finance and just wanted to address some of LAO's comments that basically and including the 50 million for deferred maintenance, the 15 and 35 that had been described before. Basically, this would provide extended flexibility on how you seek the best to manage the funding that they have. We also like to note that CSU currently has the ability to finance the third maintenance which is point out that there's several instances of deferred maintenance that easily would extend 10, 15, 20 year of life spans. Roof replacements would be one such example. Finally, we would note that in regards to the 15 million there's several examples of general obligation bonds where a component of those bonds are used for planning purposes and we would also see this as a planning purpose to best identify UC's deferred maintenance needs.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 83, 'end': 86, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Barbra Glaser: thank you, mr. chair and members, barbra jason glaser with the california hospital association, we represent over 400 hospitals in the state. a number of our hospitals provide graduate medical education programs, both public and private. when proposition 56 passed and cha was a supporter of it, one of the things that we really looked forward to was more graduate medical education residencies being provided in the state, and with the way this came out in the budget, it doesn't look like that's going to happen or certainly, uncertain at best. so what we would like to see is that the funding be restored to uc the 15 million, and so that all hospitals can participate in this new money. and we will have more graduate medical education programs, not just the same number, thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 269, 'end': 272, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michelle Baca: Good afternoon. Michelle Baca with the California Medical Association. We agree with our colleagues from Cha that this funding was not meant to back fill general fund. This was funding that was intended to expand graduate medical education statewide and UC was to administer these dollars. We like to also echo the comments of the previous speaker that we'd like to see these funds, the general fund reallocated to the UC's budget, and we think that using Prop 56 dollars for UC's corporations are legally questionable at best, thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amber King: Thank you, Amber King with the Association of California Healthcare Districts. We will also would align our comments with the previous speakers and would point out that healthcare districts mostly operate in rural medically underserved areas and we believe these additional residency programs that could be provided if the funding was restored for these programs would be a huge benefit for the State of California, especially in those areas that really need those providers, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brandon Nichols: great, good afternoon chair and the members of the sub committee. i appreciate you're taking the time on a very busy day to consider this issue. i am brandon jonah nichols. i'm the acting director of the department of children and family services in los angeles county, and i'm here on behalf of supervisor sheila kuehl and a broad coalition to talk about the child care bridge proposal. so i think that the presentation that you just had on ccr by director lightbourne, sara rodgers, greg rose, in department of mental health, or department of health, it was a great intro to the issues that we're trying to address with the foster care bridge proposal. so as you hear, as we have had ccr come in our need for foster parent is going to be even greater, and that's happening at a time that we had been losing foster parents.  so in la county in last 10 years we gone from 8,000 available foster parents to 4,000, and that's a trend that's been repeated across the state. as we moved out of congregate settings, we're going to need more foster parents to take care children. and we've also seen in that same time period an increase in young children coming into care. so our zero to five population since 2000 has gone from 28% of the population to almost 40% of the population. so we have young kids coming into care and those kids are kids that don't go to school, they're kids who need extra attention and extra resources. and this is a state-wide issue, it's not just an issue for la. you heard testimony about the use of ... dollars. so when a proposal was put out from the department for our counties to submit recommendations on how to use ... dollars, i believe 58 counties responded. out of those 58 counties, 28 counties included your request for child care. one of our local advocacy organizations did a survey of foster parents, to ask them what was one of the biggest barriers to being a foster parent in la county, and they repeated the child care was a problem for them. so here's how it works. we take a child, now often under five years old. we knock on a door of somebody who maybe wasn't expecting to have a baby in their care, and say, please take care of this baby, sometimes it's a relative. in la county, we do a good job placing with relatives. 52% of our children are placed with relatives. if that person works the next day, they have to miss work. and if they work the following week, they have to miss work that following week until they can get that baby into childcare, or they have to say, which is an untenable position to put them in, i just can't take care of my niece, or i just can't take care of my grandkid, and that's what this proposal would help address. i don't know how much further you want me to go until the speaker gets here, but families are an important resource for the kids. and if we don't support the families that take care of the kids, the kids are ultimately affected. so we as a system, we as a government, need to rally around those people who are willing to step up, open their heart and open their homes to take children in and this is a big way of doing that. it's a way to show that we as a community value the efforts they're putting forward. but it is also is a way for us to help them in a very tangible method. so there's three parts to the proposal. the first part is it provides a time limited voucher so that they can flexibly get kids into child care while we navigate the existing state system of child care provision.  it also provides navigators to help foster parents navigate that system. and the third part is it provide trauma informed training for people that actually provide child care. as you know removal of a child from a home is a traumatic event. those kids express behaviors that are atypical sometimes and takes special skills to address and to stabilize. so that's the three primary parts of the bill.
[{'start': 150, 'end': 171, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 307, 'end': 319, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 458, 'end': 469, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 471, 'end': 483, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 485, 'end': 494, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Wendy Lewis: thank you so much i appreciate the time and i apologize for the two and a half hours of interruption. my name is wendy brandon lewis, i live in yolo county, i live in woodland, i work for davis joint unified school district. both my husband and i work full time. we have been foster parents for almost eight years. we have taken placements as short as five days to as long as over three and a half years before we were able to adopt. always taken personal leave, vacation leave, sick leave. my leaves are exhausted.  i need childcare immediately when i say yes to these most valuable, vulnerable children. our little one here came to us here at two days old. she was in daycare by eight days old. that doesn't give her the chance to bond that i would like her for too, but knowing that she had a safe place in the yolo crisis nursery that provided her trauma-informed care, i was okay with leaving her at eight days. she lived with us for year, was reunified and came back to us after horrific event three months later. we're now moving forward to adopting her and she is still at the yolo crisis nursery benefiting from their team's trauma-informed care. we are lucky enough that i called them, i said i need day care. they waited four months until she was medically cleared to get back into day care, but i was able to get day care and go back to work. there are families in my county that have lost their jobs because they've used all their time. there are families that say no to siblings or other children coming into care because they don't have daycare. so i'm speaking on all three points of these. the bridge is so important for people who want to help. i have people at my work who say i'd love to do it, i'm out of sick time already i can't do it. to have somebody coordinate and guide you through the process would be amazing. and getting more and more educators informed on how to deal with trauma would be amazing. we have episodes and seizures and ongoing things and i'm confident that i can go to work safely and they will be able to manage it until i can get there. so please, please give this bill your all, and thank you for your time and again my apologies for the interruptions. and i've gotta get to woodland by 6, so if you know the chp, i don't want to take it on the way home.
[{'start': 113, 'end': 132, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jenna Hayden: Hello my name is Jenna Hayden and I found childcare and flew up from Santa Barbara today and have to get back to my five kids and catch a plane really soon. So I'm the birth parent of three, and foster adoptive of two, and our numbers fluctuate.  I'm also a K8 teacher, and resource parent trainer, and the President of the Santa Barbara County Resource Parent Association. We need more foster parents. The only state has a greater need for foster parents in our country is Texas, and supply and demand says that to get a greater supply of foster parents we need to increase benefits and decrease cost. And as a foster parent I provide 24, 7 therapeutic parenting to kids who've suffered early childhood trauma. I'm an advocate for their academic, physical, emotional, social, and character needs and I balance scheduling and carry great emotional toll of wrapping my heart around these kids and then returning them to their birth families. This unpaid job is very demanding. And so we have to lighten the load on quality resource parents in order to retain those we have and recruit more. In my experience when potential foster family sees exasperated foster parents, they are more hesitant to foster and if they see victorious resourced foster parents then they thoughtfully consider fostering. So California foster kids also need trained childcare providers because kids with early trauma need to feel safe. They need providers to understand attachment issues, developmental delays, the effect of prenatal drug exposure, in order to provide compassionate care. And we also need to increase the access through information with the child care navigators, because we want to decrease the research time for foster parents. I've got a lot to do. So every time that you can cut down my responsibility, I can take more kids and I want to take more kids. So yeah, let's resource California's resource parents and vote yes on the Childcare Bridge Program. Thank you.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Evan Adler: Hi, my name if Evan Adler. I'm part of the Yolo County Resource Families. I am an unmatched prospective foster parent. So I'm looking to foster with the possibility or offering a long term concurrent home. So we're currently in the class. We're at the beginning of the process. And I, with many of the other families present, we don't really know how we are going to be able to find the money for child care. So I've got a huge amount, a massive amount of student loan. I do earn a decent living I work as a veterinary my wife works as a chemist. Most of the time we kind of feel like we're trending water mostly do to my poor debt to income ratio. So that's a big thing. So along with my wife, we're able to offer a safe, stable, and loving home for a child in the system. The large impediment to this would be our urgent need for assistance for paying for child care. So I strongly urge you to support the childcare bridge program, and thank you very much for your time today.
[{'start': 12, 'end': 25, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rosanna Castro: hello, my name is rosanna wendy castro, and i'm a yolo county foster parent. my husband and i had been foster parents for almost six years and we thought about doing foster care for several years before we actually got to do it. and the one of the main reasons is because we both work full-time and we couldn't afford child care. we already had one, our birth son that was in child care and we just wasn't able to do that. so, i finally was able to get a place where i quit my job and it's seem like a good time to start foster care, and so we did and fast forward many years, and here i am. i have this new born baby that i picked up from the hospital last tuesday, and she was only three days old. i am a full time student who, i'm a full time student, and so, i need help with childcare. i'm a mother of six at this time. i have two birth children, two adopted children and two foster children, and so, things do get quite hectic at home. and i had to take her to class last week because i didn't have childcare that was available. so, i strongly urge you to say yes, so that my husband and i can continue to say yes and open our hearts and our homes to these children.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Wendy Thompson: Hi, my name is Wendy Thompson and I'm a yellow county foster parent. I'm urging you to support the child care bridge program. When I brought home, my four month old foster daughter I had a really difficult time securing child care and funding for her. Most parents have adequate time off work in order to make arrangements to care for their children, but foster parents don't have that option. Many parents have the option also of having friends or family members take care of their kids. We also don't have that option we're required to have licensed child care with them, which is a lot more expensive. My monthly reimbursement rate for my foster daughter at that time was, I think, $688 a month. And child care was 1,050 a month, so in order to kind of budget that gap there's a child care subsidy. Fortunately, for me that came through my foster daughter came to me in November, and I finally was approved for the subsidy in February. There's also about a two month gap after taking in a child before you get that first reimbursement check. So, it's really a long time to go, with paying out of pocket for a foster child, and it really shouldn't be that way. The process also the subsidy is not always available. It sounds like they usually run out for the year in March or April. So, if it's after that time you're out of luck. And you're paying out of pocket. I admit that there are times when I felt like the foster care system was not on this side of the children or a foster parents. I almost felt like they were breaking me instead of trying to keep me there. But, when I looked at this amazing little person in my arms, I knew that people had already failed her, and I wasn't going to do that. I just knew I couldn't fail her. I persisted and I needed to keep her there. So, I continued to do that because I knew that she deserved more. And I'd like to think that the system won't fail me either. So please, please, say yes to the child care bridge program.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sherry Shroeder: hi there, good afternoon. i'm sherry and i think i wear a little bit of a different title, but i am the educator and the recruitment and retention person for yolo county for both the ccr side of this fence for bringing in resource families and i've also done this for a number of years with our license foster parents. so, i'm well aware of what happens when you lose it, and right now, because of ccr and the resource family approval process. the beautiful thing, it's working. our classes are full of potential and prospective caregivers one of them was here that spoke. so, 10 years ago, 11 years ago i asked yolo county if i could step up and do recruitment or retention from them, and one of the things that we first did are surveys that someone mentioned earlier, but, we did want to find out what would be a stop gotta a barrier for a caregiver, and first and foremost, by almost every single person it was going to be childcare. we would love to do this, we're busy, we work, we have our own children and unfortunately we can't. so, childcare has come up and reason it's head over and over and over again. as wendy mentioned, we have had some availability off an on over those years to the subsidy program. and i just want to say in some ways, so we started this program, i started recruitment retention, it's probably been 13 years ago, but i lose track. but never the less, with around 32 active families, we're up to 120, and part of that was because we found some ways to get some child care subsidies and then we've lost it. and he could recognize in our class right now, we have five or six prospective families off saying they would love to do this, and unfortunately, we don't know if we're going to be able to do this without childcare. so wholeheartedly, on so many different levels, and the ... money and the recruitment and retention, this is recruitment and retention childcare is one of those key factors. and so we do hope that we can get this bridge program and provide subsidies for child care for our care givers. and you can kind of change the face, and i agree with julene when she said i think if we can make life changes when they're young. certainly, perhaps we won't have as many issues on this back side, and we won't have as many kids in group homes, which are now going to be our short-term residential treatment programs. and we can do a better job and have far better outcomes. so, thank you so much. and you guys were gracious moving us forward, so thank you.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1117, 'end': 1122, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2094, 'end': 2100, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Frank Mecca: Thank you Mr. Chair, Frank Mecca and I come on behalf of the County Human Services directors. And for other reasons you've already heard, our members strongly support this proposal and it's one of the top priorities for the year.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Donna Sneeringer: Hi, I'm Donna Sneeringer with the Childcare Alliance of Los Angeles and we've been working with the Department of Children and Family Services in Los Angeles for the past few years, putting the components together to really make this system worked better for foster families, and we really appreciate your support for this proposal.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lola Cornish: Hi, Lola Cornish with the California Childcare Resource and Referral Network and on behalf of our agency and its member agencies, we'd like to offer our support for this proposal. Thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Catherina Grigana: Catherina Grigana, on behalf of First 5 LA, in support of the proposal for the Child Care Bridge program for foster children. Foster families provide a safe and loving home to young children in need during a time of crisis. This request would provide an essential support to those foster families in our states most vulnerable children. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tony Rice: thank you mr. chair and members. tony on behalf of the los angeles area chamber of commerce. very appreciative of you and your staff's time. this is an issue that the chamber has spent an enormous amount of effort and resources in promoting and strongly support the work of this committee in promoting this as we move forward. and we also would like to thank mr. thurmond. i know it's an aside, but we have been spending a lot of of time, and we are very proud cosponsors of his policy item running on that concurrent course. so thank you so much and we appreciate working with you moving forward on this.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 363, 'end': 371, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brenda Dabney: Brenda Dabney with the Children's Law Center of California. We represent over 30,000 children in the foster care systems of Los Angeles, Sacramento, and Placer counties. I'm here to specifically call out the need for the child care bridge program for our teen parent clients especially, who frequently are not able to continue their education or work or other endeavors as a result of having to make a choice between child care and their own future activities. So I would really ask that this Committee support the program for those particularly. Thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Adina Koons: Good afternoon, Adina Koons, with the Alliance for Children's Rights. And we would like to strongly encourage you all to support the child care bridge program proposal. Thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Harold Schroeder: Harold Schroeder with the California Alliance, another alliance of Child and Family Services, in support of this proposal, strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Martha Guerrero: martha rosanna guerrero representing the los angeles county board of supervisors and also for madelyn moore who had a medical emergency. she works with supervisor sheila keuhl. she really wanted to be here just really reinforcing that this is extremely important for our children in los angeles county. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 94, 'end': 107, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 163, 'end': 175, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Summer Ray: hi, everybody, mr. chair and members. thank you for allowing me to be here to advocate for all these foster youth, the 1,000 of foster youth in california. my name is summer martha ray. i am currently a student at heart nolans of california and i work at a nonprofit that is youth read and youth ran called the epicenter. we work with at risk and system involved youth specifically.
[{'start': 167, 'end': 184, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vanessa Hernandez: Hi there. Vanessa Hernandez with the California Youth Connection. CYC members are in strong support of this ask. They've been talking for years about the importance of feeling normal and belonging in their own communities, and this could help us achieve that. Thank you.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tisha Ortiz: Hi Tisha Ortiz, former foster youth I strongly support this budget proposal.
[{'start': 3, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sheri Schroder: I'm here again Sheri Schroder Yolo County, I'm also a care giver and I mostly take older children typically 14 although just as you might know a 12 but 14 years and up, and when they come I think usually in the summertime, which is when I can do it most whole heartedly. I've had to pay for horseback riding lessons. And I've been fortunate sometimes to get money out of a judge's fund but my young child that came that was the one thing. She knew nobody and she was just crazy for horses so we did it three times over the summer and if you add up the 650 times 650 times 650 it's a lot to ask for someone out of pocket. I had another young girl that came at 16 and I wanted her to experience dorm life and she played tennis kind of. So, we went to tennis camp, 1250, $1250, and I just feel like it's those things that make or break youth. And I love that you spoke to that, that it's really the integration into a community to go to camps and be able to participate like other students. And I can't tell you how many proms that we've tried to help pay for and dinners and dresses and Camps, and basketball, and shoes, and all those things to make it right. And so, I still appreciate that you've done this as well and whole heartedly our care givers would support this as well. Thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rosanna Castro: hi it's me again also rosanna summer castro foster parent in yolo county. and we got a little girl when she was nine years old and she had interest in playing the piano, and so we started doing lessons and the county was helping us pay for those lessons. and unfortunately, their funding ran out and so she had to stop doing the lessons and she loves to play piano. she's 14 now and she's had some issues come up recently because of the trauma that she experience in childhood and i just know that, piano would be therapeutic for her. and i also have an eight year old little boy who excels at piano as well. but, as a full time student and my husband the only one bringing in the income. i can't afford to put my kids in lessons at this time. and so, i want my kids to shine like your parents wanted you to shine. but unfortunately, i just don't have the funding to do that. so, i strongly support this.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Gonzales: rebecca, national association of social workers, california chapter. we're also strongly in support of this proposal. enrichment activities are so important for all kids, but especially foster kids. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lily Colby: Hi. I'm Lily Colby, I'm an Equal Justice Works fellow at the National Center for Youth Law. We are strongly in support of this enrichment fund. We know that foster youths are able to thrive and succeed when they have access to extra curricular activities. Thank you.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tisha Ortiz: Thank you Chairman and Members of the Committee. My name is Tisha Ortiz. I'm 24 years old and a former foster youth. I first entered the foster care system at age 4 and I went in and out of system from ages 8 to 12. Until I stayed in the system when I reentered at 12 until I turned 18 and emancipated. I went through many traumatic experiences in and out of the foster care system. I was physically, emotionally, sexually and verbally abused. I survived it all, and today I am a senior student attending California State University, East Bay. An advocate with the National Center for Youth Law. Last year, the State Auditor released a report that found foster youth were being prescribed powerful psychotropic medications without adequate oversight. Often these youth were prescribed multiple medications, mixing classes of drugs in amounts exceeding recommended dosages. These practices were outside of the state guidelines for safe practice. The report also found that alternative therapeutic services were not being tried or made available. The Auditor's report really struck a chord with me, because it could have been describing my own experience. At age 14, the doctors gave me various powerful drugs. At one point, I was on four different medications at the same time. I was taking two antipsychotics, Abilify and Geodon, an antidepressant, Trazodone, a medication that's not approved for children, and a mood stabilizer called Lithium. This consisted of me taking six pills in the morning, and six pills at night for a total of 12 pills per day. These powerful and sedating psychotropic medications cause serious side effects like weight gain, tunnel vision, and gave me a zombified feeling. I couldn't stay awake in class, and failed classes because I could barely keep my head up to participate. I also developed an irregular heartbeat because one side of my heart was enlarged due to the weight I had gained from being on the medications, and I also suffer from ticks on my body that I continue to have to this day. What I actually needed was therapeutic behavioral services, not a cocktail sedating psychotropics, to help deal with my self-injurious behaviors. As well as, trauma-focused therapy for the sexual and physical abuse I had experienced. As well as grief counseling when my mother passed away while I was in care. A few weeks before aging out, I was finally set up with a trauma focused therapist. Nine years, after the initial abuse when I was eight years old. Those services were given to me too late, as I was already going to turn 18 and exit out of the system. And I needed that support earlier and for more time. I was exhibiting behaviors that doctors wanted to medicate me for. Instead of actually helping me deal with the trauma and cope without self harm. The foster care system neglected to take care of me and my needs from the trauma that I went through. And instead, the system over medicated me, and did not give me appropriate and effective treatment to help with my PTSD. Thank you.
[{'start': 60, 'end': 71, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susanna Kniffen: susanna rosanna kniffen with childrennow, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Skoglund: John Skoglund with the Children's Law Center of California in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tia Orr: tia, seiu in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 5, 'end': 9, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Vanessa Hernandez: vanessa with california youth connection, we are in strong support
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lily Colby: Lily Colby, former foster youth in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danita Harmon: good afternoon or evening. my name is danita susanna harmon, i am a public health nurse representing the healthcare program for children in foster care. i serve in the lancaster office, which is in los angeles county. but i'm not here just to represent my county. but i'm here to represent the healthcare programs in all of the counties in california. we have a common, we have a
[{'start': 38, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tisha Ortiz: Tisha Ortiz, former foster youth, a public health nurse was the one who found my heart issue and was the only person who was willing to listen to me. I'm really in strong support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lily Colby: colby with the national center for youth law, we are also in support of this public health nurse budget proposal. it ensures that the investment made last year is not diluted, and will fulfill the intent of ensuring proper psychotropic medications case management for children and youth in foster care. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Skoglund: john danita skoglund with children's law center of california, in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ben Johnson: i'm johnson from the lao we're continuing to review this tbl and appreciate the staff's recommendation to hold it open.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Department of Finance: Chile, Department of Finance. I just wanted to note that this BCP just represents the full year ongoing cost to essentially perform the workload that was already built into the previous 2016 Budget Act, but that was on a half year basis.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ben Johnson: Ben Johnson, LAO. We take no issue with this BCP.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pat Leary: We will do our very best to be mercifully brief. I'm Pat Leary, I'm the Chief Deputy Director of the Department of Social Services, and this is Pam Dickfoss who was our Deputy Director for Community Care Licensing. I think your agenda actually did a fantastic job of really laying out for you what the division is, who we are, what we do, and what we had gone through in the last years, and have a legislature who's played a really important role in supporting us in that. I think what we'd really sort of like to talk about is the programs that we have started are well under way. We were making up for a lot of deficit that got created during the recession where practice. And policies and documentation had sort of fallen away. The resources we've gotten have been well used and very strategically targeted to get us back. We have made I think excellent progress in trying to change the process and the practice. I think that the stakeholders that we work with would echo that, we're not late,  but I think that we still have a ways to go, and I think that the recent California State Auditor report pointed out that we do still have those deficiencies. We are aggressively addressing those right now, we agreed with all but one of the recommendations, and we are in the process of implementing those changes right now. We anticipate that at our six month response to the Auditor we won't have much at that work already completed. In terms of the things that we are looking at on our horizon right now, we are implementing the increased inspection frequency which was a huge sea change. Starting in January, we started inspecting all facilities once every three years instead of once every five years. That will continue for both adult and senior care and our children's' residential to go down to two years next year, and then one year the following year, which is really incredible. We have the staff on board. They are in the process of doing those inspections right now. And we do anticipate that we're going to be able to make those targets and stay on track. We also anticipate that as a result of those increased inspections over time, we expect to see fewer complaints as a result. One of the problems was once we went to every five years that's really what we became was a complaint based system of regulatory oversight where we were going into facilities after damage had already occurred, after something had already occurred. We are very much of the mind that once we start increasing the inspection frequency, we're out there more often. We're going to be able to spot things before they occur, help to address it with the licensee. Help to correct providing technical assistance to licensees, so that we can hopefully avoid harm. There will always be room for complaints. There will always be unforeseen events that occur, but to the extent we can move away from a complaint based system and more to a proactive forward looking system. We think that the public will be safer and the health and safety of the folks in these facilities is paramount. It's one of the foster parents was relating today. When the parent is standing there releasing their child, their baby into daycare, they want to have a reasonable belief that the regulatory system that's providing oversight is meaningful, and that is truly our intent as we do this. One other question, was just mentioned in the agenda was in term of what we're doing with our key indicator tool as well as our workload study. We did not get all the answers we hoped to out of that key indicator tool, but we have found it to be very useful. It allows us to do more inspections and we did get a lot of assistance from Sac State in honing the tool itself so that we were asking the right questions, which is more helpful in trying to determine which facilities need a closer look. Which facilities need further inspections and which, if they're performing well on the kit are more likely to not have any additional adverse events. So we intend to keep using that as we go forward, we hope to further refine it and further look at what we can do to make it a more useful and more targeted tool for different times of facilities. We're also looking one of the big things that we're in the process of doing, is creating some new information technology. Our systems are best to find as antiquated, there's someone above an IBM punch card but they are not what anyone would consider modern. As part of the child welfare system digital services project, the licensing functions are included within that for creating a new system and taking these old antiquated systems and moving them to the cloud and new technology. We think that's going to give us a lot of tools that we can implement in the future of using tools like business analytics. To try and help us even further define which facilities might need more attention, might need less attention, what types of things we should be focusing on. That's all information we kind of do by hand now. We have literally data miners who go in and pull out this information to try and assist us in looking at trends and what kinds of complaints we're seeing and what kind of violations we're seeing so that when we see those and in fact last year we did a survey on what were the most frequently cited complaints so that we could say to the field, to the providers. These are the things that you're getting citations for, here are the ways you can avoid these citations, and it was actually quite helpful and well-received by the provider community in order to do that, because they don't want to get the violation. We'd prefer that they don't have the violation, that they're in compliance. So it really does help us. So those are sort of the major things that we have on the horizon. There are lots of other process changes, practice changes, we're still implementing legislation on a regular basis. We get new legislation each year directing us to do things that we follow up on for example, the psychotropic medications. Licensing has a role to play in going out and visiting facilities and doing the part of the work that's associated with the team of child and family services as well as the county in looking at those psychotropic medications. In addition, just this year we published for the first time. The information online about law enforcement contacts with youth in foster care and group homes specifically, group homes and shelters. There had been a bill passed a few years ago by then Assemblyman Chesbro that asked us to track those contacts because there was a belief that there was no criminalization of youth in group care by using law enforcement and making law enforcement committed to disciplinary activity. We now have put online and plan to do further analysis of the data indicating how many law enforcement contacts and for what purposes they were for. In other words, was a child AWOLing? Leaving without permission or was it for assaulted behavior or some other type of behavior and we think that data is going to be very useful. At this stage, we've just made the first step to make it available. Now we have to do a little deep dive and do some analytics on it. Thank you.
[{'start': 53, 'end': 62, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 144, 'end': 156, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6516, 'end': 6523, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Department of Finance: chile with the department. there is a question regarding the current state of the technical assistance fund in the agenda and just to response to that, in the current year we're anticipating a reserve of approximately 11 million. generally, the fund expense approximately 23 million. so choose the same this proposal for additional two years, we believe that most of the fund would debt to about 7.7 million, three years out and that is still adequate level in terms of maintaining a decent reserve.
[]
Department of Finance: Chile with the Department of Finance. Just wanted to sort of reiterate the overarching message in terms of this proposal would allow the department to maintain their existing levels of service within this program. This bill was recently chartered and it would have resulted in new additional workload for the department. The overarching direction in terms of limiting anticipated increases in spending would sort of fall under this bucket in terms of why this trailer bill language is necessary for the department to remain compliant with all of its statutory obligations. We would just suggest that in order to really fully understand this proposal that you push the administration to share with you what you're actually saving by going along with their proposal here. It's not clear to us what that savings would be or the counter what the cost would be if you rejected it.
[]
Will Lightbourne: great. mr. chair, committee, thank you. we're moving now into the continuum of care reform item of the cdss budget. i'm will john lightbourne. i'm joined by sara rogers, greg rose and dina kokkos-gonzalez from our colleague agency at the department of healthcare services. i'd like to sort of just frame and introduce the topic and then i will hand it on. continuum of care reform is the initiative that was adopted by the legislature in 2015 and signed by the governor, which really represents probably the most significant change in 20 or 30 years in how we approach the foster care portion of the child welfare system in california. in some respect, it's probably one of the most far reaching initiatives in the country. certainly, in any state, that it is, state administered county operated. the goal simply of the initiative was to say children should only be being cared for in an institutional setting to receive high level therapeutic services that can only be provide in that setting. but that the treatment services and the therapy services that they need should be well and safely cared for in home-like settings, should be provided wherever they are. so we should be moving the services to the children not the children to the services. this of course requires sort of a major integration across state level departments and systems, between counties and state, between local county agencies that are comparable to the state agencies, private providers, whether they are the managed care providers or the human service providers who either are licensed by the state or under contact to the counties. it requires a transformation of the residential services component of the system. it's in many respect a sort of a three dimensional process. the administration has been very strongly committed to this implementation. the budget year funding for ccr implementation is in excess $200 million above sort of the regular core realigned child welfare program. and the sort of artist of this three-dimensional process is sara rogers, who is chief of the ccr implementation branch, and so i'm going to turn it over to sara.
[{'start': 120, 'end': 141, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 157, 'end': 168, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 170, 'end': 179, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 184, 'end': 204, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2027, 'end': 2038, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2123, 'end': 2127, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
 : then will we will will will continue will our will commitment will for will our will technical will assistance will and will intensive will work will at will the will local will level will to will be will problem will solving will right will alongside will our will county will colleagues will and will agencies will and will families.
[]
Dina Kokkos-Gonzales: good afternoon, chair and committee members. dina  kokkos-gonzales with the department of health care services in the mental health services division. i'm going to provide just a brief update on some of the activities the department has been engage in related to mental health services for implementation of the continuum of care reform. it is a very exciting time and a significant opportunity to be working with our child welfare system, and the two departments have definitely been a close partnership and closely collaborating on implementing activities and critical components that we have for our like population for the success of ccr. we also have been partnering very closely with our county mental health plan who administer the services, the specialty mental health services, to make sure that we are all on the same page about the types of services and the implementation activities necessary for ccr. and also identifying and monitoring to make sure that children who need the services, get the services, and that they not only get the services, but they get the right services at the right time by the right provider in the right setting. and so we really see this as an opportunity to continue to improve and enhance the types of services that these children receive and need. there are two key areas that will also, that are activities that are carried at this time, that will also help us to ensure that there's capacity and timely access to services. the speciality mental health services are administered through what we call a 19-15b waiver, and that waiver has some special terms and conditions, and a couple of key focuses in those stcs are around capacity and around timely access to services and also transparency. so for the first time, it's our first effort, our first time in producing performance measures, performance dashboards that we are now posting on our website. so we feel like we come along way and achieved a lot and i'm proud of what we achieved knowing that we still have a little ways to go. and then, also, the other key activity that will also help further the timely access and capacity for services is the federal medicaid managed care rule. and in that rule, there are some key focuses as well that further this effort around capacity and services. and that is network adequacy and provider standards, and so we will be adhering the county mental health plans as managed care organizations or entities, we will be needing to adhere to provider network standards, and also there are beneficiary support and protections that will be implemented. so as this managed care role rolls out, it will definitely continue to strengthen and enhance our delivery system for special team in our health services. one of the areas that you asked about were some potential challenges and i will say that initially the data between the two departments has been siloed, but we have taken on great undertakings to work ongoingly and many, many hours with a lot of resources and time spent to provide an exchange data. and that data is we're able to produce it in a way that tells a story that we can look and monitor and see what's happening. and so we've come a long way, we still have a little ways to come but that is one area that we have been challenged with because of the way that the systems and the data occurs. but again, we have come to a point now where we're really able to exchange data, produce reports, and continue to enhance that effort. i'm happy to answer any questions.
[{'start': 45, 'end': 65, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ben Johnson: Ben Johnson from the Legislative Analysts Office. I would just want to briefly note that we have reviewed the CCR budget proposal about $160 million in total in 2017-18, a $25 million increase over 16-17. These adjustments largely reflect the adjustments and the pace of implementation of CCR, slightly slower case load movements to home and community based settings and they reflect annualization of certain costs. And so it's implemented on a half year basis in 16, 17 and going to a full year basis in and 2017-18. We will again just review the CCR budget come May and we'll have a continued role in overseeing the implementation until May and beyond as we roll it out through actually established means of legislative oversight that we established in the budget process last year. So, happy to take any questions but those are comments for now. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chi Lee: This is Chi Lee with the Department of Finance. I just want to provide a quick comment on the overview, because CCR is sort of in its implementing phase, we are expecting to make changes in May revision. You know, for example, for case load or for any other issues, that since the Governor's Budget was released, that we would need to adjust for accordingly. But nothing on the overview for now.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Harold Schroeder: thank you, sir. mr. chair and members, the committee, harold dina schroeder with the california alliance of child and family services. first i do want to acknowledge that the department has put an incredible amount of effort on this. and i do want to acknowledge that the increase in the rates that they have built into that it makes it much doable. i also want to say that we continue to being committed to working with the department and everybody else as we have and going forward. there's a couple things we want to bring up and we don't have a budget request at this time because these are all contingent. it depends on how this all rolls out. but the first is, the continued care reform puts foster family agencies and strpts in the position of which they're kind of caught in between a rock and a hard place in some regards. strtps are required to provide for mental health services, ffas are required to provide or arrange for the provision of mental health services, but there's no corresponding requirement that mental health plans certify or contract for services with those provider organizations even if they're qualified. and so they can't get a license until they have that and yet there's no guarantee they can get it even if they qualify for it. and so it puts folks in a very difficult position. the second is that the ffa rates don't cover any critical permanency services and the particular services that i'm talking about are supervised visitation, family finding, engagement, and adoption services. the department has been really clear that those are not included in the raid and yet we know the counties have asked or have required their member organizations to provide those. the department has said that the money for those services is included in 2011 realignment. counties have said they've never been fully funded for that. and so in a lot of ways we're caught between the rock and a hard place on that. finally the ffa rates for services and supports may be adequate, we don't know yet, because we haven't seen the level of care instrument, but we do know that the $44 in difference in services and support between llcs 1 and 2, and 2 and 3, and the $78 between 3 and 4, don't mean anything. i mean, it's less than an hour of service, and so we're concerned about that. as i say, we continue to look forward to working with the department on this and with your committee. and we may be in front you again come may revise.
[{'start': 54, 'end': 75, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Frank Mecca: Thank you Mr. Chair and members, Frank Mecca on behalf of the County Welfare Directors Association. And I too would like to thank the administration for the partnership and the Legislator for your partnership and supporting the county implementation of CCR, which is a major significant undertaking. We'd like to point out one thing in particular, the FPSF family preservation and support funding that you provided, counties are making good use of to provide supports to recruit more family caregivers, so kids don't go to institutions because they lack a family. And there are a lot of activities that are identified in your agenda that we're undertaking. We are still in many counties finding that it's a challenge to find enough homes, particularly for children with significant needs, often children with significant behavioral health needs. Largely as a result of the unspeakable trauma that most have experienced. I'd like to thank the chair for AB340 which does attempt to root out and find that trauma early so we can get the treatment sooner. And we appreciate your authorship of that bill, and we know the Committee is really mindful of the importance of behavioral health services for our ability to keep kids in the families. And I'd like to make a comment with respect to supplemental report language that this Committee required for the administration to report on how behavioral health services are going. Ms. Kokkos-Gonzales talked about a massive amounts of effort really happening to try to increase the timeliness and availability of those services. With respect to the supplemental report, we reviewed it, and we'd like to make a couple of recommendations for ways that we think you could get even more robust information. We noticed in a number of questions, 1, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11, the indicator is children with one or more specialty mental health service.  And that service could be an assessment that resulted in a denial for any further services, and if that occurred, that case would show up as someone receiving one service. And because of this dynamic in the way we categorize specialty mental health services. The KDA settlement for example, suggests we should look at the number five specialty mental health services not one. And so we'd recommend that folks take a look at looking at the way the POS system work grouping KDA looks at the penetration data because we think that's more relevant. We would also point out that on table four it appears that 97% in out of home care are getting specialty mental health services. But, again, those services could be the request for therapy, not actually in the receipt of therapy. And so we think it would be great for the Legislature if you had disaggregated data, not that assessments aren't important or that case management isn't important, but they're categorically different than therapy. And so we think that would be better for the state to the extent that that information is presented to the state in a disaggregated context so that you can see of the specialty mental health services that foster kids are getting, are they assessments, are they case management, are they actual therapies to help ameliorate the underlying trauma. So we would actually like to work with the Committee and the administration to o see if we can even strengthen the supplemental report language to get you even better information to track.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1425, 'end': 1440, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Margaret Huber: Hello, my name is Margaret Huber and I actually came for a different issue but since you are discussing this reformed situation there are things that relate to my personal situation. I'm Margaret Huber, I've been a foster parent for over 25 years and I have children in my home that have very special needs. Mental healthcare situations. And I wear multiple hats. I have worked in a group home. And getting mental healthcare services for our children is extremely difficult. I'm sure most of you know that many mental health conditions do not begin and are not seen until puberty hits, and then things kind of can spiral out of control. It took about one year to get my teenager help, he was not able to function in school, he was getting into trouble with the law, mainly because of his inability to control himself, his manic behavior. My husband and I felt like we were just kind of isolated in our home, nobody's listening. We even felt like our lives were in danger due to his behavior and yet we could not get help for him. And I was calling, CPS every single day, begging, pleading, yelling, whatever I thought could get somebody's attention.  And it took a very long time to get help, it seemed like forever. And once I got that one person who did listen and did believe what I was telling him, the ball started rolling. He went to a group home in Grass Valley, and with the new, I guess the way that they feel like treatment should go, children need to be in a residential treatment for the least amount of time. He did spend the least amount of time and was back home reunified with us within six months. That time was very very helpful that he spent in the therapeutic environment. He's home with us now, he cannot return to the public school at this time, he's at a private school due to his stepping down from the level of care that he was at, and to make certain that he's going to be safe in his environment. But the way what I see recently is with the social workers coming to my home and the way that they have this Special Care Increments, they have new forms now that they use,  was familiar with the old form, but with the new forms, it seems like that's weighted towards children with medical conditions. Maybe if they're diabetic or they have a severe asthma but not for children with mental health conditions. That a child's mental health condition their mood, or whatever, can change from one day to the next. And when the social worker comes out to this assessment, a child can present well for the 15 minutes that that social worker is in the home and no matter how much documentation I can give them as to how many appointments I have to go to every, every week and how much care that child requires in the home. He qualifies for the lowest basic rate for 14 year old boy, who is this big. And it does not seem right at all, it seems really wrong. With my training, I feel like my husband and I have a therapeutic foster home, therapeutic level of care in our home, but we are not being compensated for providing that therapeutic care in the home. We're not compensated for it and we are not even thought of us providing that care even though we certainly are, and I could have many people attest to that.  So, that's another thing consider in this how your paperwork is weighted and how the questions are asked. Because the last queue, does your child wet the bed, does he need to wear pull ups, does he have Encopresis. Well no, but there are many other things there. I would just assume have a 12 year old in pull ups than a child with a mental health condition any day. But he's been with us since he was 5 years old and we're not letting him go anywhere. We want to continue to care for him. I've given up my job, I worked at a job for 43 years. I gave up my job to stay home and take care of the kids. I could say that my mission in life is to care for kids. So, thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 187, 'end': 201, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kathy Tipton: hello. i'm on. i do have some packets to hand you if you could take them. thank you. my name is kathy and i'm here to speak on behalf of the shasta country worker's benefit council, which is a body representing 15,000 low income workers, including many home care workers and their recipients. my husband was a home care worker for my mother and i know how difficult and viral the work is. we demand that the state not transfer $626 million or any cost of iehs to the counties, and instead, the state increase the funding to the iehs program, so it is properly funded throughout the north state and in my county. we have a large iss worker and recipient population. in shasta county, we have at least 2500 ihss workers and 3,000 recipients. any cuts to ihss or transfer of funding to the county would be devastating and irresponsible. shasta county does not have enough money to run basic services as it is. mental health is near to non-existant. they closed down our mental health hospital years ago. and as result, many of those patients people ended up on the street. we have a homeless population of 3,000, and only one homeless shelter in our county, that holds 250 people. shasta county and the city of redding have had to close fire houses, cut police and much more. we have a minimum drug treatment program despite our county having a major drug epidemic. reading has had the highest increase in crime in the nation. it has increased 500% in the last decade. these conditions are a direct result of the economic strain this city is under due to the lack of living wage jobs and cuts in government services, particularly after the 2008 economic collapse, which we have never recovered from. shasta county lost 8,000 jobs permanently since 2008 and 95% of the new jobs added since then have been temporarily part time and mostly minimum wage. considering this any cuts or shifts in funding to the counties will be devastating and would cause a negative and cascading effect on the communities long term economic future. this is why the california state association of counties has already come out promptly against this proposal and has explained that state reduction in funding ihss were forced counties to cut their critical services in order to maintain that federally mandated level of ihss services which already isn't adequate. the governor says the state faces a $1.6 billion deficit and must cut the budget 3.6 billion to build a proper reserve for the next economic downturn. you don't have to do this. you, as a legislature who we pay and elect, can take a ways and means approach to administrate and balance the budget. cutting services like home care, healthcare and education is a backwards approach and does not address the fundamental economic problems of our state. these cuts lead to less money. circulating in the economy and more money having to be spent on the fallout. haven't we learned our lesson yet? cutting ihss will cost the state more. it costs five times more to institutionalize someone rather than provide home care. you might want to take a look at the corporate tax breaks for the needed funding.
[{'start': 96, 'end': 101, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Hall: my name is hall i'm reading on behalf of paul espera. he was unable to make it.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 41, 'end': 52, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cody Brewster: So My name's Cody Brewster. I am a student at Shasta College. And I'm here today to oppose the outrageous proposal to cut from the in home care program that literally saved lives. I am from Chester County where our large workforce is in home care. So I see on a daily basis the struggles and sacrifice these workers and the recipients make. Why cut from the program or why not cut from where the money is available. We're in the wealthiest state in the wealthiest nation. California is the sixth largest economy in the world. But because the state does not prioritize the needs of working people and of small businesses, we all have the highest poverty rate. This does not add up. The state could balance the budget easily and have more than enough money to meet people's needs. If they were to simply cut from tax breaks that total $48 billion a year. That go primarily to the large corporations like PG&E, Walmart, Google, Chevron. And that's just to name a few, who paid no taxes last year. There is no justification for this. The fact is that these companies have the highly paid lobbyists. And elderly people who are on fixed incomes do not. If you fully fund the home care program, prioritize creating jobs that pay living wages, affordable utilities. Making sure people can afford their basic necessities then we'll finally see real economic change. You are in a position to change a situation as our elected representative to better the lives of your constituents by not only stopping this cuts. But increasing the IHSS budget. We want you to vote no today to these cuts. Thank you, sir.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Hanak Lopez: good afternoon my name is hanak harold lopez, i'm a student at the santa rosa junior college. and i'm here as a representative of the sonoma county workers benefit council and my mother has been a caregiver through ihss for over 10 years. and i would like to readiate that the international communities specifically 193 members state nations of the united nations have in adopted unanimously 17 global goals for our countries to prioritize. and achieve coopery by 2030. one of this goals, goal number eight is to promote, sustain, inclusive and sustainable economic growth for productive employment and decent work for all.  not only do the united states government sign on to these goals, governor brown has attended several events commending these goals. we call upon you, the state representatives to make decisions consistent with these goals. we demand that the state does not look onto ihss as a way to balance the budget. instead fully fund overtime pay, and pay workers all hours worked. the previous year, state budget included an increase to ihss an increase in funding for ihss workers' overtime pay by 300 million. we demand a full accounting of where this money went. i strongly believe that ihss is a vital necessity to our community. the governor decision to reinstate the 35, 65 state, county state sharing ratio would be devastating to the counties already strained budgets. the increase of annual cost will be prohibited and the governor has acknowledged it himself. this massive cut will just pit the counties against caregivers from just one limited overtime pay and a little trouble time last year for the first time since this program began over 40 years ago. even the highest paid ihss worker in our state earns less than half but what the state says if it takes a family to survive. we call upon you, the state, to find the funds to take a ways, a means approach to this responsibility you have to the people of california, do not cut any funds from the state to the counties. you can eliminate state tax breaks from large cooperate interests. you can organize other states to demand that the federal government pay more to make up for the state's shortfall. it is your job as legislators to find a ways to get some means. don't balance the budget on the backs of ihhs workers and the lives of the elderly blind and disabled recipients for their care, thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 698, 'end': 703, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mary Ader: Good afternoon. I am Mary Ader with the county Behavioral Health Directors Association. Since IHSS is an entitlement and a case load driven program within 1991 realignment, any increase in those cost reduces the future share of growth, funding received by mental health and health services. These changes will reduce available funds for critical community mental health services counties provide as part of a safety net for our most vulnerable Californians with serious mental illness. By eliminating counties access to these funds, the following community services which have no other funding source will be reduced. Psychiatric inpatient hospitalization, institutions for mental disease for adults living with serious mental illness in need of 24 hour care. Lenterment short act responsibilities for involuntary mental health evaluation and treatment and indigent mental health services for individuals without MediCal or other coverage. Thank you.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Olivia Rodriguez: My name is Olivia Rodriguez and I am a student at Shasta Colleges, and I am presenting this on behalf of an IHSS recipient who is too disabled to be here. She spoke before the Assembly Budget Committee in 2015. My name is Lydia Sullivan and I am a resident of Shasta County. I used to be a CNA and an IHSS worker for more than 20 years, until I got too disabled to work. Now, I am an IHSS recipient. My son cares for me many hours in a day, but he only gets 12 hours a week. He takes me to the Doctor and assists with everything I can't do, like my shopping, laundering, lot yard work, getting the car fix and services. It's very difficult with all my health issues for me to do anything on my own. I have recently developed blisters on my legs that are very fragile and don't heal well. So, I will have to keep going to doctors to treat them. I have to have a nurse come out to treat them as well. And my son also makes sure that they stay clean and protected. IHSS helps my son to have money for gas and other things, but he still doesn't get enough to care for me. My son has to work more than 48 hours a month to take care of me, but he doesn't get paid for most of it. This is partly because he only gets half the hours he should because he's a relative, which is not fair. There are many things she does for me that a normal family member living in the house with a relative wouldn't have to do. Like helping me get around everywhere and take my daily medications. IHSS helps my son have money for gas and other things for his child, but he still doesn't get enough to get by. When I was a CNA in convalescent homes and doing in-home care, I only made minimum wage or sometimes $1 over. I work six days a week and they wouldn't pay overtime. At one point, I worked doing 24 hour care for seven years. I did it because I loved caring for people and did not want them to be left alone or go without care. One year I got ill while I was working but because I did not have medical care I went without treatment and developed a very serious respiratory problem that developed into a chronic condition. I have a very hard time breathing now, which is part of why I need IHSS. IHSS workers and healthcare workers get disabled young, younger because of the working conditions and we should not be penalized when we're older by living in fear that our IHSS will be cut up or by not getting enough hours of care. We sacrificed our lives to care for others and in the process, we kept people out of nursing homes and saved the state money, is this how we deserve to be treated? I am here to ask you not to cut this program. It's not just for you when you are old, but when you are disabled. I never thought I would be disabled in my 50s, but now I rely on the care for my life. Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 222, 'end': 236, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1471, 'end': 1475, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Andrew Langley: mr. chair and members, my name is langley, i represent the county of san diego. and the county of san diego would like to thank the committee for its continued attention to this matter. and it endorses the efforts made by csac as negotiations on the issues continue within the legislature and within the administration. thank you so much. thank you sir.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jenny Laughlin: Hello, my name is Jenny Laughlin. I'm here on behalf of Martha Solomon. Okay, dear Budget Committee, hello my name is Martha Selman. I have been a nurse's assistant for 13 years and did three years in IHSS. I was only allowed four hours a day to take care of one of my patients I immediately noticed that they needed extra help throughout the day. I would use my free time to make sure that they ate, didn't wander outside, and make sure that they couldn't get into anything that would harm themselves on accident. As a result, mental illness, including dementia, Alzheimer's, and other conditions of getting older. I would clean them, bathe them, clean the house and cook for them. I didn't mind doing this in my spare time, because I felt that it was important. I have pride in the work that I do and I feel that the type of work is desperately needed for the people who can't help themselves. I really hope you don't cut the spending for the IHSS program. If anything, we need more hours, more money, more quality of care and not less. So she's from Martha Selman, 28526 River Run, Anderson, California 96007.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 56, 'end': 70, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 118, 'end': 131, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1053, 'end': 1066, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cathy Barham: Hi, my name is Cathy Barham, and I'm from UDW. I'm a UDW provider from Placer County, and I work for my disabled son, Michael. Stand up. No, you can stay there, you don't have to go past all these people. I care for him, and I am his medical advocate, his financial advocate, his power of attorney, I am everything that he needs. And there is no one without special training that can do what I do for him. And I take care of another disabled gentleman who's been a friend of mine for 37 years, so I guess I. Anyway, everything that everybody said, and I see a couple of you are actually paying attention. Not all, but thank you for paying attention. We have everything that has been said here is absolute fact. I didn't have time to do the research, but yeah, I'm all over understanding that the money is there, and please don't make us compete in each county for the services that they all need. We all need this services from the mental, the children that are starving, the elderly that are disabled, the disabled that are disabled. All of us out here that are working for this people, we need to be upgraded in the appreciation for what we do. Because we're not fast food workers. We belong up here like professionals. If I could have a nursing degree, or certificate, or something like that, then I will have that because that's what my job is. It's nursing, it's advocacy, it's everything, and it's not just taking them to the bathroom and cleaning their house, and all of that. It's so much more than that, and it's things that a lot of people here don't want to do or wouldn't do. And it is a money saver, and so we need to continue what we're doing without making us have to compete, and to let us statewide collective bargain for what we need, etc. If i had stayed in Sacramento County, I'd be $1.50 richer an hour than I am in Placer County. Go figure. So I would like for that to be even statewide, it's fair to me. And so anyway, enough said, I hope you paid attention, thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 118, 'end': 125, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Desiree Broomfield: hello, my name is desiree hanak broomfield, and i'm with the western servers worker association in redding, which is in shasta county. in-home support services is the largest workforce in shasta county, so any cuts to this program would be a significant impact on our county. i'm here today to not only reaffirm that you not cut the ihss program and shift costs to the counties but to turn the discussion on its head. we need to be talking about increasing the funding for ihss, not decreasing it or shifting costs, that everyone knows counties can afford. the ihss program is already underfunded, and it's costing lives. there are many people here today that can speak to that. home care workers, as a rule, work more hours than they get paid for. the time task formula that ihss uses to determine what hours of care people need grossly underestimates the time it takes to provide services, such as bathing, where you normally only get 15 minutes. if your recipient takes longer because they are in pain that day, you don't get paid more if it takes an hour to give them a bath. you're also not going to clock out in the middle of the shower. no, because you are endangering that person's life. this is just one example of the many things that home care workers do that they don't get paid for. they are literally responsible for other people's lives, and that includes their safety and well-being. the state takes advantage of the workers this way, especially if they're taking care of family members, knowing that they were keep working regardless of if they are getting adequate pay. not every home care worker can simply work for free, and they shouldn't have to. when the state doesn't provide enough hours of care, people get sicker and are often forced prematurely into a nursing home sooner than they need. and unfortunately, this is usually where death rates skyrocket for seniors over 65. my mother has been a cna for 17 years. she has worked in in-home care as well but mostly in nursing homes facilities. it is not a place that most recipients want to be nor does their family want to send them to. not only does long-term care and nursing homes cost the state more, but some facilities are short in the number of cnas that are working there. this lack of supervision can lead to a lot of things that go unnoticed. a little discussed and frankly terrifying epidemic has been happening in our nursing homes throughout the country. recent reports raise alarm on the facts that many seniors in this facilities are being raped and sexually assaulted. the idea that this is even a possibility would cause many people to reevaluate sending a beloved family member to a nursing facility as they should. home care workers save lives and tax dollars. in our area, just last month, an in-home care worker and their recipient were found dead in their home. the home care worker was 61 and died of natural causes. three days later, the 91-year-old recipient passed away because of being so dependent on that care she was provided with. this is a very poignant example of how important home care workers are. this is also an example of the life saving work that home care workers provide for only the $10 an hour they are being paid. these home care workers make minimum wage and have an average income of $15,000 a year, which happens to be the federal poverty level. we should not be talking about how to cut the program. but instead, talking about how we can increase the funding so the limited and helpless recipients, can get proper hours of care and the dedicated hard working providers can get a paid living wage. thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tina Withrow: hello, my name is withrow, and i am 40 years old, and was born with physical disabilities, as well as i suffer from degenerative disc and osteoarthritis. now, because of the cuts in ihss funding, my husband and i both have been denied ihss hours, which we both so desperately need. my husband is disabled as well as he suffers from osteoarthritis, degenerative disc. and have gone through several surgeries himself since he was six years old. he also has a torn disk that gets irritated very easily when he does strenuous activities such as mopping or helping me with our grocery shopping. we also have a neighbour who relies on ihss and the care of her ihss worker, because she's battling cancer as well as other on going chronic illness. and if she doesn't have the access to ihss hours, she wouldn't be able to clean her own home, cook, prepare meals, do her own laundry, and go grocery shopping. she would be pretty much put in a home, which she doesn't want, and all of us in our complex where we live don't want to see that for her. before my disability had gotten worse, i, myself, was an ihss provider. i took care of my grandmother, who had suffered from diabetes and several strokes. she had lost her ability to walk and use her hands, and if it wasn't for me stepping in when i did as her provider, she would never have gotten bathed and she would never have got medical attention when it was needed. and she would have starved to death. putting the burden to pay ihss workers in the hand of each county would not only strain each county. but would end up harming long-term care facilities by causing them to be full to their capacity. where they would have to turn people down because they didn't have the room for them. and cutting funds to our mental health care system and other vital needed programmes. thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Hennigan Pittsburgh: hello my name is hennigan desiree pittsburgh and i'm here today on behalf of sacramento workers benefit council, because we oppose the states propose ihss cost shift which will primarily affect the poor. the governors new budget proposes the shift over 600 million in ihss costs from the state to the counties. the counties have made it loud and clear to the state that they do not have the revenues to pay for this cost shift. and will have to take the funds from critical county health, mental health and public safety programs. within the sacramento area we see so many on the streets who are there because they lack adequate mental health services to treat the symptoms of hopeless and binding poverty, and the trauma from the wars they have fought in. how could we allow that to get even worse? additionally, the county's ability to pay for the cost increase will only add pressure to cut wages of ihss workers, and hours of care from their recipients of care. ihss is an essential program that ensures the livelihoods of 100s of 1,000s of caregivers and recipients who are already struggling to get by and feed their families. most ihss workers already do not get paid for all of the hours they work and until february of last year, they were among the few groupings of employees of this country who were still denied overtime pay. now, if you approve this new cut that pits counties against ihss workers and recipients. livelihoods of 22,500 ihhs workers right here in sacramento county will be endangered. we call this wage theft, when workers are shorted pay for hours worked. last year, according to economic policy institute, this accounted for $50 billion nationwide. our council has been aiding ihss workers on these cases. each case can take months to resolve. one worker we fought for received $3,000 in back pay she was owed for 100s of unpaid hours. if you cut this budget by over $600 million,  that situation of wage theft will be repeated, as ihss workers will not walk away from a recipient whose hours are up, but still need aid preparing a meal, after a long wait with them to visit the doctor. that unpaid labor of the workers does not pay their rent. time and time again, the burden of new legislation falls on the poor who can cannot defend themselves. governor brown has promised to help mitigate the budget problems that the counties face under this cost shift, but mere promises is not enough. we need to be sure that our communities and worker are unaffected by this extreme budget proposal. the cost shift might not be necessary if you ally and get organized with other states to advocate to the federal level for funds. do not let the governor take the easy way out. we demand the following one, the state take a ways and means approach to resolving the budget issues such that the state ensures no cuts to ihss. two, that the state and counties do not make funds to ihss from enter vital health, mental health and other state or county funded programs. so, as to not negatively impact the well being of low income communities. three, that the state finds the funds by investigating ways to eliminate state tax breaks for large corporate interests in california. or organize with other states to demand the federal government send funds needed to cover the program. we are looking at you to stand with us, thank you.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 33, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2287, 'end': 2292, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alexandra Berg: My name is Alexandra Berg. I am a resident of Placer County, excuse me, Shasta County, and I have lived in Redding for 13 years. Previously, I lived in Placer County, where I owned three businesses for many years. I am here representing Marcela Revellta and she is an home caregiver for her disabled mother. She can not be here because she runs a childcare Center for Head Start our every home in cares for her mother seven days a week. I am representing this on her behalf. My name is Marcela Revellta I take care of her mother who is disable and goes to dialysis three times a week. She use to work at a plant nursery until her arthritis will not allow her to work any longer. After breaking her hip, she is totally unsteady on her feet. And then, she fell and broke her arm last year. She has extreme weakness in both arms and is unable to sit up by herself when she gags or vomits after dialysis. I have two children to take care of and a daycare for my own income. Since she needs help to eat and easily chokes, meal times are the greatest need for workers. Unfortunately, this means splitting shifts, which is hard for workers. At night my mother is wakeful often coughing and gagging so I sleep next to her, and that means getting usually less than four hours of sleep nightly. Then I have to get up and prepare for daycare kids. My mother needs someone with her 24/7 even though the IHSS only covers six hours a day, it helps me keep my mother at home. Even though, excuse me, without it I would not be able to care for her and she would need a nursing home at much greater cost to the state. We should fund the IHSS program more, not less. I also care for my husband who has advanced Parkinsons disease. He will soon also need in home care so it is critically important that this IHSS isn't cut in any way. The need is great and becoming greater everyday. We have to offer this assistance to this growing number of elderly and disabled people, who have often worked extremely hard their whole life. The State needs to fully fund the program to meet the growing need, and not look for ways to cut it by transferring costs to the already underfunded counties. Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 237, 'end': 253, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 486, 'end': 502, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cida Gemelly: My name is Cida Gemelly and this is my third trip here. I came to the one on the 2nd and I came to the one on the 8th. Now, I'm here again saying the same thing I said then. I come from Lake County. We've not only been devastated by fires but, we've been devastated by floods. We can't afford for the governor's proposal to go through because, I guarantee you besides the budget. And the money going back to the counties, expecting them to fund the IHSS funds. I will tell you I have had experience, I've been here 21 years, and every time our county was expected to fund the IHSS program, for whatever reason, it didn't go to us. It went to social services, it went to foster care, it went other places. Folks, 21 years and I'm now working for $10.50. I would like to see any one of you sitting there right now in this Committee to go and live on that per month and have your rent be $900 a month. And let's not forget when we turn our time cards in they get mailed to Chico then they get processed and go out by the state controller's office after they're processed. Most of us get our check on the day we're sending in our new time cards. If we're lucky. There have been providers that have lost homes because they can't get their payment checks on time. We wait seven to 10 days, business days before they even send them to us. And then they sit in our bank for three days because that's what the state controllers office tells our banks to do. Wait three business days before putting our direct deposit in. So not only are we waiting the 10 days, but we're waiting another three on top of that. And if it's on a Friday, then we wait until Tuesday to get our money. And we barely get enough to live on to begin with. Besides this proposal I already know ever body says, well, if we send it back to the, we cut from the budget of the counties and make them pay for the IHSS program, it own be IHSS that's going to get cut. Folks I'm here to tell you it will be the first thing on the chopping block in any of these counties, all the rural counties. The first thing they're going to chop is IHSS. I'm here to tell you, you know who's going to lose them? It's the people that only have like 30 to 50 hours a month or 56 hours a month. They're the ones they're going to cut. And those people need us to go in and fix their meals and do their laundry and do their shopping for them because they can't do it for themselves. I have three recipients. One is my son and I work with two others. One of them is on 24/7 oxygen. She cannot do her own shopping. She cannot take herself to the Doctor. If I lose my hours and I have to go work somewhere else, who's going to take care of her? It certainly isn't going to be the nursing homes. You have no place in the State of California to put all the people that we take care of in each county for IHSS, into nursing homes. It ain't going to happen. You don't have the staff and you don't have the places. Lake County has three nursing homes, all three of them are full. When someone from our county hurts themselves and they are disabled and have to go to one of the rehabs, they can't go to a rehab in our own county. They ship them down to Nappa or ship them to Santa Rosa or Oakland because there is no room in our local nursing homes. That's what this proposal will do to this counties, it won't just heart us, it's going to devastate us. Lake County is not going to know what to do if they lose that amount of money I just plead with you to vote no on this proposal. because unless you've lived it, you may not understand it. You may think we're just giving you a bunch of facts and that we're just trying to play on your sympathy. But folks, I'm telling you, try living on it for one week. I don't think any of you could do it. And especially since you can't even get your paycheck. I venture to say that you guys don't wait three to four weeks to get paid for a two-week period. We do. And then there's the other issue, state bargaining. We were excited, ecstatic IHSS union workers were ecstatic that we were finally going to have state bargaining. Because trust and believe I have worked with the BOS. I'm on the bargaining negotiating team in our county. They don't want in the rural counties to work and negotiate a contract that's quality living contract. We need the state to take it over, they need to be our bargaining negotiator because trust and believe the Board of Supervisors will keep those rural counties poor as long as they can. Some of our counties aren't even making, well they have to make $10.50 an hour now. But until that happened, they were making way less. And here's my other concern about this budget. The unions worked really hard and long to get us overtime. We had to take it all the way to the Supreme Court to win. Look it up if you don't believe in my facts. That is where it went, that is how we won our overtime and it took us 21 years to do it. How many other areas, how many other jobs already had the overtime and they didn't have to work for it, they deserved it and first of all, for the IHSS workers, our overtime is capped. We are only allowed to get 66 hours a week, even if our recipients need more than that. We're allowed 66 hours. That's our cap. How many other professions that get overtime have a cap? Not many. We are the largest work forces in most of the counties, especially the rural counties. We are the largest work force in our county. And we are the ones that are struggling the hardest to survive. And believe me, we save you money. Everyday we go in to take care of our recipients, we are saving this state money. Yet it seems like we have to plea and bargain and beg to get just enough to survive. And we still don't have enough, 10.50 isn't enough. Minimum wage should have went to $15 an hour for everybody across the board. Because that's a living wage. Some of these places, the rents have gone sky high in the rural counties. I pay $900 a month for my house. And then I still have to figure out how to pay for the utilities and all the other stuff. And trust me folks, if it wasn't because I'm getting a widow pension from Social Security, I wouldn't be able to do it. I have to work three recipients,156 hours is what I work a month, to just barely scrape by. So please hear me and please think very hard and long before you say yes. Because if you're voting yes, forget it. Think about what we've said to you today. It's meaningful, it's true. It's not just something we're just coming to you with, feel sorry for us, woe is us. That's not it. What we tell you is the facts and if you ever went into the trenches, you'd see it. Thank you, and I hope I haven't made anybody upset. If I have, I apologize.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Charlotte Leo: Hi, my name is Charlotte Leo and I'm a proud United Domestic Workers. And I'm here to talk to you guys. I love and truly care about other people. I love to make them smile and I love to make their house sparkly clean. Because a clean house makes anybody feel good and keeps them out of the hospital. And please, please, please give us our state bargaining, because it's not helping that we don't have it. I heard one county, they told them before the minimum wage, they told them, why don't you just wait till the minimum wage comes? That's it, thank you, have a great day.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lisa Scott: afternoon, i'm an ihss care provider. we are here for you to protect our counties and allow statewide bargaining. my name is lisa hennigan scott, i'm a udw provider from el dorado county. and i provide for three recipients for the last 13 and a half years. now, you guys have all heard that a lot of women take care of family. i have taken care of these three people that i didn't know any of them. in the last two years, i just lost a recipient about a week ago. she was court-ordered to go into a nursing home. and i firmly believe that the nursing home is the reason why she passed away. she was not taken care of. she was urinary incontinent and she had bed sores. that was not taken care. i was taking care of them, they were healing. and that's just what i wanted to share with you guys is that it's just not family taking care of family. it's other people taking care of other people, i didn't know any of these guys. and i've done them for 13 and a half years, thank you.
[{'start': 125, 'end': 144, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alabani Lopez: hello, my name is alabani lisa lopez. i"m a retired member of seiu, been involved for over 50 years. let's stay with the state, not the county. in behalf of our brothers and sisters that i'm doing this service for the elderly, the disabled. i've got two titanium knees, but i'm working at it, the big muscles, to support. you need to support our people, our brothers and sisters. thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Savah Yancy: Hi, my name is Savah Yancy and I am a single mother of three, a student at Delta college, and a home care provider representing members of San Joaquin County. I care for two recipients, which are my grandparents. I've been doing it for over eight years now, I don't get enough hours. My income from IHSS doesn't provide me enough to cover for my rent, my utilities, clothes for my kids, gas to get to work. This program not only allows me to work, but allows me to have my grandparents live in their own home and get the care that they need and communicate with someone who understands their needs. This program is not only an essential program, but is a vital need to individuals who cannot care for themselves. So I hope these stories today touch your heart like they had touched mine. I support the proposal by the IHSS coalition. And please protect county services and allow statewide bargaining for IHSS providers. Thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicole Torres: Hi, I'm Nicole Torres. I'm out of El Dorado County and I had two clients. In 2009, after I lost my mom, I decided to make IHSS work a full time career although with the issues with state wide bargaining, I've had to reconsider my career path which is unimaginable and I'm in support of this, thank you.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julia Levorse: mr. chair, members, julia alabani levorse, on behalf of the urban counties of california, we're also opposed to the $623 million cost shift. as ms baker said from csac, while we can't support the assembly proposal today, we don't object to you adopting it and voting in it. we consider it a backstop. we are in negotiations with the administration. we are making progress. i think this takes a lot of time for us to look at all the data and the numbers and confirm the numbers, to get on the same page with the administration. we do see that we need to lower that number so we don't want to accept that 623 is real at this point. but we sincerely appreciate the assembly proposal and the work that you've done and we would really appreciate the ongoing conversations with the administration continuing and not hurting our organizations. but we consider this a backstop and very much appreciate your work on this issue, thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 147, 'end': 152, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tracy Ryan: good afternoon, ryan, rural county representatives of california. i would also, just to align my comments with my county agencies before me and that we are very appreciative of the commitment of this committee to try to lessen the impacts to our counties, especially rural counties, thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tia Orr: Good afternoon, Mr Chair, Tia Orr, on behalf of the Service Employees International Union. I'd first, again, like to thank the Committee for your hard work on putting this proposal forward. We obviously have huge concerns with the shift to counties in the tune of $620 some odd million. We also want to ensure that our IHSS workers have a place to bargain at the State of California. We look forward to continue to working with the governor's office and your staff. We believe we can come to some type of compromise, thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Schrider: mr chair and members, paul julia schrider, i think libby said what i was going to say pretty well. so, i just want to thank you, your staff, the minority staff, mr vice chairman, the speaker staff, and i also want to thank the administration for staying open to a solution that might be different than what they originally proposed so, thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 51, 'end': 56, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Marty Omoto: Marty Omoto, California Disability Community Action Network and the California Prison Center Advocacy Partnership, and a family member. First, I want to thank the Subcommittee for doing this informational hearing in Fresno, that was very meaningful to our communities. So, thank you for that. Thank you for also taking public comment. Not everybody would do that, and for all the members to be here, that's deeply appreciated. Their support the work of the Subcommittee staff and its recommendation, it's a great least starting point and we're really appreciative of that and strongly supportive.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bob Benson: Bob Benson from the California Person Centered Policy, Person Centered Advocacy Partnership.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bonnie Newman: good afternoon. my name's newman, i'm from calaveras county. i'm an ihss worker for the past 18 years and i'm on the ihss advisory committee, as well as a member of the california in home support of service consumer alliance. you may know that calaveras county suffered a devastating fire last year. we're still recovering. one tenth of our county was charred.550 homes were lost in a county that had only 45,000 people. i don't know how many are left, probably between 40,000 and 45,000. i stand in opposition to the governor's proposal to shift the fiscal responsibilities. it would just be horrible for our county, we're already dipping into every contingency, teeter fund, anything that's available. that happened last year, i don't know what would occur this year. i also oppose forming a state-wide authority bargaining unit at this time. our local public authorities were created to do bargaining and if we shift that responsibility to the state, what is going to happen to our local authorities? i would imagine we could defund them, it's about $60 million a year that could go somewhere else, but there's responsibilities would probably have to be shifted to the social services and that would increase funds at that point. and if the local public authorities no longer serve their original purpose, and we begin eliminating unnecessary departments. i think we might want to look at ... program which is the state payroll program which is just causing torture to home care workers right now. i think that responsibility should also be shifted back to the counties. until we're aware of all the ramifications of changes in our program and we're okay with those changes, i don't think we can support any change on that level at all. and if they're going to impact me and my client, i say no.  if you'll allow me to be the devil's advocate in one respect here, what if this program were to be eliminated? it costs a couple of $1000 a month to keep a person healthy and happy in their home and, they might live six or eight years. if we put them in an institution, where the average length of life is 13 months, although it costs more, we could save money in the long range. in 13 months, they'll be dead, and we don't have to pay for them any more. is that where we want to go? is that who we want to be? i think it's really important to consider the importance and the vital integrity of this program keeping people safe in their own homes. and i had the thought recently. i was seven years old when i took the brownie oath, and it was, i promise to do my duty to god and my country, to help other people every day, especially those at home. when i was seven years old i didn't know i'd be a home care worker, but that's who i am, helping those at home. thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Iliana Ramos: Iliana Ramos, Department of Finance. We just want to indicate for the record that we're not supportive with the proposed actions. At this time, we don't have a fiscal proposal given that the proposed action is in concept form, but we do want to note some concerns with that concept. First, that depending on the implementation, the courts may deem the using of special funds to offset some of the county costs as not legal. So we're concerned with that. We also want to ensure that, we also know that it's unclear, there's going to be sufficient 91 realignment funds to be able to pay back the special funds that are used. We note that diverting of special funds may cause cash flow problems for some of the agencies. There maybe be general fund cost pressure to back fill any special funds that needs to be repaid immediately before there's sufficient 91 realignment funds available. And it may limit the administrations ability to do short term loans from special funds to support the general fund for cash flow purposes. This may mean that the administration will need to borrow from outside sources.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : Thank you Dr. Wood. Looking for a second? Second from Assembly member Mathis. Can we call roll please?
[{'start': 14, 'end': 18, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 70, 'end': 76, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dirk Simmons: good morning, dirk jonah simmons, department of finance. the governor's budget proposes $7 million in a one-time general fund to encourage local governments to participate in the census bureau's local update of census address program, also known as the luca program. and with me this morning, i have karen louis, officer from the department of finance.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 300, 'end': 311, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jason Gonzales: Mr. Chairman and members. I know the Chair is all too familiar with this issue. Jason Gonzales representing three of the four newly incorporated cities. To the chair and Mr. Hill's point, this is about $14 million in a $6 billion pool if you will that is what used to be via left backfill. So we are very much supportive of any solution that can resolve this hit for local governments. Jurupa Valley as an example, lost 40 plus percent of their entire general fund. Not their property taxes, their entire general funds. So, a hit like we've never seen on local governments before. That happened in 2011, so we're supportive of any solution to the chair and the administration may be able to develop, thank you.
[{'start': 80, 'end': 94, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 174, 'end': 178, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Gene Hurst: hello mr. chair, gene here today on behalf of the riverside county board of supervisors also in strong support. we'd sure like to get this done soon.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dorothy Johnson : good afternoon. dorothy dirk johnson on behalf of csac. we've long supported a solution for this problem and we're pleased to offer our support today.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 36, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Heather Halsey: Heather Halsey, Executive Director of Commission on State Mandates.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Heidi Palchik: heidi, assistant executive director of the commission on state mandates.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carolyn Chu: Carolyn Chu, LAO.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Hill: Chris Hill, Department of Finance. Thanks for joining us. Who wants to start?
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dorothy Johnson : good morning, mr. chair and members. dorothy dorothy johnson with the california state association of counties. we definitely appreciate the staff comments on the, perhaps, need to revise some of the mandate reimbursement process, but we must continue to express our deep concerns about the delay of repayment for this past debt. i know it's marked as savings for the state, but these are costs that our local agencies have already had to carry out for services and programs. and so, we again, express our concerns about the ongoing suspension for the mandated programs and services, thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 60, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kim Alexander: Good morning, I'm Kim Alexander with the California Voter Foundation. We have a letter before the Committee asking that you remove the election mandates from the list of mandates to be suspended. We are concerned that voters are not being treated equally in the state, and is that, they're here in the next report from the LAO. That registration levels varied from county to county often based on how well resourced the county is. The state has increasingly passed laws that permit, but do not require counties to treat voters equally. And this has resulted in unequal treatment of voters and widespread voter confusion, that in the last election, resulted in a lawsuit, and a great deal of voter confusion. So we think that voters need to be treated the same. When they're requesting a vote by mail ballot, our letter to the Committee illustrates just one way that voters are treated differently. Counties that are well resourced have options for voters to send in their requests online or by phone. Counties with fewer resources don't offer those options to voters. It effectively changes the timeline for when voters have to get those requests in. All you have to do is look at county election websites, and you'll see vast differences in the ways that voters are able to be served, based on the counties' resources and their size. So we encourage you to remove those from the list of mandates to be suspended. We note that Californians are more engaged in politics than ever before. And their ability to participate in elections should not be limited to the location where they live or the size of their county's elections budget. And the only way to ensure all California voters have equal voting opportunities, regardless of where they live, is for the state to restore election mandates funding, enact laws that require equal treatment of California voters, and they pay for it. And now is the time to demonstrate the state's commitment to supporting local election programs that facilitate participation for all Californians. Thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Hill: chris dorothy hill, department of finance again. the governor's budget does of course propose to continue the suspension of the six elections related mandates, resulting in the annual savings of in the neighborhood of $30 million. we would note that we recently released to the legislature a statutorily mandated survey of counties. and this was based on the most recent election. and in that survey, we asked the counties whether or not they were performing the activities specified in the mandates despite the suspension. and we submitted our survey anonymously to all 58 counties. we received 48 responses of which 40 were actually complete and usable. and according to the 40 counties that submitted usable and complete responses, it looks like virtually all of them are performing the mandated activities despite the suspension. i do appreciate that that's not going to really sit well with counties. because they're saying, yes, we're doing, but that's truly required to be reimbursed, and while we're doing it we would still like to have our money and we do appreciate that. but we do note that despite the suspension updates it looks like most of these activities are being carried through.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nick Schroeder: nick chris schroeder with the lao. the one thing i would say is that, the flexibility that the block grant model would provide would allow the legislature to, in the future, modify the requirements so that it would become more modern. and so if there was an electronic voting component, that could be added to that block grant.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dorothy Johnson : Hello again, Dorothy Johnson with CSAC. Again, also with my cursory review of the LOA's report, want to thank them for putting forward the suggestion. I will say again as a preliminary comment, sometimes block grants only help those counties that already sort of have the means to implement the end goals of the program or the requirements. And unfortunately that may not achieve the overall goal of creating more consistency in voting practices and equipment throughout the state. So just want to add that, but we are encouraged, I do agree with many of the good points raised by the LAO in their study. Thank you.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 28, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kim Alexander: yes, hi, kim nick alexander with the california voter foundation. we also appreciate the report lao did. it's a lot of great information all put together in one place. i want to note that the lao is not alone in recommending block grants. the october 2016 report from the department of finance also recommends a competitive grant model, so you have both those departments suggesting something along similar lines. and we are working on a funding proposal with csac and the california association of clerks and election officials, league of women voters and other advocates to provide an alternative funding model along the lines of what lao has recommended. so we look forward to sharing that with legislative leaders and chairman roth in particular. i hope you will take an interest in looking at this funding proposal. i want to point out though that we really need both, we need the mandates turned on and we need a block grant approach. and the block grant approach will be more meaningful it it's actually a choice that countries are making, whether they're going to provide a mandate reimbursement process for themselves or pick the block grant. so, i hope that we can work together moving forward in this and i really appreciate the committee's ongoing attention to this issue. thank you.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 96, 'end': 99, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 192, 'end': 195, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 637, 'end': 640, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 731, 'end': 735, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
 : I have to admit, I was a practicing architect and I blamed everything on DSA before I got here and found out that wait a second. There's issues that are changed.
[]
Miles Brunette: Miles Brunette Deputy Director of administration for DGS.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Fitzpatrick: John Fitzpatrick, Department of Finance.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tamara Johnson: tamara kim johnson, department of finance.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Helen Kerstein: helen tamara kerstein, legislative analyst office.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tamara Johnson: Tamara Johnson, Department of Finance. We'd just like to note that it would be a physical change in their location because they are currently located in the Department of Rehab building. So it would just be a physical change in their location but not a change in their role and responsibilities.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Matsura: melissa helen matsura, department of technology, deputy director of administration.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Tong: good morning chair and member of the committee. amy, director of the department.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ted Ryan: Ted Ryan, Department of Finance.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lourdes Morales: morales, lao.
[]
Mark Tollefson: Good morning. Mark Tollefson, Department of Finance.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Emma Jung-worth: Emma Jung-worth, Department of Finance.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anita Lee: anita, lao.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 7, 'end': 10, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Greg Brest: sure. greg melissa brest, department of finance.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dominic Adira: dominic greg adira, department of finance.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ann Hollingshead: ann dominic hollingshead, legislative analyst's office.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Noah Johnson: Good afternoon Mr Chair, Noah Johnson and the Department of Finance. The 2017- 18 Governor's Budget proposes to eliminate the authority to spend 67.5 million general fund for the community infrastructure grant program. These grants were intended to increase the number of treatment facilities and promote diversion programs. And the funding would be used for facility acquisition or renovation equipment acquisition and start up or expansion costs. Given the lower than expected revenue picture, the Governor's Budget proposes to pull back one time spending commitments, rather than make reductions to existing and ongoing programs to bring the state's finances back into balance. In the initial stages of the program and the funding remains uncommitted at this time.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Bear: good afternoon, dr. pan and fellow policy makers. mary with the county behavioral health director association. we're oppose to this proposal to revert these funds for the reasons already mentioned and is especially to emphasize that we're in the middle of the op crisis. where these infrastructure grounds are particularly important. thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 23, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 50, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dr. Lynn Thull: Dr. Lynn Thull from California Alliance of Child and Family Services. And we are concerned about this proposal, so we are encouraging you to reject the reversion of these funds. It is a very small amount of money. There has been a lot of work and attention paid to the lack of children's crisis services throughout the state. The OAC had a series of stakeholder and subject matter experts workgroup last year that indicated there is no place in the state where there is a complete crisis continuum of care for children in the state. I have many cases that have been told to me, two recent ones, I'll give you briefly. There's a grandparent who's taking care of her child in Alameda County, had her youth placed into the emergency department for 45 days. Because she was unable to find crisis services for that child. And then there was a recent one in Sacramento County of a 16 year old who was in the emergency department for 30 days due to lack of services. And so I encourage you to restore this funding.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 14, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mary Ader: Mary Ader with the County Behavioral Health Directors Association and also on behalf of the County Welfare Directors Association. State general fund support to extend these services to children and youth is critical to enabling communities throughout the state to establish age appropriate crisis care. Californians experiencing a mental health crisis need that state general fund support to increase the quality and continuity of care. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Perry: mr. chairman and members, randy jonah perry with aaron read and associates on behalf of the california children's hospital association. we ask the committee, the subcommittee, reject the reversion of the $17 million. our eight free standing hospitals work with counties and local community partners to extend these services. and we ask that we not go back on the program that we all created last year. thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 49, 'end': 59, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Diane Stanton: Thank you, Mr. Chair. Diane Stanton, Executive Director of The California Health Facilities Financing Authority. We don't have an opinion or a position on this proposal yet.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Diane Stanton: sounds good. diane, i'm the executive director of the health facilities financing authority, which is housed in the state treasurer's office.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Newton: mark, lao.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 6, 'end': 9, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ben Johnson: Ben Johnson, LAO.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Noah Johnson: Noah Johnson, Department of Finance.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Guadalupe Manriquez: Guadalupe Manriquez, Department of Finance. Okay, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Newton: mr. chair, mark with the lao. if i may just make a very brief comment on issue 2 and 3, which are the main issues before the committee. as we noted, it would be very important to look at the state's fiscal situation in may. and things may be different that can accommodate the proposed spending from last year. but what it really comes down to, this really is an issue of legislative priorities. and if in may it does appear that there are a need for budget solutions, there are many budget solutions that the legislature can look to. certainly looking at one time spending, that is often a prudent and sort of appropriate place to turn. but sometimes turning that way may be inconsistent with the legislature's priorities. so our office is, if there are need, if we find ourselves with a need for budget solutions in may, our office is certainly available to provide a lot of assistance on what budget solutions may be more consistent with the legislature's priorities.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Ader: Good afternoon, Mary Ader with the County Behavioral Health Directors Association. We wanted to support all of those comments of Los Angeles County and also support the notion of extending the timeline to June 30th, 2121 for all the reasons mentioned. Thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Guadalupe Manriquez: mr. chair, manriquez with the department of finance. so there is $2.8 million in reimbursements, those would be federal funds. but the $142.5 million is all general fund. so we would have to extend those appropriately.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brenda Grayluch: brenda, assistant deputy, mental health, substance use disorders services.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erin Baylor: Erin Baylor, Department of Health Care Services.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Toby Ewing: toby randy ewing, i'm the director of the mental health services oversight and accountablity commission, thank you, senator.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Nugent: Mark Nugent, LAO.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ben Johnson: Ben Johnson, LAO.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Sankis: Jessica Sankis, Department of Finance.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kirsten Barlow: good afternoon, kirsten with the county behavioral health directors association. on the mhsa reversion issue, i think it's important that folks know that counties have been, really, on the record for many years about the importance of getting clear and final guidance out to counties about what exactly is the intent. and we've really actively participated with department of healthcare services on their proposed regulation package. we're working really hand in hand to try to find a way to make this doable from the state's prospective, as well as the county's prospective. we appreciate that the oac is drawing attention to this very longstanding issue. we agree with their recommendation in the draft paper that was circulated that to the extent we're going to start actually doing reversion. we look forward and prospectively apply whatever the policy ends up being. however, we really have what i would characterize as the strongest opposition we can have to the proposal from the commission, as well as senate bill 192 this year, that would, as mr. ewing described, capturing the money and sort of doubling down on the incentives for counties to spend it. i think going back to the initiative itself and the first few years of implementation, we saw in our california mental health system really the first time that consumers and family members were not just asked but required to be central to the planning and decision making around how prop 63 funds gets spent at the community level. so i think we would take strong exception to the proposal to capture unspent funds, and provide them to decision makers in sacramento. no offense, obviously, because we're all here because we want to be a part of that process, to decide what the unmet needs are. and instead, really believe that at the local level where consumers, family members, educators, child welfare advocates are at a local table together thinking about if they are provided additional funds that had come from reversion, what are the unmet needs in our community as opposed to looking at a set of statewide priorities that can change and shift with political climate from one year to the next. thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1056, 'end': 1061, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Susan Rajlal: Good afternoon, I'm Susan Rajlal from Los Angeles County Department of Mental Health. I agree with what my colleague Kirsten Barlow had to say. But I would additionally like to say that in the proposal, I believe that it would give small counties five years instead of the three years for reversion, and I'd just like to mention that we acknowledge that small counties have problems, but large counties have problems as well. They're economies of scale with both. So we would like to see one reversion period for all counties and secondarily, I would really like to accentuate that we believe that the decision making on how our MHSA funds should be spent, along with our stakeholders at the local level, and we don't want to see anymore statewide grant programs with our MHSA money. We want to have the money available to be spent in the way that local needs are expressed. Thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 117, 'end': 131, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dr. Lynn Thull: hi, dr. lynn again from california alliance of child and family services, we were actually a sponsor on this bill, so we appreciate it getting passed through last year. we are concerned about the delay in creating regulations on this, as we heard on the earlier item, with therapeutic foster care, it's really hard to implement a program just based on an information notice before the regulations are completed, it's kind of like asking someone to drive to a place they've never been to before without a road being laid, or without even a firm decision of where the road's going to go. so until we have a better idea of what those regulations are going to look like, it's impossible for the county mental health plans to do this in there, or we're not going to be able to make the change that's so needed, thank you.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 12, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Karen Savage: Karen Savage, California Pan-Ethnic Health Network, and I want to thank the Chair for these questions about oversight and quality improvement. These are important for us and we do have some concerns. We understand the department is doing a lot of work in this area, and we think that special terms and conditions that CMS did give the state, particular to 1915B were really important. And we do see really significant racial, ethnic, language disparities when we look at mental health services. And we think it's really important that the state is paying particular attention, and has the tools and is doing the monitoring, and the reporting, and the oversight in those areas. And, I would just note that the special terms and conditions do require the dashboard to report on the language capacities of our plans, and the dashboard does not currently include those elements, as well as things like wait times to appointments That is not reflected yet and so would really encourage the department to be working with stakeholders on that element. We understand some of these things are coming from the final rule, but would really encourage the department to consider more robust stakeholder process around some of those things. So, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brenda Grealish: good afternoon, thank you so much for having me here. i'm brenda toby grealish, i'm the assistant deputy director of mental health and substance use disorder services.  so, the performance outcome system is something that i've been working on for quite a few years. it's probably my favorite project in the department. but we had legislation passed in 2012 and then amended in 2013 to develop a performance outcome system for children and youth who receive medical services under epst. and we've had stakeholder groups and different subgroup meetings to really develop a robust system. we've got a plan that we laid out a few years ago, and we've just been working on implementing that plan. so some of the questions that you've asked in the agenda have to do with a couple key components of that plan, of having to do with our functional assessment tools. the update on the development is, in the last year we've had a study with ucla to sweep national and international literature to see what functional tools are out there, see what other states are doing, see what our counties are doing. and after that kind of a phase one sweep of the literature, took it to a phase two modified delphi panel of a variety of experts who worked at the counties, different levels within the counties, different disciplines within the counties, urban, rural, trying to find a really good balance of folks and also consumer family members to really look at all the tools. and so ucla's wrapped up their study. they've given up their recommendation, and we've been working now to determine which tool or set of tools would fit the needs of our system to be able to track functioning over time. so i think this kind of goes to your question you were just asking in the previous part is, how do you know the kids are getting better. and that's a key question, and that's what we're just on the cusp of moving forward with. and in terms of with whatever tool we select in the training, in governor's budget we put money into the budget for training. so counties will get the money to do the money and they'll be reimbursed for them. and then, of course, that'll all roll up into a quality improvement process.  so we've been working, we have a subject matter experts work group for our performance outcome system who's given us recommendations. we've been looking nationally again hedis measures. looking at what other areas of our department are doing, so we make sure that we're in sync.
[{'start': 58, 'end': 78, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dr. Lynn Thull: Dr. Lynn Thull of California Alliance of Child and Family Services again. I have been a member of the performance outcome system's subject matter expert group longer than any of these folks up here have been involved in the project, so since the very beginning. I am very pleased that we're getting close to choosing a functional assessment measure that quantitative data that's available now is something, and it's given us some good information to work with. But, like you said, many times, what we really need to know is if any of these services that we're providing are making a difference in the child's life, and we can't do that until we have that finished data. So, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 14, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tom Renphrey: yes, thank you dr. pan. good afternoon. i'm tom brenda renphrey. i'm deputy director for substance use disorder services for the county behavioral health director's association. and i will just say that we are extremely grateful for the generous sgf contribution to help cover the non federal share of costs for, especially for the expansion of drug medi-cal services. there is one restriction in the governor's budget that will allow counties only to be able to claim sgf for two of the expansion benefits. that would be for non-paranatal residential and for intensive outpatient. however, there are other benefits that are required as part of the organized delivery system, including case management and recovery services. but counties cannot claim sgf or that, and we are kind of baffled as to why counties should not be able to utilize the sgf for those other benefits, since we think there's plenty of money there to be able to cover all of the services. but for some reason, we're restricted only to be able to claim for the two. so that would be our only comment. otherwise, we're very grateful to the administration for the sgf. thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 22, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 44, 'end': 63, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marlies Perez: great, that's mine. hi, i'm marlies tom perez. i'm with department of healthcare services. and so, our request is actually for a total of 27 positions. 20 of them would be permanent positions, and of those 20, 14 would be new and then 6 would be establishing limited term positions into permanent positions. and then the other seven would be limited term funding. and of those, four of them would be specifically for los angeles county, which los angeles county would be providing the funding source for those. and then the other positions would be five-year limited term. and so what those positions would be working on, is we have had really, over the last three or four years, an explosion of spotlight, lots of different funding sources for substance use treatment services.  of course we've had aca expansion that we've talked about. we've also had private insurance companies funding. we've had the opioid epidemic. so what we're experiencing at dhcs, we license various different residential services, narcotic treatment programs, driving under the influence programs, just an increase in access, which is a really great thing, except we don't have the workforce to review the applications. we have statutory requirements that we're not meeting unfortunately. we have to go out every two years to visit the facilities when they renewed and then of course we have a myriad of other tasks involved with helping the program with technical assistance. unfortunately, sometimes suspending or revoking licenses and then we also have complaints due to the death, low, medium, high complaints and other issues. so these staff would be assisting with all those different tasks. the reason why we have some of them as limited term is the trend in our facilities keeps increasing, but we're hoping through this five year process we'll be able to see where this trend levels off.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sherry Daley: good afternoon, dr. pan. thank you for your generosity. sherry marlies daley with the california consortium of addiction programs and professionals. and here today to discuss what kind of impact this increase in staff would have on licensing fees.  our last increase in 2014 of 21 new positions more than doubled the residential license fee, 110% increase. with the opioid epidemic and the eve of prop 64 funding coming in, the need to expand capacity has never been greater, and the per bed license fee and the overall license fees are dampening on the ability to create capacity particularly in counties that haven't opted into the waiver or are rural in nature. i would also like to ask what the inputs to the licensure program are. 11833.02 limits what can be evaluated to go into that licensing fee, and as we can read in the analysis, regulation of counselors themselves, the individuals, keeps getting included in that category and we're not sure that it should be there. we'd also like to know how much of the total amount in the roth fund is spent on enforcement and if there's any way that fines and penalties could be looked at so that the bad apples in the system can contribute more to that licensing fund rather than spreading that increase for staff amongst the good programs. we'd like to work with committee and with the department on some ideas in lowering that roth cost. the current statute allows the state to make categories of how licensing fees are distributed between the licensees and we'd like to see some movement in providing a break for our non-profits. addiction treatment comes in all different sizes and shapes in california. we have little mom and pop places that are safety net in many counties that are six bed and under, and really these types of 110% increases in licensing fees directly impacts their capacity. we'd like to see at this time if there would be a possibility to waive some fees for our non-profits out there given the opioid epidemic, and the need to rapidly increase capacity, perhaps for a two or a three year period. we'd also like to explore the idea of perhaps making a longer licensing cycle for the good apples who have no or little infractions on their site visits. maybe stretch theirs out to three years, four years so that the cost to staff is less and the cost to the licensees is less. thank you. thank you. did you want to address any of those?
[{'start': 20, 'end': 23, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 56, 'end': 70, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 71, 'end': 76, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Emalie Huriaux: it's okay. it happens a lot. it's emalie. and thank you so much for allowing us to present on this proposal from community stakeholders. so i'm the director of federal and state affairs at project inform and we're a 32 year old non-profit that's working to end hiv and hepatitis c. i'm also the chair of the california hepatitis alliance which is a coalition of about 100 organizations working on hepatitis b and c in california. and project inform is one of the members of the california hiv alliance, and so this item came from a california hiv alliance and calhep proposal. so the absence of the hiv set-aside funds has been a loss for several important hiv programs but also for hepatitis c testing programs that were leveraging some of this funding for hepatitis c services as well, and it's meant a deficit of thousands of tests both for hiv and hepatitis c for people at high risk for these viruses, and particularly, for people who inject drugs. in san diego, county, for example, there's one agency that had conducted 4,000 hiv tests and 2,000 hepatitis c tests each year in drug treatment programs using the hiv set-aside funds, and they're no longer able to provide this level of service. in many rural counties, the set-aside was the only resource available for for hiv testing and for hepatitis c testing in community settings and the testing programs that we're serving those individuals no longer exist and the loss of funds has really meant a deficit of integrated hiv prevention, hepatitis c prevention and substance use services. in some of the rural areas this money was leveraged to provide mobile counselors who travel throughout the counties, and in some cases these were the only lgbt competent providers in the area. you, i believe, received a report from the california hiv/aids policy research centers which did a rapid response study documenting how counties had used the hiv set aside and concluded that a reliable source of funding dedicated to providing integrated hiv, hepatitis c, and substance use treatment should be identified in order to protect advances that california has made in identifying and treating these diseases. so we really urge the state to back-fill sort of a weird thing it's not really lost money it's just money that was used for a purpose that can no longer be used for that purposes, but to use general fund to ensure that those services can be provided. and particularly, to serve people who inject drugs, both in drug treatment programs and in syringe exchange programs, so they can both be tested for hiv and hepatitis c and linked to care. and that's really both for their individual health and to prevent forward transmission of these chronic infectious diseases. we are also seeking to have the funds coordinated with department of public health, which houses both of our hepatitis prevention program within the std control branch, and office of aids. and we think that administering these funds through cdph would ensure that they're leveraged with other hiv and hepatitis c prevention, and linkage to care efforts and prioritizing the communities with greatest need. and we really see this as a particular need right now with the opioid epidemic. the cdc has identified two counties in california that have similar conditions to the county in indiana where there was a notable hiv and hepatitis c outbreak, and we're also at a time when we're talking about eliminating hiv and eliminating hepatitis c. just on tuesday, the national academies put out a report about the elimination of hepatitis. in our own state we have a plan laying the framework to get to zero, and san francisco just put out a document about ending hepatitis c. so we think it's really the time to keep investing in these services and not eliminating them.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julia Clems: Hi. Good afternoon. My name's Julia Clems, and this mic is not tall enough. And I live in Berkeley and I work for Berkeley Based Needle Exchange Emergency Distribution, which you can probably guess what our main mission is. We serve People inject drugs who come from local area and also from various parts of Northern California. They're not enough needle exchange, branches or sites that are covered in their own home counties. I'm here to ask for the $12.5 million to make up for the loss of federal funds and I think it's a great purpose to offer care and treatment for HIV and hepatitis C to program clients on the premises where they frequent. So, drug treatment programs, needle exchange programs. And I want to say something about treatment as prevention. If somebody is actively using, they run the risk of transmitting Hepatitis C or HIV. Okay, treatment is prevention. This money would help a lot, thank you.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Wilk: Hi. Good afternoon. My name is Mike Wilk. I manage Infectious Diseases Programs for Health Right 360 in San Francisco. We're the largest non-profit behavioral health CBO in California with over 1000 employees. We're also a member of the San Francisco Community Clinic Consortium. Last year we treated over 28,000 individuals in our primary care facilities, had over 35,000 clinic visits. I'm here to support the proposals put forth by the California HIV Alliance and the California Hepatitis Alliance. The five clinics I work for in San Francisco serve homeless and marginally house populations, people of color, most notably, African Americans and people living with HIV. Many of our clients are substance and injection drug users. Funding for these budget proposals is of paramount importance because we depend on ... block grants, set aside funds to support our HIV HCV rapid testing programs that link clients into care and treatment. The availability of highly effective well tolerated oral HCV therapy gives us the ability to cure hepatitis C. In nearly all infected patients, reducing morbidity and mortality and breaking the cycle of forward transmission. In 2016, out of almost 2,000 people tested at CBOs in San Francisco. Nearly 20% were hep C antibody positive.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Will Lightbourne: Will Lightbourne, Department of Social Services.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Kent: jennifer sherry kent, department of health care services.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ben Johnson: ben, lao.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 5, 'end': 8, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jessica Sankis: Jessica Sankis, Department of Finance.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chi Lee: chi jennifer lee, department of finance.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Kent: Great, so Jennifer Kent with the Department of Healthcare Services, and I may be known as maybe a trouble maker in certain circles. But I think I'm sitting next to a full blown revolutionary to my right. So, Will is very modest, but I think the effort that he's been leading and his staff have been leading on the CCR really speak to some of the really dynamic ways that the state is trying to do better by the children that we as a state have said we're going to be their parents. And we have in the past, I think, failed a lot of those children and this is our collective best effort to both give them the services and the help that they need to be better adults and to raise their own families and to be successful in life. And so, our component as a department is in working as closely as possible to deliver necessary and needed mental health services to these children as early as we can, as appropriately as we can. And so a lot of the work that we have been rolling out also requires partnership on a county level. We run a county operated mental health program, and we oversee 56 county mental health plans, obviously just as closely as Department of Social Services has to work with 58 different child welfare programs. And so I think a lot of the guidance and work that Sarah spoke to about needing to do this up front has been what we have been diligently trying to get out the door as much as possible. We have applications for these short term residential treatment programs to actually apply, they need to be both certified from a Medicaid standpoint. They have to have clear mineral health guidelines in terms of how they're going to be delivering services appropriately from a clinical standpoint. And then we want to make sure that the licenser requirements that they have to meet on the social services side are done in coordination with us so that we're not putting these programs and facilities through in some cases three different bureaucratic processes. We're really trying hard on the front end to get as much of that work done. Another key component besides the mental health certification and application process around the STRTPs, there's a benefit known as therapeutic foster care. These are very, very intensive clinically driven services provided by kind of the top of the top in foster families. These are children that are placed in TFC types of homes in which the parents are providing not only permanent placement or placement for a child but they're also delivering mental health and clinical services to help support that child. And so it's a strong alternative to a residential treatment. In some cases it can be used to either avoid residential placement, or as a step down from a residential placement back into a more family like setting. And so we have worked with both the state Department of Social Services as well the CMS from a claiming standpoint, because there's Medicaid dollars involved. And now we're working on the guidelines, and the clarification, and the billing rules around how counties will be claiming for this. There's also an additional workload obviously that we need to do with the counties for who validates these families. Obviously the foster family agencies that Department of Social Services oversees,
[{'start': 10, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 208, 'end': 212, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1281, 'end': 1286, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Chi Lee: Chi Lee with the Department of Finance, I just wanted also echo that, since Gen 10 we have had some changes in terms of timing and we expect to be revising some components of CCR for the mayor vision.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kirsten Barlow: thank you for having me. kirsten chi barlow, i'm the executive director of the county behavioral health director's association. just a couple of additional comments that kind of complement some of the things that cwda raised and that you heard this morning. i think the child and family team is one symbolic way in which continuum of care form has created a venue at the local level for multiple partners to get into a room. but i definitely have to say that this entire process, of which i've at least been personally involved for now about a year and a half but pre-dated my role here creates at the state level many venues where i think it's been really effective to have all of us in a room together to talk about shared goals around high-needs children who are in our foster care system. wanted to really thank the department of social services for creating an openness to inviting the county behavioral health care system into the conversation in a way that is beyond just the bureaucracy that we're trying to build around services and funding. but they've gone so far as to create an actual office space in their department here in sacramento, for us to provide a staff consultant, to really be there on a day-to-day basis, to provide them with the mental health point of view, as they build ccr. so i wanted to thank the department for that. i think another piece is really that we're through those avenues of planning together here in sacramento and at the local level. we've identified a number of needs that we continue to want to work on. i think it helped us really get a better handle on what it means when folks say its hard to navigate access to mental health care. and hopefully in the coming year we will actually produce jointly some tools that can be used by county social workers, by others, by folks who are resource families who have these children to really understand the multiple places in which they might access mental health services, whether that's through an iep they have in a school-based setting, whether it's through the county mental health system. but also we've identified some gaps around early identification. i think you've heard concerns about whether we're providing timely access, are all the kids who should be receiving care getting it. we know that about half of kids in child welfare have received, at least, a service through the county specialty mental health system. is that enough? we haven't really had that deeper conversation yet about what is enough, how frequent and how early. and the entire county mental health system really is undergoing some changes due to federal oversight around timeliness that hopefully will also help this particular aspect of our services become more concrete, to ensure that every county has really the same guidance around what does it mean to be timely when someone has referred you for an assessment and to get you access to clinical services? i would say just from a funding standpoint. for the most part, the governor's budget in january, as well as the budget act that was passed in 2016 really does acknowledge that ccr does create some new mandates for the county mental health system. and they have acknowledged that in the way of funding, they have earmarked dollars, both in last year's budget and the january budget to help pay for many of the new costs that county mental health departments will have to do in order to comply with their new role. however, i know we will be talking in part b of the agenda around kda. i know that there are some services that are established through kda on which ccr relies, so for example therapeutic foster care which we discussed before is not a new ccr mandate. but really to get children out of congregate care settings. we really want to ensure we have these parents who are willing to be trained. then take children who have a really specialty level of need. however, we would point out that we still have a disagreement with how the administration has decided to fund that service in the sense that they are really expecting that the per diem payments that will go to provide those specialty mental health services are a county responsibility. and so we would seek, as we have in the past few years, as we've tried to get tfc up and running, a solution really to have the state help county share in what looks like around a $7 million a year non federal costs, to pay for therapeutic foster care services to be up and running in the state. thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 213, 'end': 217, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Carroll Schroeder: thank you, schroeder, the california alliance of child and family services. i want to reiterate that ccr is a once in a generation opportunity to get foster care right. it's the first time we've ever really planned foster care form the ground up. and so, i think it's really, really critical. there are lots of keys to the success of continued care reform. i want to talk about two of them. one is a strong and stable cadre of home based family caregivers of resource families. the second is sheltering, moving out of the foster care, which is temporary into permanent and safe families. the problem that we see at this moment is that ccr doesn't provide adequate funding in the foster family agency rates for either of those two things. let me talk about permanency for just a second. the foster family agency rates contain no specified funding for key permanency activities. and three of them particularly, family finding and engagement, supervised visitation, and adoption of reunification support services. both the state and the counties agree that the responsibility for these activities rests with the counties. there's disagreement on whether or not there's funding at either the state level or the county level for that. and so in some respects, the ffa's are caught in the middle. as we look forward to this though, one of the things that's really key here is the future of paarp, which is the private adoption agency reimbursement program. it's been a highly effective funding stream for reimbursing adoption agencies for those unreimbursed costs. it's the only performance based funding stream in foster care and we don't know where that is right now, it was realigned and the future of it is really up in the air. the whole questions of permanency, and the funding for those activities relates directly to the services and supports that susanna was talking about earlier. in order to retain strong and stable county of home-based family care givers, they have to know that services and support that they need are available to them. both to support them but also to support them, if they're caring for. the services and support component and the effort they rate is arguably adequate to take care of basic level of care. and at intensive services foster care level is adequate there. the problem is in between those two levels. and the problem that we see is that the amount of money that's in that rate for that is 44, 44, and $79 between that. and it just doesn't seem to be a place where that's adequate, to reimburse for any degree of service. the other problem that we're concerned about is that the services only rate for county-approved resource families is funded for just three months, total. it's sort of a priming the pump. what we know is that if something is not funded, it won't happen. and then finally, i want to say that there's no provision in the ffa or strtp rates for rate adjustments for adequacy. and we know that the state's history of that is not good. and so, we're looking for something that would say, look, this is so that we don't watch the attrition of this. we don't watch the services and support, we don't watch the good care go under the table as it becomes progressively more inadequate that we have a plan for taking care of that here and going forward. we don't have a direct budget ask. we're committed to continuing to work with the department, with the counties, to find solution to these. if that's not there, we may be back in front of you for the may revise. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1850, 'end': 1857, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kirsten Barlow: Good afternoon, Kirsten Barlow with the County Behavioral Health Directors Association. Just wanted to draw out two very specific fiscal issues, not so much the programmatic. I wanted to, as I had mentioned in my prior testimony on the panel around CCR, therapeutic foster care clearly will be an important service, once we build it. We're still in the process of collaborating with the state to build it. However, we would note that really we'd want to see the administration in the May revise, make an adjustment to how that service is intended to be funded, to at least share the county's cost that are non-federal for implementing that service. I think it's estimated that state-wide, a fully implemented therapeutic foster care, would cost $15 million to implement on an annual basis. Under the term of Prop 30, new services that get provided or required of counties could be shared either 5050 if it's a new state requirement. Or because this is perhaps related to a federal class action settlement, perhaps counties in the state might share in that non-federal share, on the part of state and counties, fifty-fifty. The second piece is that through an information notice, that was released by the department in recent months. They have clarified that because the EPSCT entitlement for children is very broad, we really can't limit these new services to only sub-classes of children. And therefore any child in California with full scope Medi-Cal, may be eligible for an intensive case coordination, or in-home based IHBS services that were established through KDA. The administration has acknowledged, in its budget development, that statewide to expand those services to all eligible full-scope Medi-Cal children, could cost around $18 million a year. But they're not providing new funds for counties, to provide those potential expanded services to full scope Medi-Cal eligible children, and will be seeking an adjustment in the May revise for those two pieces. Thanks.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dr. Lynn Thull: good afternoon. i'm dr. lynn kirsten thull from the california alliance of child and family services. and i actually agree with those comments that were given by our colleagues, over at the county behavioral health directors association. there's a couple more items i want to point out, you have an estimate in your packet that says how many individuals, how many youth are sub-class members. and that estimate is based on, youth who are already receiving specialty mental health services, and meet some other qualifying. but there's also youth who have not yet been assessed, to see if they need specialty mental health service. so we think that number is much greater than that. also, it's important to us that the instructions be given to the counties about how to claim and bill. so any information notice for therapeutic foster care that's been provided so far, does not give that information yet. and so, even though the services were supposed to have started january 1st, the counties are not able to provide these services. because there's no information notice to be up to provide that. thank you.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 42, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cathy Senderling: Thank you, Mr. Chair, Cathy Senderling with the County Welfare Directors Association. Really appreciate the state and the Legislature shining the light, and the efforts that have been undertaken that you've heard about today, and that have really been discussed now for a couple of years in this body. We are the sponsor of SB 238 by Senator Mitchell, which drove a lot of the data, as well as a lot of changes in the court Process to look into, not just is there a medication, but is there an overall behavioral health treatment plan, and what is that plan, and does it include other types of interventions as well? So we really appreciate that, and as you heard, we're getting to the point where we've got about 80% of the costs we've covered by a data sharing agreement and we'll be working very closely with the Department and the counties to get the remaining counties on board. Some of them are in process, there's just a local process with their county council, their boards of supervisors, or CAOs, who get the sign-off for that, so we'll be making sure that we're tracking that to show that there's progress, and that those numbers go up ideally to 58 over time. And just agree with your points about this being really a balancing act, the light has been shed, and the attention is being paid in a very important way, and over-medicating children is not what any of us are set out to do, but these are medications that when used thoughtfully and prescribed as part of an overall treatment plan, can really benefit children. Certainly in a short term use. And so making sure that the protections are in place but do not go so far as to have a chilling effect for children who actually could use these medications and benefit from them, it's very important if we try to approach it with that in mind as well, and I appreciate those comments from you as well and from the state. So thank you so much for this oversight and we'll continue working with the administration in partnership on this issue, thanks.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 342, 'end': 350, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Chi Lee: chi dr. lynn lee, department of finance agency.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Will Lightbourne: Will Lightbourne, Department of Social Services.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ben Johnson: ben chi johnson, lao.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Donna Sneeringer: good morning, i'm donna ben sneeringer with the child care alliance of los angeles. and as a long-time childcare advocate, we are well aware of the needs of all families to access childcare, but certainly the special circumstances that children in the child welfare system face has been something we've been thinking about for quite some time. we began, about two years ago, working with the department of children and family services in los angeles county on needs that they were identifying, because of continuum of care reform, related to emergency childcare and that built into a partnership with la county supervisor, sheila kuehl, and her team, and the building of this coalition that came together to really do some assessment of the parallel complex systems, that families are trying to navigate between and identify barriers and develop some strategies to work within two structures, that are both struggling with resources. so what we came up with was this idea to address the fact that childcare is not an emergency response system, thus the emergency voucher, to allow six months of time for a family to come up with a plan and work with the navigator at the resource and referral agency to asses the needs of the child, figure out what might work for them in their local community and identify all the potential sources of subsidy. i think the tricky thing is, this childcare subsidy comes in lots of different boxes and packages. so, if you have an expert in the child care subsidy system working with them, they might be eligible for head start, they might be eligible for a general child care center, they might fit into an alternative payment program, and then the warm hand-off, get them on these lists and get them on their way. so we really believe that that is an important infrastructure-build between the two systems. and then also the third component is a training component, for childcare providers. i think in director lightbourne's comments earlier, they talked about the trauma needs of children in the foster care system, and what we believe is that the child care providers are going to need some extra support. so that's how that piece came together as well.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 623, 'end': 635, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1945, 'end': 1956, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Danita Harmon: My name is Danita Harmon as she said and I'm a public health nurse representing the healthcare program for children in foster care. I serve in Lancaster which is in LA County. And I service children detained or in out of home placement. But I'm not here just for LA county, I am here representing the healthcare program for all nurses in California. California is home to nearly 65,000 foster children, and in my County of Los Angles there are approximately 24,000 youth who receive services to the healthcare program for children and foster care. When we're established in 1999, there was a recognition by the Legislature, that children social workers desperately needed assistance in taking care of the medical needs of the foster care population. That population is historically documented to be the most vulnerable population in the country. A public health nurses we navigate through complex health systems with multiple and often changing networks of providers, case works and caregivers in order to best advocate for the health and well-being of the children in our care. As PHNs, we oversee many children and youth with serious chronic health conditions including asthma, sickle cell anemia, epilepsy, failure to thrive, chronic and acute medical mental health issues, excuse me, substance abuse challenges, school age pregnancies, and diabetes. While there are no typical foster youth in our case load and the investments of time required follows no standard metric. And that's because each child is an individual and it's going to just depend on what the needs of the child are. However, many PHNs chairs are assigned to nearly two or three times as many youth. And then case intensity varies with many children taking not hours, but days of case management in a given month to assure that both acute and chronic conditions are addressed. As Tia said, the state recommendation is 200 to 1 in my office between the nurses and my office we have at least between 300 and 350 that that's what I guess at this point. The backload poof work is about three months. It's taken us that long to be able to review information and to adhere to different things that we need to do within that area. I would like to give you guys an example of one of the cases that we have. Okay, just we have a baby. As a matter of fact, when I left, my coworker was telling me about it. And this baby was brought to the hospital double pneumonia, viral and bacterial pneumonia. And also had blood clot, had a blood clot in the leg, was put on the anticoagulation medication and of course extensive antibiotics. Our public health nurse, we went to work on contacting the hospital. We have to make sure we follow up to make sure that we understood what the care was going to be. We then collaborated with a foster parent to make sure adequate training was done. The child is being released at this time and is on that anticoagulation medication. And of course the PHN is closely working with the foster parent to make sure that she understands what needs to be done along, of course, with the hospital. So this is something that we do all the time. This is just the kind of care that we provide to our children and, but that only one child. That's only one child and as I said, the foster children are the most vulnerable population. So we're asking, we're asking that you would give the counties of California 3.8 million from the general fund to reduce case loads this allocation will allow the State of California to take advantage of the three to one match. But more importantly, this allocation will assure that our vulnerable foster children receive the adequate care that they need to make them healthy and whole. Thank you for your time.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1852, 'end': 1855, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tisha Ortiz: thank you chairman and members of the committee. my name is ortiz. i am 24 years old and a former foster youth. i first entered the foster care system at age 4 and went in and out of the system from ages 8 to 12. then i stayed in the foster care system until i turned 18 and emancipated. i went through many traumatic experiences in and out of the foster care system. i was physically, emotionally, sexually, and verbally abused. i survived it all and today i'm a senior student attending california state university east bay, and an advocate with the national center for youth law. last year, the state auditor released a report that found foster youth were being prescribed powerful psychotropic medications without adequate oversight. often, these youth were prescribed multiple medications, mixing classes of drugs in amounts exceeding recommended dosages. and these practices were outside of the state guidelines for safe practice. the report also found that alternative therapeutic services were not being tried or made available. the auditors report really struck a chord with me because it could have been describing my own experience. at age 14, the doctors gave me various powerful drugs. at one point i was on four different medications at the same time. i was taking two antipsychotics, abilify and geodon, an antidepressant, trazodone. a medication not approved for children, and a mood stabilizer called lithium. this consisted of me taking six pills in the morning and six pills at night for a total of 12 pills per day. these powerful and sedating psychotropic medications caused serious side effects like weight gain, tunnel vision, and gave me a zombified feeling. i couldn't stay awake in class, and failed classes because i could barely keep my head up to participate. i also developed an irregular heartbeat, because one side of my heart was enlarged, due to the weight i had gained from being on the medications. i also suffer from ticks on my body that i continue to have to this day. what i actually needed was therapeutic behavioral services. not a cocktail, sedating psychotropics to help deal with my self injurious behaviors. as well as trauma focused therapy for the sexual and physical abuse i had endured, as well as grief counseling when my mother passed away while i was in care at age 17. a few weeks before aging out, i was finally set up with a trauma focused therapist, nine years after an initial abuse when i was eight years old. those services were given to me too late, i was already going to turn 18 and exile the system. and i needed that support earlier and for more time. i was exhibiting behaviors that doctors wanted to medicate me for instead of actually helping me deal with the trauma and cope without self harm. the foster care system neglected to take care of me and my needs from the trauma that i went through. and instead the system over medicated me and did not give me appropriate and effective treatment to help with my ptsd. thank you.
[{'start': 60, 'end': 65, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chi Lee: Chi Lee with the Department of Finance. Just in general, we are in review of all of these proposals. And at this time since we're in March and these would create additional general fund costs, we are generally not supportive of these augmentations. However, we are in review of them and encourage individuals who have these proposals to reach out if there is a need for technical assistance on sort of ascertaining administrative, or processing costs, or unanticipated, just additional work that may not have been originally thought of that would be necessary to make these proposals available for administration.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lily Colby: hi, i'm colby. i'm a former foster youth, former foster parent, an equal justice works fellow at the national center for youth law. the national center for youth law is also in support of the enrichment grants for foster youth. we know that access to extra curricular activities for foster youth allows them to thrive in education and in life. nycl is also in support of the public health nurses budget proposal to ensure that the investments made last year are not diluted and would fulfill the intent of ensuring proper psych meds, case management for children and youth in foster care. lastly, we again thank you for hearing our proposal to continue the good work of psych meds oversight for some of our state's most vulnerable children and youth. thank you.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Leticia Gomez: good morning, good afternoon, mr. chair and members. i'm leticia donna gomez, with the los angeles county department of children and family services. i'm here on behalf of the la county board of supervisors, to urge your support for the emergency child care bridge proposal, to increase access to child care for foster children. for the success of the continuum of care reform, we must address the crisis shortage to poster parents. the number of poster parents in la county has declined by over half of what it was a decade ago, decreasing from about 8,000 foster families to under 4,000 today. the landscape of our caregivers has changed from primarily retirees to working parents. at this time, la's caseload of children ages zero to five has increased disproportionately from almost 28% in 2000 to 38% in 2016. one of the biggest barriers to recruiting foster parents is the lack of access to childcare at the moment of placement. it's a timing issue. they simply cannot wait until a spot becomes open on a waiting list. this is especially true for relative caregivers who answer the call to take in a child at a moment's notice without the opportunity to plan for who will care for the children while they are at work. by building an emergency care bridge between the child welfare and child care systems, we can recruit and retain families, stabilize children at a critical moment's notice, and help to ensure that they benefit from high quality ongoing trauma, inform child care development services therefore, i urge your support.
[{'start': 57, 'end': 76, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lori King: Hi, my name's Lori King. And I'm here on behalf of the Yolo County Caregivers. My husband and I are foster parents who live in West Sacramento and are constituents of Dr Pan. We both work full time and we could not be a resource family without quality childcare that understands the needs of children being removed from abuse and neglect. We have a three year old in our care and thankfully, we received a childcare subsidy that started a month after he was placed. The first month of his child care was $900 our of our pocket. For many months, the child care subsidy program in our county was out of funds for foster children, which meant some resource families may have had to say no to accepting a younger child into their home. The Emergency Care Bridge program will allow resource families to say yes, to take that call which changes our lives in a matter of moments. The voucher given to a resource family at that time of placement, is invaluable to someone like me because it allows the immediate ability to pay for child care. I urge you to support the child care bridge program because it helps recruit and retain resource families and supports our most vulnerable kids. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ralph Lopez: Hi, my name is Ralph Lopez and I work for the Yolo County School District. As a sub, I understand how quality childcare impacts the foundation for a strong resilience and builds emotional confidence in children along with their families, both related and non related. I witness the difference among my students daily. Currently I'm in the process of becoming a Yolo County resource family, while sitting in class the discussion of childcare comes up in prospect families. I'll ask how are they supposed to pay for childcare? It has stopped people from moving forward in the process. Sadly, we are told that infants experience very high rates of placement instability during the first month after removal because caregivers can't find, and then afford to pay for child care. Foster families struggle to access childcare at the moment of placement, because state childcare programs are almost always full. Foster and kinship families both need support and services to stabilize the child into their family and daily living routines. As resource families, we need to figure out how to pay for a new person coming into our home, plus find high quality, local childcare. It is daunting figuring out how to cover the cost, while creating stress in the securities as far as an emergency placement resource family. This childcare bridge program will make it easier for us to better focus on the nurturing of these little people and not the finances of them. Thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sherry Schroeder: hi, good afternoon. dr. pan, i first wanted to thank you for honoring one of our yolo county foster parents in west sac. so i'm sherry leticia schroeder, and i wear, actually three, i think, pretty critical hats. first and foremost, i've been doing foster and kinship care education for more years than i'm going to say publicly. second, about 13 years ago i took on yolo county's foster care recruitment and retention. and also during that last kind of tenure i've been a caregiver and now a resource family. so on behalf of all of those components, i concur with the two amazing foster families that spoke before you. and with resource family approval, the continuing of care reform, we've been bringing in more and more families to our educational classes. my classes currently under way has about 36, 37 people attending. of those, there are seven perspective foster families all of whom say they cannot do this without a child care subsidy program. as ralph alluded to earlier, we have had a subsidy in yolo county that we have worked so hard and diligently for it and it ebbs and flows. and so, we might have families that come in for six months, they get the subsidy and now for actually the last six months until just recently, there were families that got no subsidy. someone spoke yesterday before the assembly side who was not able to take children all during that time because she only does babies and she cannot do a baby without the child care subsidy, as a single working person. so, i also, listening this morning, i think you made incredibly profound points, and i was just thinking with the subsidy, we can provide local placement for our local children. when we have local placement, they can attain local services. they keep the same schools, the same doctors, the same communities. they also provide, get the lowest level of care in in-home family like settings. it's with our relative caregivers, our resource families, or our county licensed families. those are the ones that i work with and our county loves those families, because they are the best educated and most supported. and then, day care, if we can get them into local head start programs, for example, that program then follows those children, they do assessments in home and that family can transition. so, to everything that you have said it would be so critical. i also want to say i support the resources in providing the enhancement for $500 per family to do educational supports. i think that too and especially on the front side, when relatives and perhaps a nrefm family, a non-related extended family member, is not getting the funding sources. so please, please wholeheartedly support.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 128, 'end': 152, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 957, 'end': 962, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2551, 'end': 2556, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tony Rice: Thank you, Mr. Chair and members, Tony Rice representing the Los Angeles Area Chamber and Commerce. I don't want to repeat what Ms. Lewis just said. We are very proud co-sponsors of this effort, both on a policy and a budgetary manner. I believe this is critically important to stabilizing children and their families and look forward to working with you and your Committee on this moving forward. Thank you so much.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 132, 'end': 137, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kathy Sunderling: thank you, mr. chair and members, sunderling with the county welfare directors association to comment on three of the proposals you've heard other than the one i testified on already. regarding the arc trailer bill language on item three, we really appreciate the simplification of the program that's being put forward by the department of finance and their proposed language. we are among those who have provided some suggested technical changes, and we look forward to continue working with the administration, of course your staff as well to shape up that and bring a final proposal that we can all support. with regards to the quest for public health nursing, and psychotropic meds review funding, we support both of those proposals. these are really critical supports for our social workers who are themselves trained professionals but they're not medical professionals and so having that eye, that trained eye, to help take a look at these cases and provide feedback and recommendations when children have special medical needs or being prescribed more than one psychotropic medication is absolutely essential for our social workers to be able to case manage that case and make the appropriate recommendations to the court as well. thank you.
[]
Keisha Nzewi: Hi, my name is Keisha Nzewi from the California Child care Resource and Referral Network. And we're here in support of the Childcare Bridge Program, but I want to lift up the navigator portion of that, that RNR throughout the state are every day helping families find and identify childcare appropriate for their families and help them problem-solve. And in this case, we are uniquely positioned to be strong navigators to help foster families alleviate the burden of navigating what I've learned is the most complicated child care system when they're already navigating the child welfare system. So again, thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carroll Schroeder: Carroll Schroeder with the California Alliance of Child and Family Services also in support of the Emergency Child Care Bridge Program.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Adina Kuncz: Good afternoon, Adina Kuncz, the Alliance for Children's Rights, and we strongly urge you guys to support the Emergency Child Care Bridge Program.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vanessa Hernandez: hi, vanessa with california youth connection, our members strongly support the public health and the nurse ask and also the enrichment fund. our members feel that these will both positively impact children, youth and foster care across the state. thanks.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Haspel: Jessica Haspel with Children Now, and we're in support of the request for funding for medical review of the psychotropic medications. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alisha Griffin: Good morning. Alisha Griffin, I'm the Director of the Department of Child Support Services.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Beckley: good morning, my name's mark sherry beckley, the chief deputy director for the department.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Justin Freitas: Good morning, Justin Freitas, Department of Finance.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Coby Peterson: ...I appreciate the opportunity to be here today. My name is Coby Peterson and I am the Deputy Secretary for the Veterans Homes. I'm before you today, because ...of the language that will update and fix several underlying issues with the military and veterans code. We'll also implement a good policy in decreasing the impact of Cal Vets on the General Fund. This proposal was the result of several years of hard work between the Department, the Legislature, and community partners to make the homes more responsive to veterans' needs and to be better stewards of the General Fund. With me today Is Tom Spartan. He's the Assistant Deputy Secretary for the Veteran's Homes. He's been instrumental in the development of the bill language. He's here to discuss in greater detail the essence of the bill. If you'd like, I can have him give you a high level overview or we can go right into any questions that you have.
[{'start': 61, 'end': 74, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 599, 'end': 610, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Thomas Martin: okay, great, so good afternoon. as coby mentioned, my name is thomas jonah martin. i'm the assistant deputy secretary for veteran's homes. the proposal today combines a number of ideas that cal vet and the legislature have been working on over the past few years. it also reflects a number of recommendations that were included in the little hoover commission report from earlier this month. in a nutshell, the language addresses three key areas. first, there's a number of technical or structural changes to replace outdated language or update department's authority and responsibilities. for example, we'd be eliminating a number of antiquated references to one veteran's home, as opposed to the eight veteran's home we have today. also we're updating our regulatory authority and clarifying our building regulations. second we're also proposing that the homes re-prioritze our veteran applicant population. veterans with 70% or greater service-connected disability ratings, who, clearly in the service, left the most on the battlefield. they would be, they should be the first in line into our veteran homes. they should be right at the top of the list. along those same lines, veterans who have the greatest need today, who need our services the most, they should also be at the top of our list. so, this is in line with the department's overall mission. it's in line with our mission to make sure we serve those who need us the most and we think this is going to be a critical fix to make sure we can best serve the veteran community. third, the proposal would also help reduce cal vet's impact on the general fund. there's a number of changes, some of them large, some of them smaller. but overall, they make a significant impact on the, on our general fund footprint.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 39, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 62, 'end': 81, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carole D'Elia: my name is carole thomas d'elia. i am executive director of the little hoover commission. so, as mr. martin said, some of what's in this trailer bill is actually what's in our report, so your staff directed me to speak a few minutes on what our report found, and which overlaps some with what's in the budget trailer bill but also has additional information. so our process started, actually, in the summer of 2015, when we received the letter from assembly member jacqui irwin, asking us if we would take a look a the veterans' home program, as well as a couple of other things under the veterans' cal vet umbrella. the commission responded, we held two public hearings and two public meetings and very recently, our commissioners unanimously adopted eight recommendations. we also looked at yountville and that was an area where our commissioners wanted us to gather additional information, so we don't have any specific recommendations at this time on yountville. but the other areas really focused on the mission, the overarching mission of who are we serving, as well as the financing because that's been something that's come up repeatedly. so, i'll first talk a little bit about what we found on the mission. we have 1.7 million veterans in california and this $306 million home program serves about 2,800 in any given year. we have about 2,600 slots. so, it's somewhat like winning the lottery to get in and this relates to one of the items in the budget trailer and that's our recommendation was to prioritize. whereas now, it's kind of first come first serve, to set priorities, whether it be service connected disabilities, or whether it be financial need. but set some sort of priority for who's getting into the home. so we support that trailer bill language on that issue. we also found that our veterans home system right now is a mix. we have skilled nursing, we have assisted living, and we have a program that's domiciliary or independent living. that program makes up about a third of the veterans homes. these are simply a bed and a meal, and the veterans are independent, they have very active lifestyles. so, not many other states have programs like that. the federal government will no longer fund programs, not in terms of the per diem but they won't build new homes that are going to be domiciliary. so, it's a service that's going away and so our recommendation, again, honoring the commitment to everybody who's in one of those facilities, not wanting to displace anybody, but to gradually move away from the domiciliary offering. we also heard from some experts who questioned whether or not we should continue operating some of our existing homes as is. so when a home is built with federal funding, you're committed to 20 years of operating a home unless you want to get a federal monetary penalty. but after 20 years, we recommended it would be worth assessing whether or
[{'start': 11, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 101, 'end': 107, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 465, 'end': 477, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jacqueline Barocio: barocio with the legislative analyst's office. we also recently released a report in which we looked at the general landscape of veteran's services in california, and one of the things we focused on were veterans homes. through that report, we find that on a conceptual level, we concur with some of the main aspects of the trailer bill, such as changes to the administration policies, but we agree with the staff recommendation to hold this item open and that there are more details that potentially need to be thought of more thoroughly. some examples include the timeline of implementation and the timeline in which there could be potential changes to the demographics of the veterans receiving services in the homes if we do prioritize veterans with higher service-connected disabilities and potentially higher needs. and connected to that point is also, if we're taking in veterans that require higher services, how does then that affect potential costs in the veterans' homes be it increasing staffing ratios in order to ensure that we're delivering the level of care that they require? so overall, there are a couple of future considerations to consider, one being, with those things in mind, getting a solid sense of the general fund savings and costs that this trailer bill language could result in, any reporting mechanisms that the legislature would like to add to highlight any changes that could occur to the demographics of veterans within the veterans' homes in the future, and how these changes overall fit with the department's vision.
[]
Jeff Weiner: i'm jeff carole weiner, department of finance. we have nothing to add, mr. chair.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Fitzpatrick: john jeff fitzpatrick, department of finance, if i may, just to add a little bit more clarification to the answer. as indicated, the higher levels of care residents in the higher levels of care, are eligible for the much higher per diem, given their disability rating and that population is a subset of the overall resident population, of approximately 940 beds. so, of those beds, the beds that currently don't have individuals who have a high service rate of disability, that's sort of the top end possibility for enhanced per diem downstream.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : Okay, next, we'll take up issue number 14 for the Department of Consumer Affairs, and the recommendation is to approve the proposed funding only for one year.
[]
Keith Boylan: Good afternoon, I'm Keith Boylan, Deputy Secretary, Department of Veterans' Affairs, Veterans Services Division. And with me is Angela Yamamoto, she is the Assistant Deputy Secretary for Veterans Service Division. We're here today to discuss the negative BCP for $1.7 million, which encompasses 16 existing but unfunded positions within the district offices at California Department of Veterans Affairs, along with reclassifying four existing positions. These positions are responsible for processing claims for federal benefits, and increased oversight and training of the county Veterans Service offices. Did you want me to get into the weeds a little bit, or did you have direct questions you had for me?
[{'start': 20, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 128, 'end': 143, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Pete Conaty: morning, or afternoon mr. chairman, members. my name is conaty and i represent the california association of the county veterans service officers, the general, we are the boots on the grounds for calvet. we file the claims. i want to compliment, your consultant have done an outstanding job on an extremely arcane subject. but the point, is when the legislature gave county veteran's service officers additional $3 million, it took three years, but we got it. and the claims have jumped up. since then, we've passed a bill by mr. frazier and you can get veteran on your license plate. 4,000 brand new veterans have filed claims for benefits they didn't even know they had. so with 9/11, the va was not prepared and there was a dramatic increase in claims by veterans and the va couldn't handle it. you heard about the claims back log. it was like 600 days to get a claim through. the va working with organizations like cal vet and having strike teams out there working with the county veterans service officers were able to get the claims backlog down. but we all knew at the time that the appeals backlog was just going to grow because if your claims tonight, you appeal it. and so now, we're looking at a five to 10 year wait on appeals and we can solve a lot of that problem by not cutting these positions. so we would urge you to reject the governor's recommendation. actually, i'll call it the department of finance recommendation. and i have with me witnesses from other veterans groups, who will just identify themselves. thank you.
[{'start': 56, 'end': 62, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 530, 'end': 537, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Frederick Romero: My name is Frederick Romero, I'm a Vietnam vet. I'm the State Commander of the American GI forum and we feel that this would hurt veterans if they did it, and that I'd like to say that I don't think the Department could mitigate it, losing 16 people, and that I think you're seeing that they help the county service officers get the claims done quicker. I am a recipient of a Vietnam claim and so I am opposed to the Finance Department cutting this out.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dean Gotham: Good afternoon, my name is Dean Gotham. I'm the first Vice President of the California State Council of Vietnam Veterans of America and our organization rejects this proposal. I would recommend to the Committee that we, we're speaking of state resources. I think veterans are a pretty strong state resource and there's still a lot of work that needs to be done to help these veterans and this $1.7 million is critical. Thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bob Wyllie: good afternoon, i'm bob. i represent the scottish american military society. we're a national organization with three posts in california. we also oppose this reduction of funding. thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cathy Christian: Mr. Chair and members, Cathy Christian representing Contra Costa County. I was asked to come here to note that we have a higher percentage of disabled veterans in our county than other Bay Area counties and that we absolutely reject this budget cut, but also know that if our veterans are not served properly in the way that they're supposed to be, that the burden does fall back on the counties where residents, where the veterans live. So we urge you also to accept the recommendation. Thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Camere: chairman cooper, members. good afternoon, my name is tim john camere. i'm with seiu local 1000. while we understand the administration and the department of finance's stance about trying to save dollars, we just want to say thank you to the subcommittee, specifically their staff, for fully vetting this issue and specifically, looking at what these positions do to give a better understanding. we just want to thank the committee for their due diligence. thank you.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 15, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 53, 'end': 68, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lorna Griess: Colonel Lorna Griess, I represent Military Officer's Association of California Council and Chapters. I'm also a Vietnam veteran. We reject this budget proposal.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sherman Tucker: Hi, my name is Sherman Tucker. I'm a former national service officer and I represent the Paralyzed Veterans of America, Bay Area and Western Chapter and we oppose this because we desperately need for veterans to get their benefits. And there are thousands and thousands of veterans out there that don't even know. I run into people every day. So we desperately, please fund them. Thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lorraine Plass: lorraine, american veterans department of california. i'm the state legislative chair. we highly oppose this initiative and on a personal note, as a vietnam era veteran myself, it took me 31 years to get a 70% disability that i waited for. we need this. we need this for the next generation that's coming up behind us. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gary Leach: good afternoon, leach, i'm the state commander of the american legion, and the american legion opposes these cuts also.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Clifford: Hello, I'm Brian Clifford. I'm the Senior Planning and Implementation Manager with the Department of Consumer Affairs. I'm joined by David Nelson, the head of our SOLID team.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 133, 'end': 145, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cynthia Mendoza: cynthia tim mendoza, department of finance. we support this proposal. we believe the department requires the ability to facilitate efficient and productive change management associated with new business processes, as well as the business process of mapping of new it projects.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joseph Morris: good afternoon. i'm dr. joseph cynthia morris. i'm the newly appointed executive officer for the brn.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stacie Berumen: good afternoon. stacie joseph berumen. i'm an assistant executive officer for the board of registered nursing and i will be speaking to this budget change proposal. the board of registered nursing is requesting three nursing education consultant positions, beginning in fiscal year 2017-18 and ongoing. to ensure all approved nursing programs have a method to evaluate military education, experience, and training. may qualify to meet nursing education requirements, and evaluate military education experience and training at the time of application, to qualify to take the nclex-rn exam, and obtain licensure in california. the board understands that the lao has concerns with the proposal, and as a result we thoughtfully considered what the statute states, in conjunction with the types of duties that could possibly benefit military applicants if they were to choose nursing as a career when they have completed their military service. we have determined there is additional workload in the following areas. in addition to evaluation of policies and procedures at all approved nursing programs, the necs will work with licensing staff to review applications where the applicant graduated from california approved nursing program to determine whether nursing programs are indeed following their policies and procedures. the necs will also gather data during the review of the applications for licensure to evaluate what type of training and experience was accepted for educational credits or challenge exams so a comparative analysis can be completed and disseminated to the board and the nursing programs as a means to identify best practices. the necs will also monitor and collect exam scores for military applicants to determine whether the education, training and experience are sufficient to successfully pass the exam and obtain licensure. for those applicants who do not pass the exam, the nec's will review exam information to develop a personalized didactic and clinical remediation plan with weekly follow up. the necs will compile and distribute aggregate data related to areas of exam deficiencies in order to help them improve educational outcomes and improve exam pass rates. the necs will be in contact with the various branches of the military, to stay up to date on the different types of positions where experience and training can be considered for possible credit, or challenge exam, when enrolling in a nursing program, and disseminate that information to the board and nursing programs. we have developed additional workload data that has been prepared, and is being vetted through the administration and this information can be provided for your consideration.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 38, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Joanne Wenzel: good afternoon. i'm wenzel. i'm the chief of the bureau for private postsecondary education, and with me is lisa refretti, who is the deputy bureau chief for the bureau for private postsecondary education. i just lost my notes. chair cooper and members of the subcommittee, the bureau for private postsecondary education is respectfully requesting 1 million 8 thousand dollars in fiscal year 17-18 and $928,000 thereafter to fund eight permanent and two, limited term positions to implement the requirements of senate bill 1192. senate bill 1192 mandates the creation of a permanent office of student assistance and relief, or osar. this office is mandated to be staffed with individuals that have specific knowledge in student services as it relates to financial aid and advocating for students. as a priority, this office will assist students of the schools owned by corinthian colleges by providing individualized assistance in relieving or mitigating the economic and educational opportunity loss incurred by the closure of their educational institution, but the staff will be available to assist all students that are impacted by the closure of other eligible institutions. the bureau had 104 educational institution main and branch locations close in fiscal year 15/16 impacting approximately 5490 students. those students were not affiliated with the corinthian colleges, or itt technical and the bureau believes that those students also should get the support that they need. the bureau is requesting six permanent staff for this office to properly conduct the individualized assistance, education, and outreach mandated. the bureau believes permanent staffing is appropriate for use as the osar is a permanent addition to the bureau, created to address the ongoing needs as school closures continue to happen and impact california student consumers. i know that the staff did have questions about the office of student assistance and relief. i'm happy to address those now, or i can wait until the end. what do you prefer?
[{'start': 20, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 108, 'end': 121, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 234, 'end': 240, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Giny Herold: hi, good afternoon. i'm giny stacie herold. i'm the executive officer of the board of pharmacy and with me today is ann sodergren, who's number two or also known as the assistant executive officer, and we're happy here to talk a little bit about what we're doing in the area, hello, prescription drug abuse. we've been asked to provide a special report. i'm assuming that everyone's had an opportunity to review it. i don't know whether you want us to walk you through it or if you'd like to just ask us questions and we can respond. what is the committee's preference?
[{'start': 24, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 48, 'end': 69, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 116, 'end': 129, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jason Piccione: thank you. good afternoon, my name is jason giny piccione, i'm the chief information officer for the department of consumer affairs.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brandon Rutschmann: i'm rutschmann with department of consumer affairs.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nick Bukin: good afternoon, mr. chair and members. bukin, california lottery, i'm pleased to say that this proposal has nothing to do with information technology.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mona Priedo: great, my name's mona jason priedo, i'm the acting director of alcoholic beverage control. i just wanted to thank you for your time, and i know it's late in the day and you guys have been through a lot. so i just wanted to do a shout out, thank you early on. and my partner here will introduce himself.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Deems: hi, i'm deems, chief of administration, alcoholic beverage control.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 13, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Esteban Almanza: Good afternoon, Esteban Almanza, Executive Officer of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Appeals Board. And what we have is a request for $106,000, so that we can contract with the Department of General Services to provide our administrative services that are currently provided by the Department of Alcohol Beverage Control at no charge. However, we believe that since our role is to hear appeals of actions taken by the department, it's important that we have no appearance of a conflict, with the department being the ones who manage all of our financial and personnel transactions. It's a little bit blemished. So by doing this, we would be totally independent, non-partial body reviewing actions that are appealed to our board.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : the jonah motion jonah passed.>>the jonah motion jonah has jonah passed jonah and jonah this jonah rules jonah committee jonah is jonah adjourned.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 9, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 17, 'end': 22, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 36, 'end': 41, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 49, 'end': 54, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 59, 'end': 64, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 72, 'end': 77, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 82, 'end': 87, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 93, 'end': 98, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 105, 'end': 110, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 121, 'end': 126, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 130, 'end': 135, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
 : voepel, jonah waldron, jonah weber, jonah wood, jonah mr. jonah speaker.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8, 'end': 21, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 23, 'end': 34, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 36, 'end': 46, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 48, 'end': 53, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 58, 'end': 71, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Juno Duenas: My name's Juno Duenas and I'm the Director of Support for Families. We coordinate Family Voices of California. I want to thank you, Senator Pan and Children Now, for inviting us to give input. I'll be talking about family services and family engagement. I'm a parent, it's my most important role. I have four children, one of whom has severe disabilities. My time is spent making sure she has the support she needs to have quality of life, reach her potential, and be a valued member of the community. She is not alone. One in five children has special needs in California, and that is a lot of California children, and all of those children use services. Services include therapies, medical care, educational support, transition, mental health services. These types of services for children and youth make a difference. Examples, a youth receives physical therapy that allows her to use a wheelchair and gain independence. A child who does not communicate well, because of his disability, learns to communicate through a computer, and eventually is able to support himself. A teenager who has mental health issues gets therapy and is able to learn to manage her inner resources and gains independence. This is the purpose of services, and this is the goal of the parents, to see our children independent, productive, and valued members of our community. Here's the challenge, not all services work. Services are not well coordinated, and not all services are delivered in a way that can be used. Honestly, California's not doing that well in comparison to other states, and I think you already know that. The California system needs to understand what works well and what does not work, and one of the best ways to learn how something is or is not working is to ask the person who uses it. Get the consumer input, in this case, the family input. Assuming you agree, how we assist families to give input is key. Just grabbing any family is not enough. Hand-picking families who will tell you what you want to hear, that doesn't work so well, either. Just getting one family to participate on a Committee will not get you the information you need to improve. Of course not. We want families who are supported to give us the best input possible. Best practice in engaging families requires supporting them by providing them ongoing information, training, and mentoring. That way, they understand the background, their role, how to give effective input, they have guidance in how to address challenges, they build confidence and are able to negotiate differences of opinions. This example of providing training, ongoing information, and mentoring to families, it's not a new concept. It's happening all over the country. New Jersey provides parent leadership development to verse parents to help them participate on groups, such as special ed, health related advisory, and even city councils. Rhode Island has more than 250 peer specialists. Rhode Island is this big. Rhode Island has 250 peer specialists who are trained and supported to improve quality and performance of their programs, as well as the entire system. West Virginia employs parents to hold public forums and participate in policy development. Idaho, Maryland, North Carolina, New Hampshire, Minnesota, Ohio, Wisconsin, New Mexico, Alabama, and I could go on. And you know who's paying? 90% of this is funded from government because this input is for government services. To some degree, it's happening here in California. We have an existing framework of parent centers. This includes family resource centers, parent training and information centers, as well as family empowerment centers, all who provide varying degrees of information, education, support and mentoring to families. In addition, we have a model of training, mentoring, and support. It's called Project Leadership, and has been funded over the years by Lucile Packard Foundation. The training includes the history of special needs, the systems, how to partner and give input effectively. Family Voices Project leadership has trained 145 families who are now represented on committees throughout California, including Department of Healthcare Services, technical work groups, California Pacific Medical Center, Kaiser, UCSF, and Oakland, as well as in San Francisco, as well as NAMI, the National Association on Mental Illness. Family engagement improves systems. A recent success was family input on SB 586, the whole child model. Families' voices were heard and that bill is better for their participation. If nothing else, think of it this way, consumer engagement is so important, even big business asks its consumers to give input and feedback. Appropriate, coordinated, efficient services make a difference. As parents, we're taxpayers and we recognize the resources it takes to provide the services our children receive. We know how precious these resources are and we all want to use California resources wisely. So here it is in the short, services are important, some services work well, some don't. We need family input to know what works. Families need to be trained and mentored. Parent centers are a great vehicle to make that happen. We have parent centers here in California. We have a model of training and mentoring. What's holding us back? Let's work together to create a service system that spends its money wisely, while also effectively supporting our children and youth to reach their potential. Thank you.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 140, 'end': 143, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alice Mail: thanks. i'm alice jonah mail, so thank you for holding this hearing today. so should i just go ahead, okay. so, i believe all would benefit from an improved system of evaluating medi-cal experiences in engaging youth and parents and program improvement and policy development. i have three children, the youngest two are now 18, and i have had medi-cal on and off over the years. one has special education and health needs secondary to traumatic brain injury, the other has ongoing challenges associated with autism spectrum disorder. i initially got involved with the child health advocacy when the transition of healthy families to the medi-cal occurred. a couple of factors motivated me to speak out. one was a dramatic contrast between the ease of using healthy families program and medi-cal. healthy families provide a very accessible care, a simple enrollment process, and helpful written and over-the-phone communications. in contrast, medi-cal paperwork is confusing. the reenrollment process, complicated, and county and states found support difficult to access and  use. i figured it would be helpful for the larger medi-cal program to be aware of, and hopefully utilize, the successes of the healthy family program. the other reason i was motivated to become involved was that my son lost access to behavioral health treatment as a result to the transition to medi-cal. i would have been somewhat accepting of the difference of coverage between the two programs, but i was not at all accepting of what i was experiencing as deceptive communications indicating that there would be no loss of coverage for those high need children. i joined the healthy families advisory panel. i was on the panel as it moved under the umbrella of dhcs and became medi-cal children's health advisory panel, or mchap. i served as a parent representative on the panel for over three years. throughout the history of healthy families, an advisory panel had offered feedback and suggestions to administrative leadership. parents had always been included in the panel along with other experts representing other professions and fields. it is somewhat unusual for stakeholder growth and advisory panels within dhcs to include youth, parent, or subscriber members. during my first meetings on the advisory panel, it became evident that the parent representative perspective was dramatically different from that of dhcs staff. specifically, staff described the transition is a success, complete with colorful pie charts and presentations. each of the four parents spontaneously countered with real time concerns about the transition had not occurred smoothly for their children. we described our experiences of lost coverage, unwanted changes in providers, missing insurance cards, lack of information about where to seek services, and difficulty accessing help. i do believe it was powerful to hear directly from individuals voicing experiences that were in direct conflict with official reports. parents and agency staff can have completely different awareness of concerns, as well as differing markers of success. throughout my time on the panel, it was clear that parent members offer valuable information. we offer our own situations which are essentially case studies that are reflective of larger problems. some problems may have been previously overlooked or unknown to leadership. we can offer examples of things that work well and those that don't, as well as ideas for improvement. we become the human face behind the numbers. of importance is that director kent consistently attends and participates in the mchap meetings. she helps provide a respectful and welcoming venue for panel members to openly share their ideas and experiences. i'd like to share with you a small sampling of the sorts of issues with medi-cal that i've experienced. almost every year, we run into problems with enrollment process. this past year, we were not sent reenrollment paperwork until i found out the paperwork was overdue when i contacted the county on another issue. a couple of years ago, we were sent reenrollment packet in which the autofill spaces were left blank. so there was no deadline for when to return the form, no contact phone information, no information on where to return the form. presumably, thousands of other alameda county medi-cal enrollees also received these unusable forms. remember, the difficulty from a parent perspective is that if the re-enrollment form is not sent in by whatever the deadline is, in this case it was unknown, the child loses coverage. twice i've had to spend tens of hours rectifying the unpleasant and unexplainable situation in which one of my twins was wrongfully dis-enrolled while the other remained active. of note, is that both times the twin identified as disabled was the one who was abruptly left without health insurance. how many other children identified as disabled are wrongfully dropped? would other parents know to context state legislative offices, child advocates, and legal organizations in an attempt to remedy to situation. suffice it to say that i have had many, many examples from my own experience of problems with medi-cal. hassles, wasted time while on hold, conflicting directives, worry, confusion, and having to private pay for visits occurring during wrongful gaps of coverage. i cannot be the only parent who has experienced so many issues with medi-cal. all the unreported problems that parents encounter are a wealth of untapped data, data that could be used to improve systems. we need to decide that hearing directly from those using medi-cal is of value and we need to determine how to gain access to that information about consumer experience. most parents have no real voice within the medi-cal system. there are few, if any, platforms to voice concerns, or, more importantly, offer suggestions. it is very unclear how to offer feedback or become engaged in effecting change. currently, subscribers and parents can come to their county case workers to voice a concern. specific case workers are often difficult to reach and non-responsive and it is not clear that that information goes anywhere else. the state fair hearing is one method of offering feedback while seeking a remedy to a serious problem. however, that venue is inherently legalistic and intimidating. i'm sure that many would not consider initiating the process other than in the most extreme of circumstances. while it's clearly a necessary and required option, it is an inadequate way of attempting to address system problems. dhcs needs to have a close enough relationship to consumers in order to be able to ask the questions that tap in to their experiences. if there is little to no feedback from youth and parents, there will be little awareness of the problems and little motivation to seek remedy. there are many ways to increase feedback and engagement with subscriber families. mchap is one means of obtaining information and getting parent, and engaging parents, but they're just four parents out of millions and are far from representative, and, as you've mentioned, they've essentially become pickled. so if i have a problem, i always know i can e-mail the director or other administrators. so i, things change. it would be great if dhcs would expand membership of existing stakeholder groups and panels to include youth and parents, but most parents would not be able to take a day off to go to a meeting, even if a stipend is offered. also, the formality of the experience is potentially off-putting. jc's upcoming suggestion, seeking feedback and involvement at a community level within schools makes sense. and there really is need for more opportunities for local community-based, in-person involvement. surveys using all of the available mediums; phone. mail, online, social media, are an unintrusive, accessible way of gaining information. representative focus groups could be another method of involving parents. while not a survey, florida has a one-page online complaint form that appears to be pretty easy to complete and is open ended. feedback methods, again, need to be easy to use and preferably available online. another option would be a troubleshooting website, in which frequently asked questions are addressed, along with online help and links to contacts for giving feedback about customer experience. in addition, just as dhcs continues to work on user friendly, simpler terminology and language in all communications with families, the terms related to consumer feedback could be simplified. for instance, the term ombudsman, the place where subscribers' issues are addressed, is probably a term unfamiliar to many. ombudsman could be replaced with something as simple as help line. clearly, there would be many benefits from dhcs paying closer attention to what is happening on the subscriber level. subscribers would appreciate having an opportunity to offer feedback and ideas. unfortunately, at this point there are very few pathways to do so and that really needs to change. thanks.
[{'start': 12, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 3552, 'end': 3556, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3602, 'end': 3607, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kausha King: Good morning, my name is Kausha King. I'm the mother of three children. My son, Christian, is medically complex, and he's now 20 years old. My son is a CCS client and so he'll age out really soon. But since his birth, I've been an advocate for him, and had to coordinate his care. And I just briefly want to say, give you a little description of who Christian is. Christian is seen by six different specialty care physicians and has had over 12 surgeries in the last nine years. So when we talk about systems, we talk about voices and using those voices to advocate for children like Christian is essential. I, myself, am a graduate of Project Leadership. I am also a parent health liaison with the CCS Program for the last 14 years. I didn't choose this, it's my life, it's his life, it's all of our lives, so when I stand before you, it's not just as a parent, but as a professional because I understand both sides. A lot of times you get complaints about parents, we're complaining about what's not happening. So, I think here, today we're here to tell you how you can make that better for us. I have to remind myself that it's not just about him, but the millions of other children in the state. One of the concerns I have, though, is that there is a lack of families on committees, if you've heard that, and this has to be a priority. Our voices matter. Our voices are the ones that are going to give you, rather than complaining, we can be allies with you. We can join you in figuring out what the next steps are. Of course, we understand there's cost. We have to look at what that looks like, but we're also talking about real lives here. So, I just want to reiterate the fact that having families on advisory committees as allies when you're making decisions is such a benefit. To make decision for our children that could cost them their lives is just not the way to go. We're in a state where we have many committees going on but, as Juno has stated, very limited families or specific families. I look at things in a way, I've been in this fight since it was born, the last 14 years been very active in advocating, and I'm a voice that people know because I've allowed media in my home, I've allowed newspaper outlets to do stories on us. You know, what should be private for us, and maybe private for other people in the state, it's not. And so I think that to have us ally with you all to make decisions about our children, you can't go wrong with that, but you have to make room for us. And I don't mean just sitting on committees. Juno touched on this briefly, sitting on committees, we have a seat at the table, but are you really hearing our voices? I have had the pleasure of joining many committees and I just want to say that there has to be opportunities that are readily offered to parents. Again, not because we complain, but because we are an essential part of the team. Because we all want our children to have full lives. There are many parents, like myself, who want to be involved in decisions being made, but not after a Committee has been formed. Allow us to be a part of forming the committees. And not reaching out after the Committee's already be formed, so it feels like we're an afterthought, and therefore, our children are an afterthought. Reaching out as Gino touched on family resource centers and other organizations that work with families can give you leads on how to connect with the parents to join. And again, training parents, not just again, city not a seat at the table. But actually training parents so that they are able to engage. It's not easy for a parent to get up and talk before a legislators and sit on committees at the state level, even county levels. So what I want to say is when we're left out it sends a message that our children don't matter, but that they are a number. And I choose to believe that's not the intent. I understand the politics of the system and that there are limits you all have, but I think that this is an easy decision. It's one that should come as a first thought. When parents are invited to participate on committees and given the opportunities to give insight on what changes could be most effective from our perspective with what you see as most effective on your end, you gain a more powerful force. We work better together rather than opposite of each other, and we all want to ensure the best health care for children with special needs. I'm going to briefly share how I have had the opportunity to be a voice in this community. I have co-chaired the children's hospital, Benioff Children's Hospital Oakland FAC. And one of the things that I'm very proud of and had a success on that Committee is that we were able to create a job for a parent to be a mentor within the hospital, not just as a volunteer but a paid staff, and that matters. It's a big deal because otherwise, we're serving on committees, we might be offered a stipend. But the stipend isn't going to cover some of us having nursing for our children, so that doesn't cover that. Bu worked hard, and so I say that because it matters to me. It matters to all of us. And we're not just sitting on the sidelines complaining, we want to be involved. I've had many other committees I've been on, and I just want to say, a brief issue we had at the hospital was that we had heard that one of the clinics was going to close. It's a clinic that 80% of children receive MediCal and CCS as their coverage, and I think this is going to impact a lot of lives. And our understanding was, that the hospital was is in debt now. But this was one of the programs within the hospital that was generating money, and now they're going to take this away because other deficits in the hospital. And we're talking about a statement being made, and this is most critical to me, is that these children can get care anywhere. That's not true. We're going to have a situation where we're going to be trying to figure out where these children are going to get care, and it's already difficult to get that care now. So we called a meeting, the concern I have is and again, I'm just going to go right back to the point of having a sitting on committees. But does our voice really matter when we're sitting on those committees? Because this happened, we're sitting on committees with administrators, and not one word was mentioned to us. We found out through the community. That's not okay. I graduated from project leadership which trains parents on how to be effective communicators and advocating not only in our communities, but on a state and national level, learning the history of advocacy, and Juno talked about training parents. And project leadership does that, it goes back to the history of what advocacy means and how advocacy can be effective. But what I took mostly away is that you cannot ask for change if you are not willing to put forth the effort to make it happen. So I ask you today not to only insure that you leave a seat or several seats for us parents to join in what is sure to be some tough conversations. I'm also asking you to sit at open season our committees as parents who are juggling the daily care of children and join us for fight for what is essentially the fight of our children's life. And I'll leave you with that. Thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 80, 'end': 89, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 350, 'end': 359, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 364, 'end': 373, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1944, 'end': 1948, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2545, 'end': 2549, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3292, 'end': 3296, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6627, 'end': 6631, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
JC Aguirre: My name is JC Aguirre, and I'm 14 years old. I'm a student, and I reside in Recide County. I first want to express to you how pleased I am to be able to be here today considering this issue. I have been sending correspondence to the state Legislature for over three years. For so long I have been reaching out to not only the state Legislature but the Department of Healthcare Services as well. I'm very happy to know that people such as you are concerned about hearing from the people who are truly involved, and I'm really honored to be here. So thank you for that. I will like to begin by telling you the challenges and successes that I have experienced at communicating with the state Legislator and the Department of Healthcare Services. I then want to offer some ideas on how this communication can be improved from my point of view. I began writing to the state Legislator when I was 11 about the California Children Services Program. In order to keep my expenses to a minimum, I fax my correspondence to every Senator and Assembly Member in the State of California. Fun fact, takes about eight hours to fax every one of you. I was sent a very nice letter and a couple of three by five cards all saying thank you but please talk with your local Assembly men or Senator. About a year later, I sent another letter via fax and received those same three by five cards in response. I realized that I had to alter my approach if I wanted to be heard. So I reached out to the California Civil Services Advisory Group, whom I found to be much more responsive. As a result, I was approached by an advocacy group who was very interested in hearing what I had to say. They realized that the decisions that were being made by the state Legislature and other organizations had a direct effect on children like me throughout the entire State of California. They made this so I could come and meet and speak to some of you. And after meeting with and speaking to you guys, I saw that most of you, practically 99% of you, really cared and were really concerned about what I had to say and that was very heartening for me. Gave me a greater appreciation of how the Legislature functions and how hard you guys have to work to get anything done. I see that, like in a football game, it can be three feet in a pile of dust. Though I've already spoken about some of the challenges I have experienced, there's one that had a profound effect on me that I would like to tell you about. In June of last year, I testified for Senator Hernandez's bill SB 586, which you mentioned earlier. I was truly inspired to be part of passing that legislation that will help protect the children throughout the State of California, with health care concerns like mine. While testifying for that bill, a woman who had driven two and a half hours to speak during that time allotted for public comment, came up to the mic and address the legislators. She stated that she needed more than a minute and respectfully asked for three. They were unable to give her that time which clearly upset her. Though she virtually begged for the time, it was not available to her and she was escorted from the hearing. This was an extremely embarrassing situation for everyone present. And it could have been avoided. Had I thought of it then, I would have given her the extra minute of time, I did not use when I testified. I also realized that if the 20 people standing in line behind you could just say their name, organization, and that they supported the bill, had given there time as well she would have been able to speak. I came to understand that public access to legislators is limited, and that I've been very fortunate to be able to speak to you, especially considering my age. Extrapolating on that many young people and people in general are unable to participate in the legislative process for various reasons. Is it need it because of homework, affordable access, time constraints because they don't know how to Participate. Because you made decisions everyday that affect us, specifically use in the future, it is important for us to participate in the process. The proposal I have for you would be to reach out to the youth in the schools, specifically leadership classes which are available at almost every school. This is the one place where students are gathered who are interested in taking leadership roles. It would be the easiest place for you to interact with youth and get a large sample of public opinion. From almost every group in society because in high school you're pretty much a captive audience. If legislative members go to these leadership classes they can begin to understand how their actions affect youth, get fresh ideas, and hear their opinions. At the same time you can shape young leaders by teaching them about how the Legislature works, how to access their legislators, and more importantly what it means to lead. Maybe an avenue can be created allowing one minute videos to be sent in order to obtain comments from youth as well as the public. I would also like to suggest that the way emails are handled by legislative representatives undergo a modification. I'm concerned because I noticed when I attempted to send an email to several representatives they required I put in my zip code. When my zip code did not match a zip code in their district the system would not accept my email. I see none of you here plugging your ears and ignoring me because I'm not from your district. A simple check box on your web page where a person can select regional issue or state wide issue will make it very easy to differentiate between local and state wide issues. Allowing anyone with a concern to comment. You can always put a disclaimer saying that if you're not in my district I may be unable to help you with your concern but your comment will still be reviewed. Another suggestion would be to make sure fax numbers are always available on your webpages for all your offices, so the public can send comments or input via fax. I say this, because two weeks ago, while sending out a comment to the US Representatives regarding the American Health Care Act, or AHCA. Many did not list a fax number in Washington DC making it impossible for me to express my concerns. The thing that is bothering me the most though, is that for over a year now, I've been attempting to point out to the Department of Healthcare Services and the state legislators, the inadequacy of Merced County's medical provider network. In this network, for example, we have only one neurosurgeon, one audiologist, and six pediatricians. Currently, none of those pediatricians are taking patients unless they are referred. Now, the first thing that has to refer them is the primary care physician. And the pediatricians are the primary care physicians for children so that kind of weird. The total number primary care medical doctors is less than a 100 in my county, and many of them are not taking new patients and only work in the clinics. This PCPs currently serve about 131,000 medical patients. This means that they're serving roughly over 1,300 patients each, what's make very difficult for them to get very in depth with the patient, and establish good provider patient relationship. All my attempts of communicating this have either not been received or fallen on deaf ears. I would like to see that the Department of Health Care Services and any other state health organization as well as the legislators communicate in a meaningful way with parents, caregivers and children and youth with special health care needs. I believe the best way to do this, is through the California Children's Services Medical Therapy Units or CCSMTU. There are over 120 throughout the State of California, making it a very simple task to contact, visit or send surveys to children youth and special healthcare needs and their caregivers or parents. A great number of these children and youth get services through these therapy units. I have a copy here of the current list of all CCSMTUs as well as sections of my current medical provider list which I'll be handing to the clerk along with my testimony. And in closing I would just like to say that as my local Assembly Member said to me, we should spend more time in our district gathering information and less time up in Sacramento making decisions. Thank you so much for this opportunity and for hearing my ideas. Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2515, 'end': 2524, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Kent: so thank you for having me, good morning. jennifer alice kent department of healthcare services. i think just starting more broadly, when i took over as director we had done a stakeholder survey that was posted publicly on our website. and i read it as i came into the department because i wanted to see what various opinions were. and i will stipulate to what alice said earlier, is we're a big department with a lot of complex programs. we can be really difficult to work with from the standpoint that we use acronyms, like it's own language, that most people, we forget that other people don't speak the language of department bureaucrat. and so i took that feedback, and i listened to a lot of the comments where people said we give feedback to the department and we never hear back. or we don't understand why the decision was made that was counter to what our suggestion was. and so one of the things that i took away from that, which is if you're going to go to the effort of giving the department feedback, it is our intent always, as much as we can to the best of our ability to try to explain the comments that we received, as well as the reason for why we either changed our policy based on those comments or why we couldn't. we recently had a document that we shared with hundreds of stakeholders, not on children with special healthcare needs in particular, but we asked for feedback within 30 days. and in that case we had completely conflicting opinion on the exact same topic, right. so one group said, please do it this way, and the other group said, no, we want you to do the complete opposite. and so sometimes when you're searching and asking for recommendations, we ultimately have to go back and make a decision. but i think we try really hard and i'm committed to doing this which is explaining why we couldn't or we could do something. as it pertains to both the ccs advisory committee, as well as mchap, i'll speak to mchap first. when i started, that was kind of the first year after the advisory panel had come into the department. they were very familiar with healthy families. the board, the medical insurance board was a very different entity than the department. and when we talk about training and education, it seemed important to me that the committee, no matter who they were, family members or providers or county representatives or hospital representatives, because the committee has a whole set of those different organizational memberships, that sometimes they were trying to make recommendations to the director, to me, but they didn't actually understand maybe the background or some of the finance scene behind the programmatic area that they were interested in. so we've done, and this is i think helping as we do agenda setting, multiple agendas in a future way. and then what we do as a department is we provide deep dive kind of subject matter experts where we come into mchap, we have our experts on either mental health, or dental, or managed care, whatever. and they provide both training and kind of ground setting for the entire committee so that when they come back to me with a recommendation, they are informed about the program and kind of how it operates so that they can then make certain recommendations. and that has gone, i think, really well. it has made their recommendations incredibly meaningful because they are looking at how we operate today and then they're coming back with concrete solutions rather than just saying, fix it, that's not helpful. and so i think that has been particularly evident in the quality of the recommendations. and then consistent with my belief is that when they give me a written recommendation, i sit back with them the next meeting and say, here's what we are prepared to do, here's what we are doing, here's why we can't do a certain thing. or this is our alternative for you to consider. and so i've been pretty pleased with how that has been going. we recently, with alice, resigning from mchap. we just concluded interviews last week for both a pediatrician representative as well as a family member representative. so our next mchap advisory committee when you attend will have new members. so swearing in big happenings. for ccs in particular, again a very important program, oldest in our department by a long shot since 1927. the advisory group was formed specifically around changes that were being contemplated to ccs in 2012, 2013. i was actually on the advisory group before i became the director, and as ccs has evolved from that initial formation it is now kind of permanently in place within our department. there's kind of a two-track process that we're working on, both the whole child model, which are the county organized health system models that we're working on to better integrate the ccs services with the rest. but there's also another track within the ccs advisory group around performance metrics and quality outcomes. and that is composed of both the provider organizations, neonatologists, hospitals, family members, researchers. and the idea is is that we are trying to look at ccs more broadly but also more specifically on both the kind of historical ccs program as supposed to the whole child model. when we negotiated 586 last year in the legislature with a lot of people in this room, as well as senator hernandez, one of the things that we had felt strongly about from the statewide perspective was having advisory groups at a state level informing us as a department. so we worked with dr. hernandez, as well as the stakeholders, to have each county organized health system have a advisory group on a local level composed of ccs parents and providers. and so i think we recognize, and this was certainly from the previous panels, statements around all politics are local, all healthcare is personal. so people's very, very personal experiences with healthcare help inform healthcare systems no matter whether they're at a state level or at a local level. and so we have been both supportive of that as well as working with the plans to make sure that they embrace what the intent of that was in the legislation. so i will just kind of say broadly, and i'm happy to answer questions on the challenges around family engagement. obviously, the ability for us to have families, sacrifice time out of their home if they're being a caregiver full-time for their children, or to travel the sacramento is certainly difficult. and this has been something that we're trying to work on is, if we just put a family member into one of our advisory groups and immediately start talking, it is really, i can imagine, incredibly overwhelming and so i've actually had conversations with the chair of mchap committee which is what this new family member that is coming in. we need to be very intentional and very thoughtful about working with her to make sure that she's brought up to speed, that we give her as much material ahead of time. but also making sure that we keep an eye on the conversation as the advisory committee is even meeting to make sure that she's not just kind of completely lost. and so i think being aware of who's on your committee at all times and making sure that you try to not necessarily lower the conversational level but just make sure that your information and that your time is afforded to every single participant in a way that is meaningful. so anyway, those are some of the good things. and obviously, again, being a big department, we struggle to get it right. but i would like to think that we are evolving our feedback loop as much as we can, so thank you.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 361, 'end': 366, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1943, 'end': 1948, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3967, 'end': 3972, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5336, 'end': 5345, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5524, 'end': 5533, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kimberly McCully: Hi, Kimberly McCully, constituent of yours, with two special needs daughters. So I have a couple of concerns. The first would be, when was the last time this Committee met? because my understanding, it's been well over a year. And that this is a Committee, correct? It's not just you, so there's other people on this Committee?
[{'start': 4, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joshua Coleman: hi, senator pan. my name is joshua. i have an eight-year-old who's paralyzed, in a wheelchair. and i have a major concern about amendment h, from sb 277. so my son right now, he's grandfathered in, and he's able to attend school without being fully vaccinated. but when i was attending the senate hearings, amendment h, it was clarified by both your co-author, ben allen and also someone from the department of education, saying that somebody who was not fully vaccinated could still attend school if they had an iep. well, right now what's happening is most school districts are not, they're not honoring amendment h the way that it is. and i mean, the language is very vague. but of course, we know at the senate hearings, which you are present at, it was clarified, crystal clear and you never contradicted that there. so what could we do to have amendment h honored as it was intended?
[{'start': 12, 'end': 15, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 28, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 361, 'end': 370, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dynel Kenworthy: Good morning, Senator Pan. I'm Dynel Kenworthy and I have a 21-year-old son with Down syndrome, autism, and he's medically complex. We've met before and I am one of your constituents. My son has recently graduated from CCS and moved into adult care. I serve on my local SELPA CAC and chair it right now. I serve on the Sacramento Regional Advisory Committee of the State Council on Developmental Disabilities. And I'm a board member of our local Family Resource Center and Parent Training and Information Center, known as Warm Line here in Sacramento, serving 26 counties. I also, through my son's life, have served and helped in our local communities by connecting parents, meeting in coffee shops, just talking with parents and mentoring them. Parent to parent mentoring works, and I see my parents serving in many different areas. I recently was trained in the parent leadership model. I love it. It is really good and I cannot support it any more than this, to tell you that this should be throughout the state. There should be funding for parents to attend, for trainers to be trained. And I'm so appreciative, Lucille Packert, for backing it.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 25, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 31, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1116, 'end': 1131, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Maureen O'leary Burness: Hi, Maureen O'Leary Burness, also a constituent and I'm here because I was the co-executive Director of Statewide Special Ed Task Force, where we made lots of recommendations similar to what you're talking about. And I am on the executive board for Breaking Barriers. And that group is also looking at making change to our system. One of our recommendations I would like to say from the task force, was that we increase the number of family empowerment centers. And so I'd really like to support Juno in her work, and just remind you as a Senator that we made that recommendation to the entire Legislature last year. DeDe Alpert, originally I was the author of those. And so that's one recommendation. The two others that we have and we're working with the Advisory Commission on Special Education, is to set up an interagency coordinating council like that for the birth to five group, but that would be for children. And also to look into New Jersey's recently established Children's System of Care, which actually has taken all of the agencies which work together for children and put them under one roof. So that an advisory council could actually work with one group for parents. Thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 496, 'end': 500, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 617, 'end': 628, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Christina Hildebrandt: Hi, Christina Hildebrandt from Voice for Choice Advocacy. I wanted to thank the people speaking today. And I'm very glad to hear that they are doing amazing work, and that they were able to come today. They seem very enamored with you. Unfortunately, as you know our organization is not enamored with you. And there are many other organizations that are not enamored with you. The lack of notice, yes, you did give official four days' notice, but that put it on last Thursday. Friday was a state holiday. Saturday, Sunday were the weekends. So realistically, you gave less than one business day notice for special needs families to come up here, and to attend this meeting. That's not good enough. I'm sorry, it's not good enough. Similarly, this Committee has met three times in 18 months since it was initiated. There has been nothing that has come out of this Committee other than those three informational hearings. So what the people that sat here today said, wanting for their voices to be heard, they're not being heard. You're not doing anything in this Committee except for having those three meetings. You can go on your website for this Committee.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Malviny: Hi I'm Karen Malviny, I'm a parent of a disabled young woman who is a Regional Center client, and it is also in school. I also serve on the State Council for developmental disabilities  representing my county, and the local regional advisory council. And my professional background is all working with technology companies, and I'm just so struck today that we have the technology to educate potential Committee Members, to create webinars, so that anyone who wants to participate in the legislative process and provide public input, can be better informed before they deliver that. So, create a webinar for us. Create a webinar for parents, so that they can understand what the framework is before they deliver. A comment and secondly, meetings like this, many families particularly the more disabled your child is, the harder it is to participate in these meetings. These should be webcast put up a SurveyMonkey afterwards to collect input. Let people deliver written input as well, when you announce the meeting. These are things that will get you the input that you need to deliver better commentary. Thanks.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kelly Young: Hi, I'm Kelly Young, and I have a daughter who has cerebral palsy and epilepsy. So very experienced in this. I'm also the Director of Warm Line Family Resource Center here in Sacramento, as I am a constituent and I serve your families. I want to echo what's been talked about today as far as, how to engage parents, I think it's much easier for parent centers to engage parents because we already are there. It's much more difficult for a state agency, a school district, or any other agency to go out and do that individually. And it's much more inefficient. I think we've proven over the years, that were effective or efficient. We know when we get our people together, our parents together, we can cut costs, we can find out where the fat is, identify wasteful practices. We love, we just had our board member and staff go to project leadership, and we have no funding to provide that to our parents. But we're going to find funding, because we think it's very important, and the whole idea of having a well trained cadre of parents throughout our state, because we know you guys are last minute. So we need to have parents ready to go when you have a hearing. And testimony. So again, I really like the train of thought that you guys are on today.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jazel Wall: wall, i'm from beruks, and this is the third meeting that i've been to in the last month or so with you. so i just wanted to speak to an echo as well. the fact that i do see a lot of activity on social media with you, and awards that you're winning in regards to this particular topic. i too have won awards from san juan unified school district, and i feel that i have showed up at these meetings and pointed out that the experts are here, and that we're begging you to work with us. we're begging you to hear us, and that we wanted a platform to be able to communicate. i have a background as an aba specialist. i also had worked in a family practice and work in the medical field, as well. and so i feel like the wisdom or experience that these people have in these committee or town hall meetings, are crucial for you guys to hear. and so, if we don't know that the meetings are taking place, or we know two days before, these families that have these children that require a little more tending and preparation to come and speak, but they have all the knowledge. i also just wanted to point out very quickly that, what i notice is that there was a feeling that you were kind of dodging us, or ducking us, or not wanting to hear from us. that was the feeling, and then what has kind of solidified that or validated that is that tyler aguilar, one of your staff was following a group that was dedicated to working in opposition of sp18. and he said do you have a job to me on one of my post, and i just want you to know that i thought about that for a very long time. do i have a job? i do i have three young children. and i also work with the community. and i am dedicated to volunteering with special needs children. i have plenty of jobs. it's very insulting to see that the staff are saying that he works 70 hours a week for you, to schedule a townhall meeting that we didn't get to know about until two days before. that's not okay. that's not okay. we are begging you to work with us, please.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1332, 'end': 1345, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Monnie Gale: hi, my name is gale. i am a mom of 5, and 3 of my children have autism. i'd like to express my gratitude for having this meeting today, but again i am a little disappointed because we really need to have notification. in schools you have that formal notification, and i would hope that the state would have those rules governing notices as well. many families throughout the state, central southern california, even the northernmost. did not have the opportunity to come up today. and they really, desperately wanted to have their voices heard. i'm disappointed, that this of the bullying of legislatures that has happened. legislators who have blocked public media. the public who are trying to engage about some of these issues, have been blocked on social media. and when negative feedback has been voiced, they are deleted and they're blocked. i think, just a few minutes ago, your jab about vaccines, about a mom back here. i think it was really immature, and insensitive, especially because, these are the families. some of them are. i just think it shows a lack of respect. you are a doctor. we have to acknowledge that autism, there's vaccines. let's just end it with that and try and get more family engagement. thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julie Cosgrove-Garcia: Hi, my name is Julie Cosgrove-Garcia. I'm a parent of son with muscular dystrophy 25 years old, I'm here with my friend Leandra Archdekin with her son Nicholas back there. He also has dusion and other serious medical issues. But I wanted to thank everyone for the time to be here. We came in late, apologies for that. I'm learning the process of how this works. Since my son's diagnosis, I've spent a lot of time on working with Parent Project Muscular Dystrophy. Leandra and I are both basis coordinators, with Parent Project Muscular Dystrophy. Pam is advocating, coordinating, educating and supporting families. I want to learn more on the local level of resources that are available for our children. My son didn't qualify until he was 18, for resources. I know with the social worker I ask what else is out there, what else is available. There are other resources available. I was told nothing. So I wanted to just say I'm learning the process and we do need to reach out to families, not just Duchenne, but families who have severe conditions. Perhaps a media, to where you can get a video of people talking and speaking and telling concerns. I just wanted to share that, contribute. Thank you for your time.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 120, 'end': 137, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 151, 'end': 159, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 464, 'end': 471, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 547, 'end': 550, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
 : there jonah it jonah is. jonah senator jonah hill, jonah you jonah may jonah begin.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 11, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 15, 'end': 20, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 25, 'end': 30, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 39, 'end': 49, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 51, 'end': 56, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 61, 'end': 66, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 71, 'end': 76, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Paul Woods: Yes. Paul Woods Consumer Attorneys of California. This is a serious problem obviously. The Berkeley tragedy and the Folsom tragedies speak for themselves. Nationwide, 33,000 people have been, between 2003 and 2007, were injured in balcony and depth collapses. Initial inspections have proven to be not entirely effective in capturing these problems. The Berkeley problem was completely enclosed under a socket of the building, and wasn't detected until the balcony actually collapsed. More intensive inspections, more frequently done. As these projects age, we think it's extremely important and we support the bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ashley Donahue: hi, my name is jackie donahue and i'm the mother of ashley  donahue and the aunt of olivia bark who died in the berkeley balcony collapse. with the, for the friends and the other seven kids who were injured. and i'm here today to ask you to move this bill forward because we had success with the last bill however this a part that's very near and dear to my heart. for one, think about it how many of you when you step out on a balcony think it will be your last step? i bet those kids didn't. think that they would step out on that balcony and their whole world would end that night. but i look at it now with berkeley. okay, berkeley has done, put some stuff forward, they have inspections going on. which is one little city. think how many people live in the city of berkeley. pretty small, compared to the state of california. so, if you look at the berkeley numbers is even. and then i'm just going on roughly for how many inspections that they did when they send out the letters in us. they performed say roughly over 2000 inspections. out of those 2000 inspections, over 400 are those balconies needed some kind of fixing and they had to be addressed. so, take little berkeley, the little city of berkeley, and think about where you all live. think about your children, your grandchildren, your spouses, whoever is in your life. and a many are walking out on balconies on a daily basis. and none of them are being inspected because i know every time i look around now and i look at some of these balconies and i see how they're all covered up, i mean, some of these inspectors you can't blame them, they don't know how to inspect even. this bill needs to go forward. because the reason i'm here today and the only reason i drove up from rowan park today is because i personally cannot live with if this does not go through today. and i felt because i didn't take the time to come up here. and something else happens and somebody else dies. so, then many more people are going to die. or be injured because of this. so, every time when you walk out in that balcony, take a step back, and think about the hell those six kids and their seven friends went through. and think about the hell that the families and friends are still going through. because i might be the only family here in america. but i am in constant contact with all the families in ireland. and it is hell for every single one of us. so, i ask you guys to do the right thing and put this through to the next level. thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 29, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 52, 'end': 66, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 83, 'end': 94, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nicole Bautista: Good afternoon, Nicole Bautista with the California Building Officials as indicated we are definitely here in the support position today. We do have some concerns with the March 27th amendments, as we fully create an unintended burden on building the apartments. However, we have brought this to the attention of the author. And we're going to continue to work with the authors in their office to move this forward and to correct what we found that created a burden. So, with that we offer our support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Justin Paddock: Chairman and Committee, my name is Justin Paddock with the California Association of Realtors. We don't have an official position on this bill. We've raised a few concerns, and we look forward to continuing working with the author to resolve those issues in the coming weeks, thank you.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Deborah Carlton: thank you. deborah, with the california carbon association. we want to thank the senator for working with us on amendments. we've, we're almost there. i think, what we still have left is we want to make sure that the wooden balconies are the priority. we have the cantilever, or the steel construction, we think there'll be, probably less of a concern with those types of construction. so, we want to make sure that the priority is the wood construction. we want to make sure, i think we've done that, we'll take a closer look. that you don't end up with a local requirement and a state requirement, so two inspections. so i think, we have taken care of that, but we will take a closer look to make sure we're not duplicating efforts. because they are a local ordinance is already in place that do require inspections. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Craig Page: Mr Chair, Committee Members, my name is Craig Page of the California Land and Title Association. I want to thank the author for I guess accepting the amendment regarding the recreation provisions. However, there was one other new provision that was put into the bill dealing with liens in the bill. And we think the way it's currently drafted creates a potential for a secret lien that may not be obvious when it's there. We'll reach out to the author and anticipate that we can work with him to address that issue.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dana Nichol: Good afternoon, Senator, Dana Nichol with Pete Conaty and Associates. Everyone of our veterans groups supports this bill. That would be the American GI Forum, and Vets American Legion, California State Veterans Council, California Association of County Veteran Service Officers, National Guard Association of, California, Military Officers Association, American, Vietnam Veterans of America. As the Senator pointed out veterans when they join the military out of high school serve for four to six years, usually, and when they get out, they're a little behind the curve on getting a career going, and this will certainly help them get a toehold. I'm a licensed contractor myself, and fortunately, I was working as a plumber when I got my contractor's license, and I was able to pony up the $400 it took to do it, but these young veterans may not have that opportunity. Thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carl Brackensiek: Good afternoon Mr. Chair and members. Carl Brackensiek on behalf of the California Coin and Bullion Merchants Association, we are the co-sponsors of SB 579. I know you have a very tight schedule here. You have to get to the floor shortly. So, I will be very brief to say that we are very pleased to be co-sponsoring this legislation. I have with me our President, Barry Stuppler, who has just some very brief comments to make.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 364, 'end': 378, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Joyce Hayhoe: Good afternoon, Chairman Weber, Chairman Arambla and Members of the Committee. My name is Joyce Hayhoe, I'm the Director of Legislation and Communications for California Correctional Healthcare Services, one of the three agencies that are involved in this BCP. Our proposal that was included in the Governor's Budget is a no cost proposal to transfer three current programs operated by the Department of State Hospitals to the Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation and California Correctional Healthcare System. It involves approximately $250 million and 1,978 employees. Upon transfer all of our departments will begin working to insure that there is a smooth transition of the program, so that both of our employees and our patients don't feel unnecessary stress. But there are some very important things about this proposal that I wanted to point out before I turn it over to the other speakers. First of all, first and foremost, this proposal assumes that from the pre-condition of the programs at the Department of State Hospitals to the post condition, where it's transferred to corrections and California Correction Healthcare Services, there are going to be no changes in the programming that we're doing everyday for the inmates. In addition, we're not going to be changing any of the terms of conditions for any of the employees. We have a number of employees at the program right now. We're going to continue to use those employees. We're going to continue to use those classifications. So the employees are not going to notice any difference either. And the important part of this as we want to make sure that there is no break in the programming that the inmates are receiving because it's very very important for continuity. In addition, what we are going to be doing is we're going to be meeting with all of the bargain units to go over all of these proposals. We're in the process right now of meeting with many of them. Some other bargain units will also be met with very quickly to make sure that we've got continuity with what we're doing. Lastly before I turn it over, I want to make sure that we also understand there will be a better oversight for the programs because we'll be having the Office of the Inspector General that will now be involved with oversight, and the proposal itself has been, it's supported by the special master .... So, I want to turn over right now to Pam Ahlin, who can talk a little bit about the current program.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 30, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 41, 'end': 48, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 90, 'end': 102, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2405, 'end': 2414, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Pam Ahlin: good afternoon. pam, director department state hospitals. i'm going to let you know what we did in preparation to this transfer. the three of our departments, department of corrections and rehabilations, the california correctional health services and department of state hospitals have been working very closely to ensure a smooth transfer of these programs over to cdcr. this work started over a year ago. we worked with the special master, cdcr and dsh to develop a memorandum of understanding and joint policies that would link our two departments much closer together. this fiscal year we have had several work groups focused on preparing these programs for transfer to cdcr. the work groups are comprised of representatives from all three departments and they're focused on identifying all key issues and details and work plans that will connect our departments for a successful transition. those work groups included mental health, legal, custody, nursing, accounting, human resources, labor relations, it, and business services. and this was the pre-planning prior to the governor's budget as far as getting the technical connections between our departments. since the governor's budget, all three of our departments went out and conducted town halls at all three sites for our employees, to hear from us the leadership of the departments, and that our commitment to make sure that these programs transferred over to cdcr with minimal impact on the patients and on the staff. after the town halls, we took questions and answers, and we had a lot of employee questions, and what we did was jointly work together with cdcr and cch staff, and our labor groups, to make sure that we had responsive answers to our employees. we also did some critical policy reviews as well, and this is very important because there's going to be from june 30 to july 1, we want to make sure what changes on that day, what do our employees need to know for reporting structures, communication, from one leadership to the next,  so we had some critical policy meetings as well. and finally, we continue to work, and go out, and answer questions, and make sure that our patients, ultimately, department state hospitals even though we're handing these programs over to cdcr, we want to make sure that there is the smoothest transition for patient care. so we're trying to share all the things that we've done over the last 10, 20 years for these and make patient populations to cdcr and cchf on behind the scenes of really what happens in this program so, that they have all the whats and whys and how we do things. and the communication is daily, weekly, and it'll continue on even after the transfer just to make sure that these are successfully transferred over. with that we'll turn it over to miss tebrock.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2785, 'end': 2792, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Katherine Tebrock: Good afternoon, my name is Katherine Tebrock, I am the Deputy Director for.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katherine Tebrock: very good. so good afternoon my name is katherine jonah tebrock, i am the deputy director for the cdcr's mental health program. thank you for giving me an opportunity to come and speak to you all to provide an update about what we're doing in our efforts regarding the lifting shift of the current in prison in patient programs run by dsh, as we transition them to cdcr. the proposal is important at this time. because it reflects, i think a recognition of the maturation of cdcr's mental health program. dmh now dsh, stepped in to care for cdcrs patients at a time when cdcr didn't have the capacity to handle the highest level of care for patients that it had. however, over the course of many years, cdcr has built up it's own system. we now maintain two programs at san quentin and ciw, you'll hear more about the san quentin program from doctor burton here, where we provide both acute and intermediate levels of in patient care to the populations there. i'm confident that cdcr and cchcs are well positioned at this time to assume responsibilities for the current dsh programs. and that confidence stems in part by our successful management of those inpatient psychiatric care programs at the california institution for women and the san quentin state prison. both of those programs have full accreditation from joint commission, which is considered an industry standard for healthcare organizations. those programs were established from the ground up and have been monitored closely by both headquarters and by the coleman special master team. the federal court monitors in our ongoing mental health case. in establishing those programs, we looked to dsh to help provide guidance and mentoring. in fact, we adopted and adapted much of dsh's approach to care in those in-patient units. now that we've had some experience doing this work, we believe it's a good time for us to resume responsibility for all of the care to our patients in those prisons, and there are multiple benefits that derive from the lift and shift. first, we'll be able to reduce the patient referral and transfer time frames. thereby improving access to psychiatric outpatient programs. currently, both cdcr and dsh are required to oversee and review each patient referral. once that transfer occurs, we'll be directly responsible for the management of those beds. including making local referrals and determination of appropriate levels of care as well as accountability. the bottom line is that patients will be able to be placed into beds more quickly. this can only be accomplished by creating a unified program structure under the control of one agency. second, when cchcs and cdcr is able to manage the complete continuum of care the communications between those levels of care can be smoother. since the announcement of the proposal in the governor's budget, as director ahlin mentioned earlier, cdcr, cchcs, and dsh have been working closely to develop the transaction or transition process, alignment of the policy approach, etc.  in fact we have folks working in real time on those policies right now. that work has been incredibly positive and productive between the agencies and the special master, in fact, some of his team also involved in some of that review process to ensure that it is consistent with overall process and philosophy. one issue that i think is important for you all to know is that cdcr and dsh share a common philosophy which is critical to the transition. and that has to do with putting patient care first, really ensuring that through this process of transition that we make sure we don't inadvertently harm the care to the patients. one way we do that is by trying to maintain the systems and structures in place to the extent possible so that we can make sure the continuum of care is managed well, and the patients are safe. so with that i think dr. burton might have some insight related to san quentin program.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 63, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 850, 'end': 856, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2857, 'end': 2862, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3868, 'end': 3874, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Paul Burton: Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen of the Assembly. My name is Dr. Paul Burton. I'm the chief psychiatrist at San Quentin State Prison. Thank you for having me here today. It truly is an honor and privilege. For some historical perspective, I started as a treating psychiatrist for death row in the State of California for men. And several years before, we had a psychiatric in patient program, we had very good in my opinion out patient and crisis bed services, however, there was a hole in the treatment, I've been asked to speak briefly about the San Quentin Psychiatric Inpatient Program experience and the mini lift and shift that we completed at San Quentin three years ago. There was not an intermediate care facility for the condemned men in our state.  So in 2014, in a collaborative effort between San Quentin Healthcare, San Quentin Custody, Mental Health Headquarters, DAI, as well as the special masters team, and with our colleagues from DSH. We developed the Psychiatric Inpatient Program for Condemned located at San Quentin State Prison, effectively creating an intermediate care facility for condemned men, first time in the state, and also taking over the acute care that DSH had provided to the condemned men that's also part of the San Quentin Psychiatric In-Patient Program. It really was a collaborative effort. The Special Master's team, and the Special Master himself, were highly involved in that process. The federal courts have reviewed our program in detail and effectively have signed off on it, and believed it is an adequate program. In the two and a half years since the PIP, as we call it, has been formed, there have been some challenges. In 2015, shortly after we opened the program, we were up for joint commission accreditation. The JC or JCAHO is the community gold standard for hospital care, and it required a shift in the philosophy at San Quentin. Rather than waiting for a problem to develop, and then responding, the JC or JCAHO really encourages proactive foresight in regards to assessing quality issues before they become problematic, and addressing them head on. That was an easy pill for San Quentin to swallow, since we're very proactive under the guidance of Mental Health headquarters. Other challenges last year in 2016, the condemned men in our state faced a populational stressor, in that there were two propositions on the November ballot. One to abolish capital punishment, and one effectively to speed up the possible rate of executions. That latter measure actually passed and we are able to temper some of the anxieties and understandable worries of our patient population in the context of Prop 66 passing. Since that still being looked at by the court by the court that's an ongoing issue that we are working with both our big population as well as outpatient. And finally juts last month San Quentin went live with the new electronic medical record system. It really has propelled the CDCR into the 21st century of healthcare. It has not been without challenges, however, we really mastered the pen and paper system for the last several decades or so. So a lot of our processes within the Department of Corrections are being modernized as we speak and really is said to improve the quality of care going forward. One of the unique aspects of working in a prison is that we work shoulder to shoulder with correctional officers on a daily basis. In my opinion that's one of the assets of working in the CDCR. Regardless of what treatment we provide as psychiatrists or psychologists or social workers to our patients, absent a court order, they're still going to be in prison. Custody officers and the correctional culture are part of their daily life, and it's important to have correctional officers working with the treatment team to provide as Doctor's some incite in regards to what's it's like on the tears in the prison, because those environmental stressors can have significant impact to the mental health of our patient. So in our San Quentin, we actually refer to our correctional officers as healthcare workers. They're members of the treatment team, in my opinion, it improves the quality of treatment patients receive. Because they actually have a seat at the table the correctional officers have bought into the mission and philosophy of healing these patients, and I also believe it provides the necessary cultural consult to make our patients thrive long after they've been discharged. So if you have any questions, I'd be happy to answer them. But in brief, that's my experience with the San Quentin PIP.
[{'start': 69, 'end': 80, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jonathan Peterson: Thank you, Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, and members. Jonathan Peterson with the Legislative Analysts Office. In our analysis of the proposed shift, we found that the shift could achieve notable outcomes but a subject to significant uncertainty. As a result, we recommended rejecting the Governor's proposal to shift these programs and instead shift a limited number of beds over a three year period. The Department already went over some of the positive outcomes, including reducing wait times for patients to get into appropriate care. We would also add the shift could generate additional savings from reducing the number of days patients spend in relatively more expensive mental health crisis beds and achieving economies of scale by not needing two different departments, having administrative staff to operate these programs. However, it's uncertain whether some of these outcomes will be achieved. There is significant uncertainty over how program costs will change, and in addition, how quality of care will be affected. This uncertainty stems from the fact that in the proposal, it indicates that the department plans to operate the current programs,as they exist now, for two years. After that period, they'll consider what changes need to be made for these programs to be operated by CDCR moving forward. We note that some of the smaller programs, like the San Quentin PIP are move expensive to operate than what it costs for DSH to operate these larger programs.  So that uncertainty in program costs, as well as what will happen to care as this transition occurs, is some of the uncertainty we were speaking of. This is why we are recommending the Legislature implement a pilot program in which CDCR would provide inpatient care to a portion of the inmates who would otherwise get their care from DSH. Such a pilot would allow the Legislature to determine whether wait times decrease as expected, what particular staffing changes need to be made and the cost of making those changes, and the effectiveness of the treatment that is provided. In addition we recommend approving the proposed beds at the California medical facility which we'll talk about in the next item on a limited term basis as one of the pilot sites that we're proposing. And finally, in order to ensure that the Legislature has adequate information to determine whether the shift will make sense moving forward,  we recommend that the Legislature require CDCR to contract with independent research experts such as a University, to measure key outcomes and to provide an evaluation to the Legislature so that it can determine whether the shift makes sense moving forward. Thank you.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 65, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tabitha Stout: tabitha katherine stout, department of finance. we would just like to state that cdcr has been successfully operating 85 beds at a similar level of care for over three years. as ms. tebrock mentioned, those are the 40 beds at san quentin and the 45 beds at ciw, and in addition cdcr operates almost 450 mental health crisis beds, so they've proven their ability to operate an inpatient care. in addition this proposal will streamline the functionality of these programs in two parts. one, having one administrating department overseen will streamline how quickly policies can be changed. currently if they want to change a policy, both the department of state hospitals and cdcr, the receiver's office, have to approve that change in policy. when it's transferred over to cdcr, that will be just through cdcr and the receivers office that those would need to be approved. so any changes that need to occur to address issues that come up could happen more expediently. in addition the review times will be decreased for the intermediate care facility. the referral review times will be decreased from 15 days to 9 days and in the acute care it would be from 6 days to 3 days. so you would have more of a patient turnover, which would allow cdcr to treat more inmates in the same amount of space which is important, because we've been seeing a growth in this area, and cdcr is experiencing running out of licensed space for mental health treatment.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 182, 'end': 189, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Margaret Johnson: hi. this is johnson with disability rights california. we don't really have a position about the transfer but the things we're concerned about is first we currently. the state hospitals are required to report to disability rights california incidents suggestive of abuse and neglect including unexpected or suspicious deaths of state hospital residence, allegations of sexual abuse where the alleged perpetrator is a staff member, and allegations of physical abuse reported to local enforcement in which a staff member is implicated. we think that it's important for us to continue to receive those reports if the shift happens, because we provide an independent oversight in investigative function related to our authority as a protection advocacy agency. in addition we have a numbers of years of expertise in addressing abuse and neglect with people with disabilities, and we also recognize that there might be conflicts of interests within the facilities to do their own internal investigations. and i think that when we've done this with the department of state hospital they have found that our investigations have been helpful, that we've been able to identify areas where there might be changes in policies or procedures to ensure that those things won't happen again. the area that we just had, just want to make sure what's going to happen is that, whoever is going to be responsible that there continue to be, that the care focuses on essential principles of timely access, adequate individualized treatment, and least restrictive setting. so that's kind of the second component. so, that's all i have.
[{'start': 12, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Doug Chip: doug tabitha chip also with ask me unions of american physicians and dentists. real briefly, just to augment the comments of my brother, having been here going on 16 years now i've seen the whole trajectory of this stuff. and cdcr used to manage the mental health programs and essentially that was the catalyst toward the common court order coming in and the creation of department state hospitals. so this move is very concering to the state physician and in particular psychiatrist, because there's no infrastructure in place, to ensure that this individuals will not decompensate again, and that's kind of why they started out at cdcr going back to dsh. so there's really no safety net in place. mark mentioned the ancillary services that will be gone in two years. that's a concern to us as well. so going forward i would hope that all this is taken into account. obviously there's a lot of support for the governor's proposal here, but i think we have to be really careful because we are really moving an inmate who decompensated mental health wise to the department state hospitals now back into a cdcr system. so it's a very fragile entity. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 699, 'end': 703, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rob Prentice: good afternoon. my name is dr. rob doug prentice, i'm a licensed psychologist. i come before you, first as a patient advocate and secondarily, as a taxpayer. i would encourage you, to each of you, ask yourselves the following three questions. will the lift and shift improve patient care, will the lift and shift result in cost savings and will the lift and shift lead to a quicker resolution on the coleman lawsuit? the lawsuit has been in place since 1995, we're going into the third decade, cdcr has demonstrated it's an ability to provide the constitutional level of the mental health care.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 400, 'end': 407, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Eric Anderson: My name is Eric Anderson, I am licensed clinical psychologist, I work at DSH Stockton and having also worked for CDCR as a mental health crisis bed at CHCF, I'm in opposition to the currently proposed lift and shift.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roseanne Neill: good afternoon. my name is neill. i'm a rehabilitation therapist at dsh vacaville. i am opposed to the merger.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Trina Rahm: Good afternoon, Trina Rahm, I'm a registered art therapist at DSH Vacaville. I'm opposed to the merger. I worked there for 16 and a half years.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kayla Allen: Good afternoon, my name is Dr. Kayla Allen, I'm a psychologist at the Department of State Hospitals in Vacaville. I strongly oppose this transfer of our patients, thank you.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marissa Marquez: Thank you for your time, my name is Marissa Marquez, I'm a music therapist at DSH Vacaville I oppose this.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ryan Leblanc: my name is ryan rob leblanc, i am a rehab, a music therapist at dsh vacaville and due to the lack of music and art therapy as inclusion, i oppose this transfer, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alicia Madison: Hi, thank you for your time. My name is Alicia Madison. Also a music therapist at the Department of state hospitals in Vacaville and I strongly oppose this merger.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Raphael Garcia: my name is raphael i am from department of state hospitals stockton and i oppose the transfer.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Daniel Lassinger: Daniel Lassinger DSH Stockton. I oppose. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 29, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Marilyn Romero: Thank you for having us, my name is Marilyn Romero, I'm the recreation therapist at DSH Vacaville and I strongly oppose this merger.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brandon Madison: thank you for hearing us today. my name is brandon. i'm a music therapist at dsh vacaville,and i strongly oppose the merger.
[{'start': 43, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dawn Clark: Thank you for hearing us. My name's Dawn Clark psychology at DSH Stockton and I stand opposed. Thank you. Thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matthew Tid: Good afternoon my name is Matthew Tid and I'm a clinical social worker at Vacaville and this is dangerous for patient care and I oppose.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Turner: Thank you for this opportunity to speak. My name is Jennifer Turner. I'm a recreation rehab therapist at DSH Vacaville and I strongly oppose this merger. Thank you.
[{'start': 52, 'end': 67, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Abdul Johnson: Thank you. My name is Abdul Johnson. I'm the President of AFSCME local 2620, representing all the health and social service professionals today. We vehemently oppose this merger because of the fact that we will lose jobs if this doesn't continue after two years.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joyce Hayhoe: good afternoon, chairman weber, chairman arambla and members of the committee. my name is hayhoe, i'm the director of legislation and communications for california correctional healthcare services, one of the three agencies that are involved in this bcp. our proposal that was included in the governor's budget is a no cost proposal to transfer three current programs operated by the department of state hospitals to the department of corrections and rehabilitation and california correctional healthcare system. it involves approximately $250 million and 1,978 employees. upon transfer all of our departments will begin working to insure that there is a smooth transition of the program, so that both of our employees and our patients don't feel unnecessary stress. but there are some very important things about this proposal that i wanted to point out before i turn it over to the other speakers. first of all, first and foremost, this proposal assumes that from the pre-condition of the programs at the department of state hospitals to the post condition, where it's transferred to corrections and california correction healthcare services, there are going to be no changes in the programming that we're doing everyday for the inmates. in addition, we're not going to be changing any of the terms of conditions for any of the employees. we have a number of employees at the program right now. we're going to continue to use those employees. we're going to continue to use those classifications. so the employees are not going to notice any difference either. and the important part of this as we want to make sure that there is no break in the programming that the inmates are receiving because it's very very important for continuity. in addition, what we are going to be doing is we're going to be meeting with all of the bargain units to go over all of these proposals. we're in the process right now of meeting with many of them. some other bargain units will also be met with very quickly to make sure that we've got continuity with what we're doing. lastly before i turn it over, i want to make sure that we also understand there will be a better oversight for the programs because we'll be having the office of the inspector general that will now be involved with oversight, and the proposal itself has been, it's supported by the special master .... so, i want to turn over right now to pam ahlin, who can talk a little bit about the current program.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 30, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 41, 'end': 48, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 90, 'end': 96, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2399, 'end': 2408, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Pam Ahlin: Good afternoon. Pam Ahlin, Director Department State Hospitals. I'm going to let you know what we did in preparation to this transfer. The three of our departments, Department of Corrections and Rehabilations, the California Correctional Health Services and Department of State Hospitals have been working very closely to ensure a smooth transfer of these programs over to CDCR. This work started over a year ago. We worked with the Special Master, CDCR and DSH to develop a memorandum of understanding and joint policies that would link our two departments much closer together. This fiscal year we have had several work groups focused on preparing these programs for transfer to CDCR. The work groups are comprised of representatives from all three departments and they're focused on identifying all key issues and details and work plans that will connect our departments for a successful transition. Those work groups included mental health, legal, custody, nursing, accounting, human resources, labor relations, IT, and business services. And this was the pre-planning prior to the Governor's Budget as far as getting the technical connections between our departments. Since the Governor's Budget, all three of our departments went out and conducted town halls at all three sites for our employees, to hear from us the leadership of the departments, and that our commitment to make sure that these programs transferred over to CDCR with minimal impact on the patients and on the staff. After the town halls, we took questions and answers, and we had a lot of employee questions, and what we did was jointly work together with CDCR and CCH staff, and our labor groups, to make sure that we had responsive answers to our employees. We also did some critical policy reviews as well, and this is very important because there's going to be from June 30 to July 1, we want to make sure what changes on that day, what do our employees need to know for reporting structures, communication, from one leadership to the next,  so we had some critical policy meetings as well. And finally, we continue to work, and go out, and answer questions, and make sure that our patients, ultimately, Department State Hospitals even though we're handing these programs over to CDCR, we want to make sure that there is the smoothest transition for patient care. So we're trying to share all the things that we've done over the last 10, 20 years for these and make patient populations to CDCR and CCHF on behind the scenes of really what happens in this program so, that they have all the whats and whys and how we do things. And the communication is daily, weekly, and it'll continue on even after the transfer just to make sure that these are successfully transferred over. With that we'll turn it over to Miss Tebrock.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2791, 'end': 2798, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Katherine Tebrock: Good afternoon, my name is Katherine Tebrock, I am the Deputy Director for.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katherine Tebrock: Very good. So good afternoon my name is Katherine Tebrock, I am the Deputy Director for the CDCR's Mental Health Program. Thank you for giving me an opportunity to come and speak to you all to provide an update about what we're doing in our efforts regarding the lifting shift of the current in prison in patient programs run by DSH, as we transition them to CDCR. The proposal is important at this time. Because it reflects, I think a recognition of the maturation of CDCR's mental health program. DMH now DSH, stepped in to care for CDCRs patients at a time when CDCR didn't have the capacity to handle the highest level of care for patients that it had. However, over the course of many years, CDCR has built up it's own system. We now maintain two programs at San Quentin and CIW, you'll hear more about the San Quentin program from Doctor Burton here, where we provide both acute and intermediate levels of in patient care to the populations there. I'm confident that CDCR and CCHCS are well positioned at this time to assume responsibilities for the current DSH programs. And that confidence stems in part by our successful management of those inpatient psychiatric care programs at the California Institution for Women and the San Quentin State Prison. Both of those programs have full accreditation from joint Commission, which is considered an industry standard for healthcare organizations. Those programs were established from the ground up and have been monitored closely by both headquarters and by the Coleman special master team. The federal court monitors in our ongoing mental health case. In establishing those programs, we looked to DSH to help provide guidance and mentoring. In fact, we adopted and adapted much of DSH's approach to care in those in-patient units. Now that we've had some experience doing this work, we believe it's a good time for us to resume responsibility for all of the care to our patients in those prisons, and there are multiple benefits that derive from the lift and shift. First, we'll be able to reduce the patient referral and transfer time frames. Thereby improving access to psychiatric outpatient programs. Currently, both CDCR and DSH are required to oversee and review each patient referral. Once that transfer occurs, we'll be directly responsible for the management of those beds. Including making local referrals and determination of appropriate levels of care as well as accountability. The bottom line is that patients will be able to be placed into beds more quickly. This can only be accomplished by creating a unified program structure under the control of one agency. Second, when CCHCS and CDCR is able to manage the complete continuum of care the communications between those levels of care can be smoother. Since the announcement of the proposal in the Governor's Budget, as Director Ahlin mentioned earlier, CDCR, CCHCS, and DSH have been working closely to develop the transaction or transition process, alignment of the policy approach, etc.  In fact we have folks working in real time on those policies right now. That work has been incredibly positive and productive between the agencies and the special master, in fact, some of his team also involved in some of that review process to ensure that it is consistent with overall process and philosophy. One issue that I think is important for you all to know is that CDCR and DSH share a common philosophy which is critical to the transition. And that has to do with putting patient care first, really ensuring that through this process of transition that we make sure we don't inadvertently harm the care to the patients. One way we do that is by trying to maintain the systems and structures in place to the extent possible so that we can make sure the continuum of care is managed well, and the patients are safe. So with that I think Dr. Burton might have some insight related to San Quentin program.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 844, 'end': 850, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2645, 'end': 2650, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2851, 'end': 2856, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3862, 'end': 3868, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Paul Burton: good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen of the assembly. my name is dr. paul jonah burton. i'm the chief psychiatrist at san quentin state prison. thank you for having me here today. it truly is an honor and privilege. for some historical perspective, i started as a treating psychiatrist for death row in the state of california for men. and several years before, we had a psychiatric in patient program, we had very good in my opinion out patient and crisis bed services, however, there was a hole in the treatment, i've been asked to speak briefly about the san quentin psychiatric inpatient program experience and the mini lift and shift that we completed at san quentin three years ago. there was not an intermediate care facility for the condemned men in our state.  so in 2014, in a collaborative effort between san quentin healthcare, san quentin custody, mental health headquarters, dai, as well as the special masters team, and with our colleagues from dsh. we developed the psychiatric inpatient program for condemned located at san quentin state prison, effectively creating an intermediate care facility for condemned men, first time in the state, and also taking over the acute care that dsh had provided to the condemned men that's also part of the san quentin psychiatric in-patient program. it really was a collaborative effort. the special master's team, and the special master himself, were highly involved in that process. the federal courts have reviewed our program in detail and effectively have signed off on it, and believed it is an adequate program. in the two and a half years since the pip, as we call it, has been formed, there have been some challenges. in 2015, shortly after we opened the program, we were up for joint commission accreditation. the jc or jcaho is the community gold standard for hospital care, and it required a shift in the philosophy at san quentin. rather than waiting for a problem to develop, and then responding, the jc or jcaho really encourages proactive foresight in regards to assessing quality issues before they become problematic, and addressing them head on. that was an easy pill for san quentin to swallow, since we're very proactive under the guidance of mental health headquarters. other challenges last year in 2016, the condemned men in our state faced a populational stressor, in that there were two propositions on the november ballot. one to abolish capital punishment, and one effectively to speed up the possible rate of executions. that latter measure actually passed and we are able to temper some of the anxieties and understandable worries of our patient population in the context of prop 66 passing. since that still being looked at by the court by the court that's an ongoing issue that we are working with both our big population as well as outpatient. and finally juts last month san quentin went live with the new electronic medical record system. it really has propelled the cdcr into the 21st century of healthcare. it has not been without challenges, however, we really mastered the pen and paper system for the last several decades or so. so a lot of our processes within the department of corrections are being modernized as we speak and really is said to improve the quality of care going forward. one of the unique aspects of working in a prison is that we work shoulder to shoulder with correctional officers on a daily basis. in my opinion that's one of the assets of working in the cdcr. regardless of what treatment we provide as psychiatrists or psychologists or social workers to our patients, absent a court order, they're still going to be in prison. custody officers and the correctional culture are part of their daily life, and it's important to have correctional officers working with the treatment team to provide as doctor's some incite in regards to what's it's like on the tears in the prison, because those environmental stressors can have significant impact to the mental health of our patient. so in our san quentin, we actually refer to our correctional officers as healthcare workers. they're members of the treatment team, in my opinion, it improves the quality of treatment patients receive. because they actually have a seat at the table the correctional officers have bought into the mission and philosophy of healing these patients, and i also believe it provides the necessary cultural consult to make our patients thrive long after they've been discharged. so if you have any questions, i'd be happy to answer them. but in brief, that's my experience with the san quentin pip.
[{'start': 69, 'end': 86, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jonathan Peterson: Thank you, Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, and members. Jonathan Peterson with the Legislative Analysts Office. In our analysis of the proposed shift, we found that the shift could achieve notable outcomes but a subject to significant uncertainty. As a result, we recommended rejecting the Governor's proposal to shift these programs and instead shift a limited number of beds over a three year period. The Department already went over some of the positive outcomes, including reducing wait times for patients to get into appropriate care. We would also add the shift could generate additional savings from reducing the number of days patients spend in relatively more expensive mental health crisis beds and achieving economies of scale by not needing two different departments, having administrative staff to operate these programs. However, it's uncertain whether some of these outcomes will be achieved. There is significant uncertainty over how program costs will change, and in addition, how quality of care will be affected. This uncertainty stems from the fact that in the proposal, it indicates that the department plans to operate the current programs,as they exist now, for two years. After that period, they'll consider what changes need to be made for these programs to be operated by CDCR moving forward. We note that some of the smaller programs, like the San Quentin PIP are move expensive to operate than what it costs for DSH to operate these larger programs.  So that uncertainty in program costs, as well as what will happen to care as this transition occurs, is some of the uncertainty we were speaking of. This is why we are recommending the Legislature implement a pilot program in which CDCR would provide inpatient care to a portion of the inmates who would otherwise get their care from DSH. Such a pilot would allow the Legislature to determine whether wait times decrease as expected, what particular staffing changes need to be made and the cost of making those changes, and the effectiveness of the treatment that is provided. In addition we recommend approving the proposed beds at the California medical facility which we'll talk about in the next item on a limited term basis as one of the pilot sites that we're proposing. And finally, in order to ensure that the Legislature has adequate information to determine whether the shift will make sense moving forward,  we recommend that the Legislature require CDCR to contract with independent research experts such as a University, to measure key outcomes and to provide an evaluation to the Legislature so that it can determine whether the shift makes sense moving forward. Thank you.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 65, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tabitha Stout: tabitha paul stout, department of finance. we would just like to state that cdcr has been successfully operating 85 beds at a similar level of care for over three years. as ms. tebrock mentioned, those are the 40 beds at san quentin and the 45 beds at ciw, and in addition cdcr operates almost 450 mental health crisis beds, so they've proven their ability to operate an inpatient care. in addition this proposal will streamline the functionality of these programs in two parts. one, having one administrating department overseen will streamline how quickly policies can be changed. currently if they want to change a policy, both the department of state hospitals and cdcr, the receiver's office, have to approve that change in policy. when it's transferred over to cdcr, that will be just through cdcr and the receivers office that those would need to be approved. so any changes that need to occur to address issues that come up could happen more expediently. in addition the review times will be decreased for the intermediate care facility. the referral review times will be decreased from 15 days to 9 days and in the acute care it would be from 6 days to 3 days. so you would have more of a patient turnover, which would allow cdcr to treat more inmates in the same amount of space which is important, because we've been seeing a growth in this area, and cdcr is experiencing running out of licensed space for mental health treatment.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 177, 'end': 184, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Margaret Johnson: hi. this is margaret tabitha johnson with disability rights california. we don't really have a position about the transfer but the things we're concerned about is first we currently. the state hospitals are required to report to disability rights california incidents suggestive of abuse and neglect including unexpected or suspicious deaths of state hospital residence, allegations of sexual abuse where the alleged perpetrator is a staff member, and allegations of physical abuse reported to local enforcement in which a staff member is implicated. we think that it's important for us to continue to receive those reports if the shift happens, because we provide an independent oversight in investigative function related to our authority as a protection advocacy agency. in addition we have a numbers of years of expertise in addressing abuse and neglect with people with disabilities, and we also recognize that there might be conflicts of interests within the facilities to do their own internal investigations. and i think that when we've done this with the department of state hospital they have found that our investigations have been helpful, that we've been able to identify areas where there might be changes in policies or procedures to ensure that those things won't happen again. the area that we just had, just want to make sure what's going to happen is that, whoever is going to be responsible that there continue to be, that the care focuses on essential principles of timely access, adequate individualized treatment, and least restrictive setting. so that's kind of the second component. so, that's all i have.
[{'start': 12, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Doug Chip: chip also with ask me unions of american physicians and dentists. real briefly, just to augment the comments of my brother, having been here going on 16 years now i've seen the whole trajectory of this stuff. and cdcr used to manage the mental health programs and essentially that was the catalyst toward the common court order coming in and the creation of department state hospitals. so this move is very concering to the state physician and in particular psychiatrist, because there's no infrastructure in place, to ensure that this individuals will not decompensate again, and that's kind of why they started out at cdcr going back to dsh. so there's really no safety net in place. mark mentioned the ancillary services that will be gone in two years. that's a concern to us as well. so going forward i would hope that all this is taken into account. obviously there's a lot of support for the governor's proposal here, but i think we have to be really careful because we are really moving an inmate who decompensated mental health wise to the department state hospitals now back into a cdcr system. so it's a very fragile entity. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 686, 'end': 690, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rob Prentice: Good afternoon. My name is Dr. Rob Prentice, I'm a licensed psychologist. I come before you, first as a patient advocate and secondarily, as a taxpayer. I would encourage you, to each of you, ask yourselves the following three questions. Will the lift and shift improve patient care, will the lift and shift result in cost savings and will the lift and shift lead to a quicker resolution on the Coleman lawsuit? The lawsuit has been in place since 1995, we're going into the third decade, CDCR has demonstrated it's an ability to provide the constitutional level of the mental health care.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 395, 'end': 402, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Eric Anderson: my name is eric margaret anderson, i am licensed clinical psychologist, i work at dsh stockton and having also worked for cdcr as a mental health crisis bed at chcf, i'm in opposition to the currently proposed lift and shift.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roseanne Neill: good afternoon. my name is roseanne. i'm a rehabilitation therapist at dsh vacaville. i am opposed to the merger.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Trina Rahm: good afternoon, trina eric rahm, i'm a registered art therapist at dsh vacaville. i'm opposed to the merger. i worked there for 16 and a half years.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kayla Allen: good afternoon, my name is dr. kayla trina allen, i'm a psychologist at the department of state hospitals in vacaville. i strongly oppose this transfer of our patients, thank you.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marissa Marquez: Thank you for your time, my name is Marissa Marquez, I'm a music therapist at DSH Vacaville I oppose this.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ryan Leblanc: my name is ryan kayla leblanc, i am a rehab, a music therapist at dsh vacaville and due to the lack of music and art therapy as inclusion, i oppose this transfer, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alicia Madison: Hi, thank you for your time. My name is Alicia Madison. Also a music therapist at the Department of state hospitals in Vacaville and I strongly oppose this merger.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Raphael Garcia: my name is garcia i am from department of state hospitals stockton and i oppose the transfer.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Daniel Lassinger: Daniel Lassinger DSH Stockton. I oppose. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 29, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Marilyn Romero: Thank you for having us, my name is Marilyn Romero, I'm the recreation therapist at DSH Vacaville and I strongly oppose this merger.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brandon Madison: Thank you for hearing us today. My name is Brandon Madison. I'm a music therapist at DSH Vacaville,and I strongly oppose the merger.
[{'start': 43, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dawn Clark: Thank you for hearing us. My name's Dawn Clark psychology at DSH Stockton and I stand opposed. Thank you. Thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matthew Tid: Good afternoon my name is Matthew Tid and I'm a clinical social worker at Vacaville and this is dangerous for patient care and I oppose.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Turner: thank you for this opportunity to speak. my name is turner. i'm a recreation rehab therapist at dsh vacaville and i strongly oppose this merger. thank you.
[{'start': 52, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Abdul Johnson: Thank you. My name is Abdul Johnson. I'm the President of AFSCME local 2620, representing all the health and social service professionals today. We vehemently oppose this merger because of the fact that we will lose jobs if this doesn't continue after two years.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Josiah Young: my name is josiah jonah young on behalf of the california natural gas vehicles coalition, urging you to support this measure. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ryan Kenny: all right, mr chair, members of the committee. ryan josiah kenny, clean energy renewable fuels. we're urging an aye vote. thank you.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 64, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michele Milota: Hi, my name is Michele Milota, I'm with the Xeroderma Pigmentosum Family Support Group. I represent patients with a rare genetic condition. Individuals with this, cannot be exposed to any, some light or ultraviolet light. So, minutes of sun exposure, these kids get third-degree burns and premature skin cancer. They never outgrow it, so that also goes into adulthood. In order to get from point A to point B, they have to either be completely covered up. Or their car has to be tinted with UV protective gear. And it's just a clear window tint, but the California law prohibits front windshields and front side passenger windows to be covered. This is my daughter Amy and she's going to be getting her permit in six months and if she had to drive a car with this, she's going to be completely, wouldn't be able to see. So, I've reached out to Kevin who I've known for years because I helped him on his campaign when he's a City Council member. And I said to him, please, please, please. No, no, no, no. Not help campaign, but just answer the door and listen to him, when he was a City Council member. And I said, hey, if you ever get anywhere, will you help me? And he said, yeah, let's write something some day. So, I reached out to my good friend, Rocky, who can explain how the window tint works. And Amy can explain her condition. And we just ask that you look at this, and that it doesn't block any visible light, it doesn't block the police officers looking into the car, it doesn't cause any safety hazards, but it will help people have a normal life, because our patients can't have a normal life if they have to be covered in a blanket. Or wear this in a car, or not be able to drive, or not be able to take a school bus. So, we ask that you think about this, and let Rocky share what he has as well.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 665, 'end': 668, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 844, 'end': 849, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1251, 'end': 1256, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1305, 'end': 1308, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1778, 'end': 1783, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rocky Shaw: My name is Rocky Shaw, I'm with 3M Company, I'm a manager, we manufacture the film products that go on these vehicles. There are obviously other manufacturers out there, so they also make similar products, so I am bias because I work for a manufacturer, but this film can be manufactured by many, all manufacturers out there so. It's basically a clear film, I've brought samples of the film, what it looks like. The current windshields of vehicles and door windows of vehicles, don't currently filter UV to the extent that they need. They're somewhere around 60 to 80% effective at filtering UV A and B, which is what we all need protection from, the sun, from skin cancer and things of that nature. So, there's other people too. People who are affected by lupus or even melanoma skin cancers and such.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
James Lombardo: Mr Chair and Members of the Committee James Lombardo Sr, on behalf of [UNKNOWN] California. After taking the beginner class as an experienced rider I found that it was very simple. And on discussing it with my membership we found that there was an intermediate class that I could've taken that would've improved my skills much better. And so we've met with the author, with the department, to come up with this idea that the Commissioner can approve the more advanced levels for taking this rather than doing a quote-unquote lollipop test at the DMV. And it's much safer for riders out there to be more experienced. Thank you.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 55, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
James Labarr: yes, mr. chairman, committee members. james ryan labarr jr, on behalf of the california motorcycle dealers association, in support.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 58, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Lovell: John Lovell on behalf of the Association for Los Angeles Deputy Sheriffs, Association of District Attorneys. California Association of Code Enforcement officers, California college and University police chiefs, alcohol monitoring systems, California Narcotic Officers Association, Los Angeles County Professional Peace Officers Association Los Angeles County probation officers, Local 685, Los Angeles Police Protective League, and the Riverside Sheriffs Association. This is a smart strategy aimed at the core problem of impaired driving. Namely that many drunk drivers continue to repeat. This is a strategy that will enable us to curtail that. It has succeeded in other states. We respectfully request your support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Skippa: mr. chair, members. mike with alcohol justice. we are firmly in support of this bill. we believe that not only will public health and safety benefit but the state will benefit by reduced costs involved in alcohol related crashes that occur every day on our highway. in 2014, nearly 900 deaths were reported as a result of alcohol impaired driving in the state. we ask respectfully for your yes vote. thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Whiteman: mr. chair and members, mark on behalf of intoximeters. we're not in support nor in opposition at this point. we just wanted to note, for the record, that we're working with the author on some language that we hope goes into the bill. one of the key elements that has been demonstrated in the behavioral studies that have occurred for 24/7 programs is the swiftness of sanctions. so if somebody test positive for alcohol use, the swiftness of the sanctions once they are determined to have been in violation of their probation, that they're either put in incarceration for a very short period of time or some other swift sanction. that's what the behavior are all saying, makes 24/7 so successful. there's a provision in assemblymember cooley's bill, ab 2367 that spoke to that. that was his bill last year that he did on this issue that intoximeters supported. and there was a provision in the nitsa guidelines that also speaks to that. so those are the provisions we're working with the author in an effort to get those in the bill. thank you.
[{'start': 735, 'end': 741, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark Watts: Thank you Mr. Chairmen and members Mark Watts today representing transportation California which is a Coalition of the Construction Industry, and Allied Labor Material Suppliers, etc. We've been working on legislation to increase transportation finance for several years as you well know. And we've worked closely with the authors of these bills that are before us today. One of the keynotes of what we found in early polling and what is probably just comes to mind when you think about what's an appropriate package, is the need to protect the revenues. And in this case we worked last year with Senator Huff on his measure, we worked throughout special session. With both Committee staffs, I'll try to come up with language that could be put into play, and at the end of the day, we have before us ACA 12, which we're pleased to embrace today. I listened to the exchange earlier about the protections in the constitutional amendment. And we, Transportation California, myself and others here in this room have had a long history of successively pursuing better and better more improved lock-downs. We think what's in place right now for the gas tax. Well, what's in article 19 is written as well as can be done, and locks it up as well as can be done. Probably the one area we failed to do anything well with was several years ago when Proposition 1A of 2006, I'm sorry, yeah Proposition 1A was tied to Proposition 1B. We negotiated that it was pulling the ballot by the Legislature. And it had one foible in it, which was we didn't protect against repeal. And the sales tax on gasoline was the source of Prop 42. The repeal was the engine for making the tax coop work. But other than that, we felt it worked fairly well. Subsequent to that, the industry sponsored Prop 22 of 2010. And we think that does a very fine job for article 19 consequentially. Looking at the measure before us, where it deals with, on the one hand, again, limit, which is something we did in 1989 when the Legislature put the Prop 11 on the ballot. In addition. By addressing and updating the article 19A which is the transit. That deals with revenues that had a cap in the constitution needs to be addressed. And so that's taken care of. And finally, the new fee which I believe is taken care of very well. It's got the prohibition on backward looking forward looking on future GO bonds. So with that in mind, I'd be happy to answer questions as you go through this and turn it over. Thank you.>>Next witness, please state your name and who you represent please.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 605, 'end': 609, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Allen Zaremberg: Good afternoon, everybody. I'm Allen Zaremberg, representing the California Chamber of Commerce. Mr Chairman and Members of the Committee, I think everybody knows transportation is important to our economy. To move goods, 25% of our economy depends on international trade and goods movement. To move people back and forth to work, not to mention their social life. But let me touch on something that I don't think anybody else touched on or is going to touch on. Mark alluded to it for a minute here. In 1989, the last time the Legislature passed the gas tax, I worked for George [UNKNOWN], that was my job to get it passed. It led to a ballot measure to raise the Gann limit. Prop 111, 108 in 1990. Let me say it was a very difficult decision for a Republican Governor to make. But he recognized as we do today, that a stable funding source that's identified, paid for by the users is essential to capital out lay. You can depend on it, you can rely on it. It doesn't have to compete with any other projects. It was a difficult decision but at that time as today it takes the Governor to step forward and pull everybody together that's what happened then. And I see that happening today. And that's what essential when you govern. I don't think there's anybody among us who says, the roads are in good shape, and if we don't do anything, they'll be even better in five years, won't they. Let's not put any money into it. Well, when we put money into it, the question is, where does it come from. And I think that's the challenge. And history has shown us that user fees, which have been in place for 100 years. And let me also say that this is as close to a user fee as Prop 26 put into the constitution. Which we also help do. And the California Chamber of Commerce in 1990 was also one of the leaders in getting Prop 111 and Prop 108 passed. It's a history and its a history worth repeating because there is an essential need out there that requires a stable, long term funding source that for almost a 100 years has been a recognized user fee. Thank you.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 463, 'end': 467, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 573, 'end': 579, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Caesar Diaz: Mr. Chair and members Caesar Diaz the state building and construction trades council. California's building Trade Unions stand united and strong support of this historic transportation funding proposal and with Senator Beall want to thank you Mr. Chair and of course our Governor, the [UNKNOWN]and the speaker. This is a good bill for all the working people. Not only will it create good middle class jobs, but it will improve the roads and highways that get all working people to and from work every single day. In doing so, we will create a better California for our families in our communities. There was a mention prior apprenticeship in this bill and there was also discussions of disadvantaged communities. I want to stress that the California Building Trades are going to partner at the regional level to ensure that this advantage people, women, all throughout including the previously incarcerated and create paths to actual career opportunities and the Building Trades with this legislation. So, we're very thankful for that piece Senate. But to be clear inaction will not only make our roads less safe to drive on. It will also cause severe harm to the economy by delaying the delivery of goods and services. That hurts businesses. But it also hurts workers, many of whom drive for a living and lose money when they sit idle. This can all be prevented If the Legislature passes SB 1, so I just want to stress it's 2003, 19 other states, including some governed by Republicans, have increased funding for transportation. We don't believe that legislatures should not wait for bridges to collapse, or be forced to respond to constant emergencies. It is imperative for this practice to be adopted in order to protect the general fund from the inevitable costs to replace vital infrastructure. On behalf of the State Building and Construction Trades Council and all of our affiliates, I'm proud to join my brothers and sisters from both public and private sector unions in urging your support of this transportation funding package, the proposal will strengthen the economy, expand trade, and create good paying jobs for California workers. Thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 219, 'end': 224, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Joshua Shaw: mr. chairman, joshua james shaw with the california transit association, representing all your local and regional public transportation systems senate bill one by senator beall and senator frazier is a huge step forward not only for the californians who must rely on public transit because they cannot afford to own or maintain a car as well as those of us who want more choices whether it's more transit options or bicycling or pedestrian options. it's also a huge win for californian's environment there is a direct connection between the investments proposed in this package, in this bill, and reducing air pollution around the state. seven of the top 10 most polluted cities in america, unfortunately, are in california. the transportation sector is the single largest contributor of greenhouse gas emissions in california, about 38% of all ghgs. and about 85% of those come from surface transportation systems. i think that's why a few years ago when the natural resources defense council was talking about the need to build a better public transit system and they were noting that in the previous year drivers in the united states poured nearly half $1 trillion into their gas tanks. the nrdc noted this dangerous reliance on our vehicles which keeps us addicted to oil and causes serious pollution is a threat to our health. environment and national security. fortunately, nrdc says, developing a modern, efficient public transportation infrastructure will address each of these challenges by creating millions of needed jobs, reducing our reliance on foreign oil combatting global warming and serving as the foundation of the clean energy economy. in fact public transit produces 95% less carbon monoxide, 50% fewer volatile organic compounds, 50% less carbon dioxide and 50% less blocks per passenger mile, as compared to passenger vehicles. by reducing congestion, transit also reduces idling from private vehicles and cuts emissions. the texas transportation institute studies these things nationally, and noted that. if public transportation service were discontinued nationwide. and we've got about 15% of the service. that's second only to new york, here in california. and riders traveled in private vehicles instead. urban areas would suffer an additional 541 million hours of delay. and consume, on the whole, 340 million more gallons of fuel. that would cost motorists about $10 billion a year nationally. the stats go on and on, i could go through them. but i will close by noting, mr chair, that the sierra club nationally notes in its transportation policy that they favor the most energy and land conserving and least polluting systems in vehicles. that's why their transportation policy says walking and bicycling are best. there's about 150 million a year in this program, as senator beall pointed out, for those projects. next are buses, light rail, and heavy rail, electrified whenever feasible. we're working under regulation with air resources board right now, to get there for all of our fleets, and on and on. so the sierra club also wants you to see more transportation spending on public transit. we would estimate the same numbers that senator beall pointed out to you, that there are some huge new dedicated funds to transit. i would close by noting the level of investment in transit in this package is the greatest in california since then governor ronald reagan imposed a sales tax on gasoline for the first time ever. and dedicated the value of that tax increase to counties that agreed to implement mass transit and expand their transit services. we urge your aye vote when the bill comes over to the assembly, thank you. thank you, excuse me, next witness.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 171, 'end': 176, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 189, 'end': 196, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2808, 'end': 2813, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3177, 'end': 3182, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3385, 'end': 3398, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dan Carrigg: thank you, mr. chairman and members, dan on behalf of the league of california cities. first, our appreciation for the leadership of the author and the chair, as well as the legislative leadership and the governor, in bringing this package together. there's been a lot of work that's gone on in this building and outside this building in terms of getting a coalition together to support such a significant investment. i think the one thing you'll see, in terms of all the support and the diversity of the support, is there's a lot of common ground in terms of the problem. our streets and roads at the local level are in decline. cities today represent 83% of the state's residents. we provide municipal services to a large, sizeable portion of the population. in those areas, the quality of our streets and roads is critical to the quality of life as well as our economy. those cities are also the centers of our economy. so these investments are really important. and when it comes to the types of investments in this proposal. i mean, obviously very important to us is the dollars that'll come directly to our local streets and roads. from our calculation, they're basically going to double the amount of dollars that cities receive locally to fix their local streets. other things are also very important. you look at the investments in transit, that benefits us. you look at the investment in fixing bridges, that benefits all of us. there's a lot of things in here that really benefit not only cities, but our state. so we encourage your support.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dan Carrigg: Assemblymember Dan Carrigg on behalf of League of California Cities. What makes sense for us is to not let the streets deteriorate more than they are. I mean, that's where we are. You have surveys that the League and CSAC, all our public works officers, have done. It's every two years we put a report out. Going over mile by mile of all those city and county, city streets and county roads, the roads are deteriorating. So what makes sense to us is to stop the deterioration of those streets and at least begin to improve them. And that's really all, in terms of the dollars that will come to us, that are going to do. It would be nice to move to what you're talking about, which is, while you're fixing the street, do more. Maybe add sidewalks or do some other things or add more capacity. That would be great. But the condition that cities are facing in this state right now is the roads are beginning to fall apart. Back to the governor's chart. You've got the impacts, what the cost of maintaining the current system is, and then you've got the dollars. And as Senator Beall pointed out, one of the reasons we're all sitting here is, there was never a CPI that was attached to the last revenue increase. So you've had a lot of erosion of those dollars over time. So what makes sense to us is to stop the decline and begin to improve it. And that's why I'm supporting this bill.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1074, 'end': 1079, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Shawn Yadon: Thank you Mr. Chairman, Members of the Committee. I'm Shawn Yadon, CEO of the California Trucking Association here in support of Senate Bill 1. And I'd just like to thank the administration and the Legislator for working with us in putting together this infrastructure package, and for including the California trucking Association's sponsored legislation, Senate bill 174 which will ensure existing clean air laws are enforced. And a useful life provision that will protect compliant truckers investments in new clean engines. The California Trucking Association has made compromises on issues that are important to our members, but we feel that overall, this is a package that we can support. Protecting environmentally compliant small and medium businesses, while providing critical funding for all modes of infrastructure, is balance policy. And I would ask for your support to the package. Thank you.
[{'start': 54, 'end': 65, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Shaw: Mr. Chair and members, Tim Shaw on behalf of the San Francisco Bay Area, Rapid Transit District as well as the Capital Corridor Joint Powers Authority which runs the Intercity Rail Service between the Sacramento region and the San Francisco Bay Area and the California Association of Port Authorities, comprised of the state's 11 commercial publicly owned ports, thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Manny Diaz: Mr. Chairman and members, Manny Diaz, representing BNSF Railway and Union Pacific Railroad, in support.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Turner: michael on behalf of the los angeles county metropolitan transportation authority board of directors, and the 10 million people who live in los angeles county who drive on these roads and highways every day, urging you to strongly support this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Keith Stein: thank you, mr. chairman. stein, executive director of the self-help counties coalition, on behalf of all 24 counties also here today on behalf of united contractors and the california alliance for jobs, all who strongly support as well.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Orquette: mark joshua orquette representing the east bay leadership council in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Lambdon: sarah mark lambdon mayor pro-tem for the city of hayward home of 140 years of history, home of the hayward fault, the multiple freeways, roads, and i urge you to support this strong, smart investment. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cornelious Burke: Cornelious Burke with the Bay Area council in strong support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrew Antwih: mr. chair and members andrew sarah antwih with shaw yoder antwih here today on behalf of metrolink. and for the first time the pacific merchant shipping association on this version of the bill.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 47, 'end': 64, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Karen Lang: good afternoon mr. chair and members. karen on behalf of mayor edwin lee and the city and county of san francisco. the counties of placer, napa, san joaquin, sonoma, shasta, yuba, humboldt. and most particularly solano county board of supervisors thanks the senator for all this work, thank you.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 63, 'end': 72, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kurt Blackburn: kurt andrew blackburn on behalf of the western states trucking association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bryan Starr: Bryan Starr, Orange County Business Council in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gary Hambly: hambly, california construction industrial materials association in support.
[]
Benjamin Palmer: Benjamin Palmer on behalf of Contra Costa, Marin, and Yolo County in support. Also been asked to express support for the Transportation Authority of Marin.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Harmon: Richard Harmon on behalf of the cities of Oakland, Emeryville, San Leandro, Walnut Creek, Pismo Beach, Turlock, Tulare, Dinuba, Carson, counties of Imperial and Mariposa, and the North County Transit District in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Greg Hurner: Mr. Chairman, thank you for your work. Greg Hurner, on behalf of the California Asphalt Pavement Association in support.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ed Barrons: ed kurt barrons, on behalf of the los angeles county board of supervisors in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ted Toppin: mr. chairman, members, ted ed toppin for the professional engineers in california government, and the association of california state supervisors both strongly in support. thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roxanne Miller: Mr. Chair and members, Roxanne Miller, representing the City of San Jose, specifically mayor Sam Macardo, and our entire City Council. We want to thank you today for this tremendous effort. It's a long time since 1993. Thank you for pulling together for the good of all.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 93, 'end': 104, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Josh Ponam: Mr. Chairman, Josh Ponam on behalf of the California Refuse Recycling Council in support. And we thank you for your efforts as well.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eric Johnson: johnson of the california transportation commission in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alex McCabe: alex ted mccabe, councilman, city of livingston. i give my strong support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Felipe Fuentes: fuentes, on behalf of the associated general contractors of california and the san diego chapter, and caterpillar inc and their authorized dealers.
[]
Mike Robeson: Mike Robeson, on behalf of Caltrain, the commuter rail system on the Berry Peninsula and the San Mateo County transit district, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Theresa Cook: good afternoon, chair members. cook on behalf of the county of alameda in strong support.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joshua Englander: Joshua Englander with HNTB Corporation in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Rosa: chris alex rosa on behalf of the silicon valley leadership group and a hundred of its member companies that have signed on to support of sb 1.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ken De Vore: Thank you, Chair, Members. Ken De Vore, with the National Federation of Independent Business. On behalf of the 22,000 small businesses in California, hundreds in each of your districts. We actually balloted our members on this issue, and the results came back 90% opposed. Now, we are not a Republican organisation, our members are all over the place politically. We have minority-owned businesses, every type of business you can think of, but the thing they share in common is by owning a business, it makes them fiscally conservative. And they have spoken, and I am here. And one of the concerns that I keep hearing is, in fact it was voiced by Ms. Baker earlier, that California, over the last six years, has increased spending by $36 billion. But no money's gone to transportation, unless you count the high speed rail. No money has gone to that. This is about priorities. We have money, we have had lots of money. We chose not to spend it on that. We choose to go to the taxpayers time and again to increase taxes. And what this tax does, most people, you have to understand that it's the poorest, the low income workers, the middle class workers, they are the ones that lives farthest from their jobs. They drive the oldest vehicles, they are once that going to pay the most this tax. And yet, everything that we tried to do in this legislature, everything that we claim will help certain demographics ends up hurting them more than helping them. And this is one of the issues. We agreed, roads are bad, but we also agreed that money has been misspent time and again, and we have no insurances that there will not be another tax proposal in two years. Something else will be put on the ballot or put before the Legislature if this passes. And they'll be coming back for more money. And I hear references earlier from earlier witnesses that other states have done it. Well yeah, I would like to put the other states' tax rates up against California's and see. I mean, when we're the highest in every aspect, let's compare apples to apples then. If we want to get rid of the state income tax in California, then we can look at a tax that Texas raised, to improve their transportation projects. There's a constant planning on, everyone says that this particular bill isn't going to cost that much, this regulation won't cost that much, and it's like handing a business owner a small rock. Here, here is my law, here is my regulation, here is another rock, here is another rock, here is another rock, well they can carry it, they can lift, now there are up to 10 rocks. Pretty soon they are buried under a rock pile because everyone is piling on over and over and over in California. So now, we want to pass another tax. And I remember what happened to the last Governor that signed something like this into place. And there are no reforms, no CEQA reform, nothing. We just want more money because we don't have the political will power to actually address the reforms necessary to make our projects more affordable. And so for that and if I'd be, strongly opposed to those. Thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 651, 'end': 656, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Adrian Martinez: Good afternoon, my name is Adrian Martinez in that year. Earthjustice. There's been a lot of discussion today that we can't wait to fix our transportation infrastructure. The longer we wait, the more it's going to cost, the more damage that's going to be done. The same can be said for air pollution. The longer we wait to finally make it safe to breathe near freight hubs, to finally meet clean air standards, the more harm. And that harm's going to come in more asthma attacks, more premature death, more people being exposed to deadly truck, bus, and other pollution. Trucks are the single largest source of pollution in places like the south coast, cities like Long Beach. It's trucks. That's the primary driver. We were surprised to see the dirty truck provision inserted on Thursday evening. It's a very broad law, it's a very broad provision. It achieves several goals which probably is what the trucking industry wants. One, it's excessively broad, and it covers a large number of trucks. It's unclear whether we want to cover that many trucks to kind of lock in dirty trucks to be operated for many years in communities. And then, the second thing it does, it potentially ties the hands of local public health agencies to solve public health problems and that's wrong. There have been amendments that have been inserted into the bill. These do not solve the problem. These do not make it better. This is a bitter, bitter poison pill from the trucking industry to communities that are choking on diesel exhaust from trucks. If this passes, there is going to be little that communities can do to fight back. They post their agencies to do forward looking approaches to finally clean up the afraid industry. And this is going to make it harder and it's going to impact most those communities that are disadvantaged throughout the state, but particularly, in places like the South Coast Air Basin, the San Joaquin Valley. So, with that, we oppose unless the amendments, unless this is taken out.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Magavern: Mr. Chairman and members, my name is Bill Magavern with the Coalition for Clean Air. Our position is oppose unless amended based solely on the truck exemption provision that went into the bill on Thursday night. And we appreciate the fact that the rest of the bill has many kinds of elements. We wish we could support it, and we also have no desire to have any truckers have to scrap their trucks and buy new ones. But let me draw your attention to two important points. One is that the language also precludes ARB from ordering a retrofit of any truck until it reaches 18 years or 800,000 miles. So that really binds the hands of the air agency. Secondly, there now is intent language, which is better than nothing, which basically says that the air districts and the air board are not to be prevented from things like indirect source rules, and this is mainly about the useful life of the truck. Well, since there's agreement on that now, why don't we put it into the codified section instead of just intent language? Let's show that we really mean it. Thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeanie Ward-Waller: Thank you, Chair and members. Jeanie Ward-Waller with the California Bicycle Coalition. I want to identify my comments with Earth Justice, Sierra Club, and Coalition for Clean Air. We are deeply concerned about the late addition on Thursday night to the Trucking Association. We have been working with many of the groups here today and many others across the State to make this bill, focus the investments from this bill on more sustainable modes of transportation, transit, walking and biking. Those have come a very long way. We were very pleased to see where the bill was early last week. Until that last amendment was made, we wanted to come on and support the bill. We hope that it will come out so that we can do that before your votes are final. So please, we are an oppose unless amended on that one section, thank you.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Abigail Ramirez: hi, and i am abigail chris ramirez with leadership council for justice and accountability. and on behalf of san joaquin valley partners, and i am here opposing sb 1 unless amended. we feel that the current provisions will further harm the health of many of the communities we work with. and so we want to make sure that these provisions are taken out, thank you.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anna Olivia: good afternoon, my name is anna abigail olivia, and i oppose the sb 1 with truck amendments. we would like more time to negotiate the language, and i know that if this is passed that it will greatly affect the health of residents. and i would not like, i don't support it at all. thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marina Barragan: My name is Marina Barragan. I am an organizer with the San Gorgonio Chapter of Sierra Club and I am also a life long resident of the East Coachella Valley, which annual income is about 25,000 a year. And that's the average income. I'm here just to say that I have had family die from asthma and respiratory illnesses. This is a firsthand experience that I have faced everyday, and I oppose the SB 1 with the transportation language, and we want more time to review this. Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Yasi Calazare: Hello, my name is Yasi Calazare. I'm also an organizing representative from the national arm of the Sierra Club, based in the Inland Empire in Southern California. In the Inland Valleys, we've been unfortunate victims to dirty trucks, sacrificial trucks that come out from the ports to our region and continue to pollute our communities near schools, residents, and parks. The amendments that were proposed on Thursday night were not transparent. They did not include EJ voices at the table. And we hope this Committee can do the right thing and bargain for more time and actually challenge leadership that's proposing these amendments. This is going to be an investment that's going to hurt our future. So please, reconsider the trucking amendments in section 18 that has been voiced already, thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Taylor Thomas: good afternoon, my name is taylor. i'm a resident of long beach, and a member of east chart communities from environmental justice, representing hundreds of residents from east la, all the way down to commerce. and we are opposed to sb 1 with inclusion of the truck amendment and hope that the committee will remove the amendment because our members and our residents will be severely impacted. thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amanda Monaco: Thank you. My name is Amanda Monaco, I'm with Leadership Council for Justice and Accountability. And I'm here on behalf of the residents and organizations that we work with in the east Coachella Valley. I think we can all agree that transportation investment in infrastructure is incredibly key for California's economy and quality of life, but we do not believe that this is the way to do it. We have several major concerns with the possible implications of this bill. And those three implications would be air quality and health, based on the trucking provision as well as really concerning social justice implications, given that there's not an adequate focus on transportation equity and investment in disadvantaged communities as the bill is written. So we oppose as currently drafted. Thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rico Mastrodonato: Good afternoon, Mr. Chair, Rico Mastrodonato, Trust for Public Land. Opposed unless the dirty truck language from Thursday night is removed, thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joshua Stark: Thank you. Joshua Stark with Transform, also unfortunately opposed. We really appreciated the movement that had taken place in this package in the couple of weeks prior to it coming out as official language. And we were really on board to strongly support this language and push our advocates and allies to support it. But for this one provision that was entered in the last second on Thursday night apparently that allows some exemptions for one industry, really at the expense of some other industries as well as the expense of communities who live very close to these facilities. So, sadly, we are still opposed unless amended to the language we've seen on Thursday. Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Pariset: Michelle Pariset with Public Advocates, we look forward to supporting this bill enthusiastically when the dirty truck amendment comes out. Thank you so much.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tricia Geringer: good afternoon mr. chair and members, geringer with agricultural council of california, also respectfully opposed.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jerry Sanchez: Hello, I'm Jerry Sanchez from the California Bicycle Coalition, also represented by the San Gabriel Valley. We are opposed unless amended on the dirty truck provision, but also on any social equity provision that was not introduced in the bill. We are definitely concerned about that still, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tom Addison: tom anna addison here today on behalf of the chair of the legislative committee of the bay area air district and executive management. not in opposition, but here to express concerns to one part of the bill. while clearly there is much in this bill that is good from an air quality perspective, as your supporters noted, we're concerned about the truck language.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Watts: mr. chairman and members, mark jonah watts, representing transportation california as it was indicated. we have worked with senator newman over the last several months since this bill was introduced, looking at different variations of language, and we're very comfortable and support the version that's before you today.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 132, 'end': 138, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Chris Lee: Chris Lee on behalf of the California State Association of Counties, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Orville Thomas: orville mark thomas on behalf of the california alliance for jobs in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jose Mejia: mr. chairman and members, jose orville mejia california state council  of laborers, in strong support.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Cremins: Mr. Chairman and members, Tim Cremins, International Union of Operating Engineers, full support.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Gladveldy: mr. chairman and members, paul jose gladveldy representing caterpillar inc, and its dealers, strong support.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Felipe Fuentes: felipe, on behalf of the association of general contractors, san diego and california chapters, in full support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Steve Baker: Steve Baker with Aaron Read and Associates for the Professional Engineers in California Government in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Emily Cohen: emily on behalf of united contractors in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dijon Duval: dijon paul duval, ...local 36, 34 in strong support.
[]
Department of Finance: Mark... Department of Finance, that's correct, that when we're trying to meet all of our obligations throughout the year there are some short term cash flow loans. It's just the best way of using your resources and getting by with less. And but, yes, this is all accounted for at the end of the year, everythings made whole.
[]
Richard Corey: richard, executive officer, air resources board. our understanding is striking that language, therefore leaves open, there would not be confusion about a local district, for instance moving forward on an indirect source role provides that flexibility. but the removal retains the flexibility.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Orville Thomas: Orville Thomas, California Alliance of Jobs, in support of SB 1.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Deanne Baker: Mister chair Members of the Committee, Deanne Baker representing the California State Association of Counties. As owners and operators of a large portion of the system, we feel a sense of urgency to get these new investments down into road projects across the state. And we stand with the Governor and the pro tem and the speaker in strong support of SB 1 and the accompanying constitutional amendments. Thank you.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Emily Cohen: emily dijon cohen on behalf of united contractors in strong support. we thank the chair, the authors, and members of the legislature for your leadership on this tough issue. now or never, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dan Carrigg: Mr. Chairman and members, Dan Carrigg on behalf of League of California Cities contain 83% of the state's residents, our local streets and roads are critical to our quality of life in our community, as well as our economy, including our state's economy. We think this is a great package. It's really an investment. It helps us turn the corner from a decline in our street and road system to beginning to improve it. It's a good investment for California. Behind me is David Sander, Council Member from Rancho Cordova and on our board of directors.Thank you
[{'start': 26, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 468, 'end': 480, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tony Madero: madero, modesto city council member, city of great neighbors. i just wanted to share with you that one of the biggest complaints that i get as a council member in the city of modesto, is condition of our roads, everything ranging from potholes to sinkholes. and so, we urge strong support for this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alex McCabe: alex emily mccabe, councilman, city of livingston. strong support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eduardo Montesino: eduardo alex montesino, representing santa cruz metro, and also as a union representative, thank you senator beall for this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 109, 'end': 114, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Joshua Shaw: joshua eduardo shaw with the california transit association, representing all your local and regional public transit systems, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeremy Smith: smith here on behalf of the state building and construction trades council also in support. thank you, mr. chairman.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Keith Dunn: Keith Dunn on behalf of the 24 Self-help County Coalition members here in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Felipe Fuentes: Chairman Felipe Fuentes on behalf of the Associated General Contractors of California here in strong support.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Gladfelde: Mr. Chair and Members, Paul Gladfelde representing Caterpillar Inc and its California authorized dealers.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Yohan Clays: mr. chair, yohan joshua clays as a representative of the city ontario and strong support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Lang: Karen Lang, on behalf of Mayor Edwin Lee and the City and County of San Francisco, and in addition the Boards of Supervisors in Placer, Napa, Solano, San Joaquin, Sonoma, Shasta, Yuba, and Humboldt. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 31, 'end': 40, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Laura Perm: perm, on behalf of the city of long beach, in support.
[]
Tim Shod: mr. chair and members, tim on behalf of the california association of port authorities, which is comprised of states 11 commercial publicly owned ports, here in support. also on behalf of the capital corridor joint powers authority, which runs the inner city rail service, between the sacramento region and the san francisco bay area. in support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Manny Diaz: mr. chairman and members, manny yohan diaz representing bnsf railway and union pacific railroad in support.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyra Ross: Mr. Chair and members, Kyra Ross on behalf of the cities of Sacramento, Glendale, Santa Rosa, and the Marin County Council of Mayors and Council Members all in support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brad Barrow: mr. chair and members, brad manny barrow with the national electrical contractors association here in strong support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tiffany Fan: tiffany on behalf of the city of downing in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Robeson: mike brad robeson in here, in support on behalf of caltrain, the peninsula community rail system in the bay area and the san mateo county transit district in support. thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Pimentel: michael mike pimentel here in behalf of the san francisco municipal transportation agency in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joshua Golka: mr. chair, and senators, joshua michael golka, with the american federation of state, county in municipal employees, in support.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Harmon: richard joshua harmon, on behalf of the city's of oakland, emeryville, san leandro, waller creek, pismo beach, turlock, larry, the new bank, carson, counties of imperial, lamer oposa, and the north counted transit district, all in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 120, 'end': 125, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Katherine Brandenburg: Thank you. Katherine Brandenburg with Brownstein, representing the Alameda County Board of Supervisors, in support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 38, 'end': 48, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jonathan Clay: Jonathan Clay on behalf of the City of Encinitas in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gary Hambly: gary richard hambly, california construction and industrial materials association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bryan Starr: bryan gary starr, orange county business council in support. josh raglander, hntb corporation in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 61, 'end': 75, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sarah Rascon: Sarah Rascon, Los Angeles Area Chamber of Commerce in support
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cindy Silva: Cindy Silva, Walnut Creek City Council, here to assure you of our strong bipartisan support for this very important measure.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jan Arbuckle: good morning, jan bryan arbuckle, council member, city of grass valley, and on behalf of he league of the california board of supervisors in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marnie Mendoza: Hi, Marnie Mendoza, Colfax City Council, and we are in support. Thank you, Senator.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sara Lambnin: lambnin, mayor pro tem for the city of hayward, one of the most diverse places in the country, in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roxanne Miller: roxanne on behalf of sam liccardo, mayor city of san jose, and our full council, thank you very much.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 21, 'end': 33, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Melanie Cuevas: Good morning, Melanie Cuevas on behalf of GreKa Integrated, San Mateo County, Sacramento County, and the Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority, all in support
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Cremins: Mr Chair, Tim Cremins, International Union of Operating Engineers representing both journeymen and apprentices on these projects but also members in our Caltrans maintenance division, thank you.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jose Mejia: Mr. Chair and members, Jose Mejia, California State Council of Laborers, in strong support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kurt Blackburn: blackburn on behalf of the western states trucking association in support.
[]
Ted Toppin: Ted Toppin for the Professional Engineers in California Government and the Association of California State Supervisors, both strongly in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eric Thronson: Eric Thronson with the California Transportation Commission in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Orquette: Mark Orquette, on behalf of the East Bay Leadership Council, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Skip Daum: skip, on behalf of the american subcontractors, in support of the bill for its safety and commerce needs. thank you.
[]
Benjamin Palmer: Benjamin Palmer on behalf from Marine County and Yellow County also announce its express afford of the transportation of Marin, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Fideli: paul city council memberl from the city of el cerito, in strong support
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Coola Kone: Coola Kone on behalf on the American Heart Stroke Association in support
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Josh Pawn: Josh Pawn, on behalf of the California Refuse Recycling Council in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kris Rosa: kris jan rosa, on behalf of the silicon valley leadership group and 100 of its member companies, that are also in support. we ask for your aye vote. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cynthia Cory: chaiman and members, cynthia with the california farm bureau. while we understand the importance of talking about taking care of our roads and trying to fix that problem. what we are worried about is the pieces in sb 1 that have nothing to do with that. and most specifically, we're talking of section 45. and as you know, senator, very well, this is your bill which has been hijacked. and that you and i and others were working on. and those that were in senate transportation housing last week. heard, you know, your committment to work with us. but this takes that away. and so those are part of our biggest concerns about sb 1 in addition to the cost to us, thanks. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 21, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Angelo Logan: Hello Mr. Chair and Members of the Committee. My name is Angelo Logan, I'm with Eastyard Communities for Environmental Justice. And we're opposed unless amended. Specifically, we're opposed to the truck provisions. The truck provisions as worded today perpetuates environmental racism. Communities along 17 and quarter and communities like that are saturated with truck traffic. And truck traffic is only going to increase. And so pollution in our communities will increase and the health and well being of our communities in terms of making our asthma, Casper, [UNKNOWN] and cancer is worst. We're asking you all to, will you take this into consideration. Work with our members, eject me in the communities to resolve this issue and then make sure this food bill doesn't turn bad. Thank you.
[{'start': 57, 'end': 69, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Adrian Martinez: Good afternoon, my name is Adrian Martinez, and I'm an Attorney with Earth Justice. Earth Justice works with a lot of groups that are on the front lines of impacts from the goods movement industry. The language in the dirty truck provision is overly broad. The new language, the amendments do not address the issue of indirect source. Rules and could create additional ambiguity. Communities need certainty about what's allowed and what's not. They don't need to duke this out in the court. This language was first released on Friday, and now it's being negotiated, there needs to be more transparency. And then second, this provision covers way too many trucks, commercial motor vehicles, defined very broadly. And it's not clear what the intent is, of what the coverage of this provision is. Air pollution, if we don't address it, will continue to get worse, just like our infrastructure. We need to engage environmental justice communities in negotiating a compromise to fix the problems with this bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katie Valenzuela Garcia: Good morning, Katie Valenzuela Garcia, I'm Co-Chair of the AB 32 Environmental Justice Advisory Committee convened by the California Air Resources Board. Our Committee greatly supports the need for a better transportation investments but are strongly opposed to the trucking Association amendments in this bill. Our communities cannot breathe, and we thought that our right to breathe would be worth more than a few $1 billion in transportation improvements, and we're sad to be proven wrong today with the current language of this bill. But there is still time for you to amend this bill to take out a provision that we know will harm the health of our communities, and the health of our economies as more people are forced in this work and miss school and pay more money into the healthcare system than they would have to if we could requestively persuade stronger truck regulations. So please amend the bill today, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amanda Monaco: Good afternoon, my name is Amanda Monaco with Leadership Council for Justice and Accountability. On behalf of the residents and organizations that we work with in the East Coachella Valley. Who are incredibly concerned about the possible health and air cooler impacts of the current bill. So, we also agree with the two prior commentaries and opposed as currently drafted. Thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tony Dang: tony kris dang, with california locks. we also oppose, unless amended, the trucker provision. we believe this provision has no place in this package. and it otherwise sours a relatively responsible package that we could've supported. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Trisha Garringer: Good morning Chair and members. Trisha Garringer, Agricultural Council of California representing over 15,000 farmers throughout the state. Also in opposition to SB 1.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dennis Albiani: Dennis Albiani on behalf of the California Grain and Feed Association, the Allman Alliance, California Bean Shippers, and several other Ag associations. We also oppose, but I do want to bring up the fact that there's very little review and reforms in this proposal that address like the LAO's own report that says we're over staffed at Caltrans. There's very little review to look into public private partnerships or design bill. There's some other financing structures that would reduce the cost of building roads and maintaining roads here in California. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Abigail Ramirez: hello, my name is abigail with leadership council for justice and accountability. and on behalf of other san joaquin valley partners. and we're here to oppose sb 1 as currently drafted. and we are also concerned with the negative effects are going to be costing all the disadvantaged communities that we work in. so unless the provision giving a free pass to the industry is taken out then we are opposing, thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erica Rincon: hi erica tony rincon on behalf of policy link we are also opposed to the truck provision language that would place additional harms on the most vulnerable communities and we ask that this bill be amended. thank you. good afternoon.
[{'start': 3, 'end': 8, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 9, 'end': 20, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Taylor Thomas: My name is Taylor Thomas, I'm with East Yard Communities from Remenal Justice. And we are also opposed to the truck amendment. And I would like to also challenge the Governor to come down to our communities and tell them that if this provision passes, that it's just politics when we're suffering from increased air pollution. Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julius Coloxus: Good afternoon. My name is Julius Coloxus, and I'm a member of East Yard Communities for Environmental Justice and also a Long Beach resident. And I'm also opposed unless amended. And I want to echo and affirm Senator Weiner and Senator Lars, and also the previous speaker's concern about the trucking provision, negatively affecting my community. Thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 218, 'end': 224, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 237, 'end': 241, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Maria Reyes: Hello, my name is Maria Reyes. And I am here from West Long Beach, and I am opposing SB1.  Because this legislation would increase pollution and we are already burdened and have the number one percentage of asthma.  And this measure will also increase the risk for folks who live near rail stations. And maybe some of you won't be able to say that this measure is bad. But I am willing to say that this measure is bad because I live the consequences. Gracias, thank you. Gracias. And then I see how children have to suffer these consequences, those who have asthma and my daughter who has to suffer the effects due to the many trucks that go to my community. Thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 449, 'end': 456, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 469, 'end': 476, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Angelica Valderes: Good afternoon, my name is Angelica Valderes. I'm a resident of the Inland Empire, San Bernardino. And I oppose SB 1, the trucking provisions. So please, we ask you to stop selling out our lungs. Thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Yassi Cavasare: Hello, my name is Yassi Cavasare and I'm an Organizing Representative with the Sierra Club National Arm based in the Inland Empire of Southern California. Although we know and realize the urge for a good transportation bill, we are in strong opposition to the proposed trucking amendments. And we're also in opposition of the new amendments that some of our brothers and sisters from our AGI communities have voiced. They are too broad, we'd like to see more provisions that aim and target transportation without the expensive, or targeting our disadvantaged communities with these trucking amendments. Thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marina Barragan: my name is marina erica barragan. i am here with the sierra club san gorgonio chapter. and most importantly, i am a life long resident of the east coachella valley, where the annual income is 25,000, annually. my uncle died many years ago in the hospital with respiratory illnesses. today, my sister suffers from bronchitis, so she's in and out of the hospital. i've driven her to the hospital during her asthma attacks where she's struggling to find many of her empty inhalers, going through all of them. my nephew had his first asthma attack and visit on january 22nd of this year. before you come and tell me that we need to compromise, you are compromising with the life of my sister and my four-year-old nephew's life is in your hands. so i am asking you to, make sure that ej communities are at the table when these decisions are being made. this has been very fast and not enough time for ej communities to actually look at this, let alone environmental champions that we have here. so until the trucking amendments are looked at and removed, i strongly oppose.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Genie Wordwaller: Genie Wordwaller with the California Bicycle Coalition, for the reasons that have all ready been stated, we are in oppose on this amended petition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rico Mastrodonato: good afternoon, mr. chair and members, rico marina mastrodonato, trust for public land, oppose, unless amended for the dirty truck provision.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 63, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chanelle Fletcher: Chanelle Fletcher, Associate Director at Climate Plan. As stated previously, in terms of the dirty truck provision, oppose unless amend.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Pariset: michelle with public advocates, thank you for the transit money. and we are opposed, unless amend, in support of our ej allies, around the trucking provision, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joshua Stark: joshua rico stark with transform. some of us worked on this for two years. we're really pleased with the languages that came out except for the trucking provision. that is the last sticking point among our community. we are oppose unless amended and could come on, we're expecting to come on in wild support or not wild, but in strong support. we had the bill gone in, except for this very last second deal. this is a two year process. this is not something that happened right away, all of the sudden there were road emergencies. this has been happening over many years. and we were happy to support, except the very last second truck provision. thank you
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alfredo Arredondo: Alfredo Arredondo on behalf of the Nature Conservancy, for reasons just stated by Josh as well, support unless amended. And we look forward to continue to work with the Committee and the author on this really important bill, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 82, 'end': 86, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Julee Malinowski-Ball: Julee Malinowski-Ball, on behalf of the California Electric Transportation Coalition, we do not have an oppose position on the bill. But we want to continue working on this sub fee. We agree with the Governor, that the delay is very important, to help push this vehicle technology. So we want to talk about refining how you calculate the fee, we think there's a more thoughtful way to go about doing it. And we're also looking at the truck amendment. And we're kind of concerned at the moment about its impact on the development and potentially stifling new vehicle technology development. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Simon Mui: Simon Mui with NRDC, we've also been working for years to fix the roads, help transit congestion. But this last minute amendments to restrict state authority and local authority. Don't make a sense in terms of handling a pollution. So we oppose unless amend these trucking provisions are removed or amended, thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Brown: Jason Brown on behalf of the Western United Dairymen in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bonnie Holmes-Gen: Mr. Chair, Bonnie Holmes-Gen with the American Lung Association in California. Still concerned that the truck exemption language is overly broad, so we remain opposed unless amended.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tom Addison: Tom Addison on behalf of the staff and the chair of the Legislative Committee of the Bay Area Air District. Not in opposition, but to express concerns with the truckers language in the bill. Still concerned, even with with these amends. Much good in the bill, but concerned about that.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jerry Sanchez: hello, i'm jerry joshua sanchez with the california bicycle coalition on behalf of bike [unknown] valley. we and they are opposed unless amended, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Magavern: Bill Magavern with the Coalition for Clean Air, opposed to the truck exemption, which is marring what would otherwise be a good bill. That provision should be heard in Senate Environmental Quality Committee. We appreciate the efforts that went into today's amendments. But they still leave the language much too broad if we're agreed that this should not preclude in direct source rules. Let's actually put that into the language.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jacob Moss: Jacob Moss with South Coast Air Quality Management District. We do not have a position on the bill, but we are also concerned with the truckers amendments.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Department of Finance: The Department of Finances in support of this proposal as outlined by the Governor and Senator Beall.
[{'start': 95, 'end': 100, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jim Beall: Well, we've had. My staff came and corrected me. We started having hearings on this in December of 2014. And we've gone through hearings on bills all over the State of California and discussing as and I don't know if I'd want to go through it again. I've been called everything in the book including some things today that were pretty nasty. However, your not going to have the ghost of Jim Beall, he's going to always be here. So I'm not going away, I'm still going to be the advocate for transportation. Infrastructure, maintenance, repairing our bridges, making the roads safe. Helping, encouraging transit. I'm going to be an advocate for environmental culture change in Caltrans and local governments. I'm going to be an advocate for cleaner trucks, and that's what this bill will do. This bill actually, if you look at the different provisions of the bill, you will see that we have, actually, two provisions that deal with trucks. And if you combine the two, plus what we're doing in terms of the amendments, we will have cleaner trucks in California as a result of this bill. You have to read the bill carefully. And the bill amendments also verified that by stating the intent of the Legislature to provide owners of commercial motor vehicles and their define as the larger ones, certainly about the useful life of their engines certified by the state board and other political agencies to meet required environmental standards for the sale in this state. This section is not meant to otherwise restrict the authority of the state air quality board or the air quality district. It's the intent of the Legislature not to do those restrictions. I served on the air board. And I know the importance of a regional air quality board and it's our intention not to restrict them. That language is in the amendment. I think that the amendments also help mollify the concerns. I can't please everybody with this bill. This is a bill that requires two-thirds so you're going to have a lot of people that are going to be uncomfortable, one way or the other, on this bill. But I think it doesn't harm the State, in terms of air quality, with trucks. I can say that. And if we need to make further improvements to that, I pledge we will. We will. If we need to make that more clear, we're not going to have trucks that pollute the air, we're going to get rid of the dirty trucks in California. So Mr. Chairman, I think that half the states in the United States are now considering how to repair their roads, half the states in the United States are looking at various ways of financing. Very few of these states are actually looking at the state general fund. Very few of these states are actually looking at taking money from schools, taking money from public safety programs and other things. And I don't think we're doing that. What we're doing is we're creating a way that we can fund this through a user fee basis. That is and segregate the amount of money that's available for these user fees because it's going to take 10 to 12, maybe 15 years to bring the roads in California up to that good condition. It's going to take a long time, we're going to have to work hard. We're going to have to work on efficiencies at Caltrans, efficiencies at the local level. We're going to have to work hard in the Committee with the Senator from Orange County and the Senator from San Francisco and we're going to have to work on the points. Great points there made by the Senator from Los Angeles about participation of everybody in terms of the economic success that we have in California. But if we can do this, if we can do this think of what a great state we would have if we had no unfunded liabilities in our transportation system. Think of what the economy of the state would be like if that would be to occur. And I think that if you look at that and you look at that in the future of the State of California you will vote yes on this bill. And I urge an aye vote, Mr. Chairman.
[{'start': 387, 'end': 396, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Autumn Ogden: autumn jerry ogden smith with the american cancer society cancer action network in support.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 24, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Caroline Ling: Caroline Ling on behalf of Mayor Ed Lee and the City of San Francisco.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 33, 'end': 39, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jaqueline Zemansky: Jaqueline Zemansky on behalf of Disability Rights California, we support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Harmon: richard autumn harmon on behalf of the cities of hayward, oakland, san leandro, emeryville and walnut creek in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roxanne Miller: roxanne richard miller on behalf of mayor sam liccardo and the bull council city of san jose in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 42, 'end': 54, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dan Kuerig: Dan Kuerig on behalf of the League of California Cities in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Shod: Mr. Chair and Members, Tim Shod on behalf of the San Francisco Bay Area Rapid Transit District, also in support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Paracet: michelle roxanne paracet, on behalf of public advocates in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tony Dang: Tony Dang on behalf of California Walks in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Keith Dunn: Keith Dunne for the California Apartment Association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jeremy Smith: Jeremy Smith on behalf of the State Building Trades, also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Wolfe: yes, mr chairman, members, good morning. david michelle wolfe again with the howard jarvis taxpayers association in opposition. members, i feel like finance. i should probably just stay sitting up here. members we are opposed to this bill here today. this is a $220 extremely regressive recording tax that's going to impact a lot of people. yes, it's not going to impact single family homeowners, but it is going to impact those who attempt to modify their loans in foreclosure. it's going to hit those who foreclose on their properties. it's going to hit on those who file revocable transfer of bond debt deeds, seniors members primarily there. and it's just punitive. we do have an affordable housing problem in the state of california, this is the wrong way to address it, i ask for a no vote.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ken DeVore: Thank you, Chair and Members. Ken Devore with the National Federation of Independent Business, largest small business Association in the state, and we also are opposed for the same reasons.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dan Carragon: This is Dan Carragon on behalf of the League of California Cities in support.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Shot: chair and members, timt on behalf of the san francisco bay area rapid transit district, also in support.
[]
Karen Lang: Karen Lang, in support, on behalf of Mayor Edwin Lee in the city and County of San Francisco, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 43, 'end': 52, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Megan Rose: Megan Rose of Leading Age California in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Duncan Mcfetridge: Duncan Mcfetridge on behalf of the Metropolitan Transportation Commission in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jaclyn Zenowski: Jaclyn Zenowski on behalf of Disability Rights California and we're in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Harmon: richard david harmon on behalf of the city of hayward, oakland, emeryville, san leandro, walnut creek, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roxanne Miller: roxanne richard miller on behalf of mayor sam licardo and the city council, city of san jose, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 42, 'end': 53, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tiffany Phan: tiffany roxanne phan on behalf of bridge housing and also [unknown] investment group, support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Paracet: michelle on behalf of public advocates in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Autumn Ogden: chair and members, autumn tiffany ogden smith with the american cancer society cancer action network also a proud co sponsor, ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 45, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kathy Mosler: kathy autumn mosler with the california association of food banks. we are a sponsor and certainly in support of this bill. this fund is the most consistent source of funding for food banks without using general fund dollar. the last tax year, we got a little over $1 million and we were able to turn that into 2.5 million meals for those folks who we're seeing and we're certainly seeing an uptick of folks coming to food banks, we're still seeing that even since the recession. so we urge your support thank you. >>thank you additional witnesses in support?
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
George Osborne: Morning, Mr. Chairman, George Osborne, for the California Sports Fishing League, as noted in analysis the cost of this bill is very minor to the state. There's a little history to this bill, in the City of Manhattan Beach a white shark was caught by a fisherman. And during the thrashing around at the end of the line he slashed a swimmer. The City of Manhattan Beach immediately close the period of fishing. Later on, the city adopted ordinances restricting Fishing, illegally, because that's the purview solely of the Fish and Game Commission. I testified at the Council hearing the night they adopted those ordinances. And their counsel told them that they didn't have the authority to do it. And they did it anyway. I brought this to the attention of the Fish and Game Commission who, by the way, supports this bill. And one of the Commissioners at the time said, I used to live on a strand in Manhattan Beach. I know what this is all about. My rich neighbors down there don't want those people who don't live near the beach. Coming down on the bus in the morning with their chair and their big bucket. And taking home fish for dinner during at night because they don't look like us. And those are his words. So that's why we're trying to identify where the problems lie, have the Commission report back to the Legislature with a recommendation on how to solve that problem, where that problem does exist. Thank you and I'm happy to answer any other questions you might have.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 37, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bob Bladner: Bob Bladner, Walnut Valley, West Covina, and Glendora School Districts, thank you. Speaking fiscally, I would just like to emphasize the ongoing savings in the millions of dollars, as identified by the LAO regarding the savings from, that the state captures when students come from an LCF funded district to a basic aid district. They save anywhere from 30 and 59% of the state's saving. That's very significant. Also I'd just like to mention that if we do unwind this program, not only will there be a really negative impact to the kids and the families who are a part of this. But there would be a double hit on LCFF apportionment due to declining enrollment, probably in the neighborhood of $5 to 10 million dollars one time. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ryan Spencer: ryan kathy spencer with the districts of residents coalition. this coalition is comprised of school districts who've been negatively impacted, fiscally, by this program. we don't have a formal position on this bill yet. we do have some concerns that we've expressed to the senator. and we do look forward to working with him and the committee as this bill moves forward. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lorree Lewis: Lorree Lewis and I'm from California.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lorree Lewis: my name is lewis, and i'm from california tribal tanf, and i am in support of this bill. i'm asking you to please break our cycle of poverty. if you say yes to this bill what happens is is that the students will not have to go to the state for welfare. once they are 18 they are no longer eligible for tanf unless they have a child themselves. they're not able for preregistration, and because of the lack of not having that preregistration they're not able to get their classes. so what happens is, is that like right now i have four students, it's taking them four years to get classes, but now they're back to tanf because they're pregnant. so if you say yes to this bill you'll be saving the state quite a bit a money, and it will  also help us get on the road to self-sufficiency. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Austin Webster: austin ryan webster on behalf of the faculty association of california community colleges, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jacqueline Wong-Hernandez: Jacqueline Wong-Hernandez with the Department of Finance. The Chancellor's Office has indicated that since there is a relatively small number of Tribal TANF recipients who are community college students, they don't anticipate any costs beyond minor and absorbable.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Harmon: Richard Harmon, County of Imperial, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Lang: lang on behalf of the counties of humboldt, napa, shasta, merced, yuba, and solano, all in support. thank you.
[]
Tracey Patterson: Tracey Patterson, I'm with California Food Policy Advocates. Thank you to the Chair and Committee, particularly for the work you've done thus far and we really look forward to working with you to move this forward when the time is appropriate. We feel like these federal programs are the best way for schools to get full funding to provide meals for California's most vulnerable students.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Coola Kone: Coola Kone, with the American Heart Association, American Stroke Association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Duncan Mcfetridge: duncan austin mcfetridge, representing no kid hungry, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joel Anderson: we heard a lot of magical things already, with the presentation of the bill. what we didn't hear, is what it will do to dreamers. what we didn't hear, how this is the greatest threat that's ever been posed to dreamers. and let me tell you why. actually, before i tell you why, let me just add this point. every time we try to have an adult conversation about immigration, there are those that will immediately say you're a racist because we can't possibly have an adult conversation. yet, on this floor, over the last four years, six years that i've been on this floor we have voted in a bipartisan manner. sending a clear message to both the obama administration and the trump administration. well, this year we didn't. it wasn't bipartisan. but we would have, had we've been allowed to participate. send a clear message that immigration is broken. and we all get that. the question is how do we move forward and what is in the best interest? so if you're of the thought that if you have an adult conversation on immigration, that makes you a racist. they're not considering the 11,661 convicted felons serving in our prisons, who are undocumented, then you're a crime denier. and i think we have to not think about either one of those things. and we need to have an honest and earnest conversation. so let me explain to you why dreamers are so at risk by this bill. you see, this bill draws no distinction between people who come here to improve their life, to improve themselves, to lift themselves out of the poverty that perhaps they're in. and they come here and they want to work hard, they want to become us citizens. and maybe they didn't come through the front door but they still are here and they're still working towards that. or maybe they came as a child and they had no choice. their parents moved here and maybe they're two years old and all they ever did is speak english. and all the country they've ever known as home has been the united states. and i get those arguments but what i don't get is confusing them with felons and treating them the same as felons. because on my opinion there is no good reason to shield felons from deportation. and yet that's precisely what sb 54 does. now initially sb 54 shielded all felons and i want to thank the author because he's taken two amendments, initially took violent felons out, so that meant murderers weren't there. and later he took out serious, and that meant that child molesters and rapists were no longer there. but the bill isn't fully cooked. it still allows for human traffickers. if you're convicted and you're serving in our prison as a human trafficker, this bill shields you from deportation. if you have felony child abuse, this bill shields you. if you take hostages to prevent an arrest and you're serving in our prison, this bill shields you. if you are convicted of a felony and you had a hate crime enhancement, this bill shields you. possession of restricted biological agents, and this bill shields you. if we were really serious about this, why won't we just say, no felons? you see, this bill continues to play hide the felon. it makes it difficult for ice to identify these felons and deport them. it makes no distinction between people who come here to work hard, to become us citizens, from those who come here to prey on others. and what's most despicable is they come from undocumented communities. you see a lot of those criminals when you talk to the police and the sheriffs. they'll tell you it's so important that they don't do immigration work, because they need people in those undocumented communities to be able to feel safe enough to come forward and report the child molester in their neighborhood. to report the felony elder abuse in their neighborhood. and yet this bill draws no distinction between the two. it's very, very important that we maintain that relationship with those undocumented communities, because these felons first prey on the undocumented because they don't think they're going to get turned in. but they also prey on us citizens. those felons are bad guys. they should not ever become us citizens, they deserve to be deported and yet this bill continues to shield them. now i get what the author's trying to accomplish. we get that, but this bill's not fully cooked. the second issue in it, that to me is just so difficult, is that when we shield those felons, and those felons are guaranteed to return to those undocumented communities, ice has but one choice. to show up at the schools, to show up in the neighborhoods, to knock on the doors, door by door, looking for those felons. and i'll give you a great example. in january in los angeles, 150 warrants were issued for felons in those communities. and along the way when they were looking for those felons, they picked up 19 people they didn't have felons for. because when they showed up to the house and they knocked on the door. and the felon wasn't home they picked up, asked everybody in that house. do you have papers? do you have papers? and if they were undocumented, they got collected. if you want to see more of that, then you should support sb 54. but if you don't want to see more of that, you should oppose it like i am. when you look at that, the second thing is, everyone keeps talking about how trump's going to take the money. the fact of the matter is much of the money, $117 million that goes to public safety. that money comes from grants that you have to apply for. when you shield felons from ice agents, you lose the ability to apply for those grants. now if you're thinking about your local police, if you're thinking, kevin, i hate for you to miss this. i'm getting to the good part. so if you shield those felons and they return to the community. one, they're going to prey on their neighbors again like they did before. and two, it's going to force ice into it but there's going to be fewer officers on the street, fewer deputies on the street to protect everyday californians. ordinary californians will have to live in fear because we're going to lose them. just think about it. if you lose 117 million, and by the way, ag sessions, when he talked about it, it was 4.1 billion nationally. and we know the lion share of the money is spent here in california. we get $50.6 million to offset the cost of housing, 11,661 undocumented felons. so when we lose that money, we can't turn around and say we're not going to pay for the police car anymore. we can't say that we're not going to pay for electricity at the county jails. we're stuck still having to pay for all those fixed hard costs. the only costs that we truly have control over is labor. so eventually we're going to lose officers off the beat. those deputies and those officers, they protect us each and every day. and to lose more officers, as we're allowing more felons to be released into our communities is a wrong direction. it doesn't serve, it doesn't serve dreamers. it doesn't serve any californian, documented or undocumented. when we talked about the task forces, there's lots of task forces that are funded through federal monies. we may or we may not be able to have access to it. we heard the author say that he has changed and mended the bill to ensure that we have access to it but m13 is a mexican gang. if we have a gang task force who's focused primarily on an undocumented gang how does that work? we don't know. so we could lose all that participation. you all received a letter from the california state sheriff's association, and they have that concern. so if it wasn't in the bill they wouldn't still be concerned, but it's still in the bill. a 60 day notice to allow people to know that felons are coming up for parole and allowing ice to get access to them. that's one of the bright spots of the bill that were amended in, and i want to thank the author for it. but it neglects a simple fact. if i'm a first time felon and no one's ever taken my fingerprints before, i'm not in that database. there may be as many as a few hundred pages of joel jonah andersons that are serving in prison right now. how do we know that we got the right joel jonah anderson? how do we know until ice has a chance to interview these folks, and distinguish between documented and undocumented. they have no way to identify who's in the prison or the county jail or the city jail right now. they have to have that access. and in many of the county jails, ice actually rents space and does all the work. the sheriffs do nothing with it. and they're just combing through all the felons that are serving in their jails or in the prisons to ensure that they don't get a us citizen and deport them by accident. look, this is a difficult, difficult issue, but this bill doesn't solve it. it creates more problems, it puts more californians at risk. members, don't get caught up with the i hate trump fever. i'm not advocating for everything or anything that the president has said. i'm just trying to do right by my constituents. and do right by all californians. and sb 54, it's the wrong direction. it exposes dreamers like nothing else has ever exposed them before. it returns felons into our communities. i don't want human traffickers or child abusers or senior abusers back in my community. and i don't want them preying on the undocumented. and i don't want to lose officers off the beat, because they save lives every day. so with that, members, i ask for a no vote.
[{'start': 5297, 'end': 5302, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5629, 'end': 5634, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6135, 'end': 6146, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8039, 'end': 8059, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8135, 'end': 8154, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dave Baldwin: madame chair, i'm major general baldwin, the adjutant general for the state of california. and this item would appropriate $144,000 of federal trust fund authority, to allow us to hire an additional environmental planner to help alleviate the workload concerns we have, that are already burdening our environmental staff.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Helen Kerstein: Helen Kerstein with the Legislative Analysts Office, we have no concerns.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sally Lukenbill: yeah, i'd just like to add. this is lukenbill, department of finance. i'd just like to add to that, that it's very common for departments that have large capital outlay programs like military now does to have study funds in order to continue to analyze and review projects and provides flexibility to both the department and the administration when bringing project proposals forward.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jonathan Peterson: thank you, madam chair. jonathan jonah peterson with the legislative analyst's office. we recommend approving the trailer bill language clarifying that calpia is not required to pre-fund retiree health benefits and pension liabilities. in addition, in our analysis, we recommend having calpia report on whether or not having to fund these liabilities will result in any price changes or any additional changes such as pursuing new initiatives, new programs, or new projects, as a result of not having to set aside these funds?
[{'start': 24, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Lopez: Good afternoon. Jason Lopez, Deputy Director of Business Services for CDCR.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Lopez: okay, still jason jonathan lopez, director of business services for the department. with this proposal, and that's what you may get the current intermediate care facility wait list that we heard a little bit about earlier.
[{'start': 12, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katherine Tebrock: Good morning or good afternoon. Katherine Tebrock, Deputy Director for the Mental Health Program at CDCR. The purpose of this proposal is to address the wait list that we have for the inpatient care. We have a growing need and in an effort to be responsive we are looking to implement this proposal for additional capacity to serve those with indication of mental health needs. Notably, I will say that we are in active litigation on this point in the ... case with a forthcoming filing this Friday, so I'm trying to be mindful that I don't want to get out too far in advance of that filing. But what's important is that we believe that we can address the wait list that exists today with the implementation of these additional beds. The question posed here is to describe the trends in the need for additional capacity. I think it's important, maybe, to step back a bit and see the growth of the population over the course of the last 18 to 24 months. That population has, we've seen our growth in our enhanced outpatient program patient population as well as in the needs of our inpatient programs, including both the acute and the intermediate care programs. Part of our response is twofold. First, it is to implement an immediate response to that need by implementing this program, and the second is a longer term proposal through a COBCP for additional mental health crisis beds that will be used as flexible beds for both acute, and intermediate care beds in the future. Of course, that construction will take some time, if approved by the Legislature, it will take some time to implement that. In the interim, we believe that this additional beds at CMF can be established and we can provide adequate care to the population.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jonathan Peterson: thank you, madam chair. jonathan jason peterson with the legislative analyst office. given that there are over a hundred inmates on the wait list for inpatient psychiatric programs, the additional capacity does appear justified. in view of our previous recommendation on the shift for some impatient programs from dsh to cdcr on a three year pilot basis, we would recommend that the legislature approve this funding and positions on a three year limited term basis to serve as one of the pilot institutions for the shift. this would help the legislature assess whether cdcr can successfully develop its own approach towards staffing these inpatient psychiatric units and also activating these additional beds could help reduce the amount of time that inmates spend in relatively more expensive mental health crisis beds. thank you.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tabitha Stout: Tabitha Stout, Department of Finance. As we previously mentioned, CDCR operates 85 beds at this level. The 40 at San Quentin and 45 at CIW and almost 450 mental health crisis beds. So, we believe that that should prove that they are capable of providing this level of care for these beds.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joyce Hayhoe: good afternoon madam chair and members of the committee, my name is joyce, legislation and communications. so our first proposal is for our healthcare appeals pilot, and what we are requesting is $5.4 million and 36 positions, beginning in fiscal year 2017-18, in order to create a healthcare-centric appeals process for our institutions statewide.
[{'start': 68, 'end': 73, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tabitha Stout: Tabitha Stout, Department of Finance. We developed the $9 million savings by taking an average of fiscal years 2012-2013 through 2014 and 2015. We note that there was a spike in 2015-16 in expenditures, but we didn't use that because in order to address that spike, positions were having to be taken off and it affected programming that was occurring for the inmates.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Camere: madam chair. madam chair, sorry. madam chair, tim, seiu local 1000. as director joyce notes, it is correct. we are supporting this proposal because we do think there needs to be an addition in staff. specifically, i want to talk about cost really quick, because i know ii have a brief amount of time. while it may be impossible necessarily to quantify the amount, we at local 1,000 are concerned about the over reliance of the state utilization of permanent intermittent employees. this permanent intermittant employees are supposed to be used temporarily, and normally it's only supposed to be 1,500 hours. but we've already have stories of then utilizing them for over 3,000 hours. a typical actual state member to hire would have been 2,500. so in short, it would have been cheaper to actually just hire a fulltime employee than to have such a reliance on these peis. thank you.
[{'start': 46, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 80, 'end': 85, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Caitlin O'Neil: thank you madam chair. caitlin jonathan o'neil, legislative analyst's office. we found that this proposal addresses challenges in the management of health care equipment in isolation from cdcr's larger equipment management system and it's challenges and we think this is problematic for three reasons. first, having two systems is likely inefficient. for example, under the proposal each prison would have one position dedicated to management of healthcare equipment and one dedicated to management of all other types of equipment. however, it's possible that some institutions with less equipment may be able to make do with one position dedicated to managing all types of equipment. second, the proposal does not directly address challenges in the management of non-health care equipment. so it could leave some needs unaddressed. and third, we find that creating separate systems and separate units and headquarters for managing different types of equipment may not make sense given that the long-term goal is to delegate responsibility for healthcare back to cdcr from the receiver. so we recommend that legislature reject the proposal and direct the department to submit a comprehensive proposal that addresses challenges in managing both the healthcare and non healthcare equipment, reflects a different equipment management needs across institutions and accounts for savings in equipment purchases.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tabitha Stout: tabitha, department of finance. we just like to note that by separating out and allowing the receiver's office to have a healthcare property controller, we'll be providing them with adequate resources to staff their equipment and also freeing up the cdcr property controller, so that they have an adequate time to address their workload as well.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gail Zurek: hello, my name is gail. i am the daughter of a man who was born with cerebral palsy. i was raised with the real challenges that limited access or no access for those folks in a wheelchair provides. as a young girl, as a teenager, and as a grown adult, there's nothing more that i want for my dad to be like every other dad. i've been part of a family that wants to eat at a restaurant and there isn't seating available and i understand the real frustrations and, frankly, anger that comes from that. my father is also a small business owner, and he taught me the realities of what it meant to not only provide for the food, and shelter, and clothing of our family, but to be successful enough to be able to employ other people who can provide for their families, as well. owning your own business is a dream for so many and frankly is what has driven me to my current position as the president and ceo of the visalia chamber of commerce. it's my honor to be able to represent 650 of our local businesses and 40,000 of our community members who are employed by those businesses. as assemblyman mathis has shared with you, 11 of our businesses were hit in our most vulnerable neighborhood in visalia, and let me first say that they aren't members. i'm here because this is an issue that our business community has struggled with. i can actually remember a time, although i'm dating myself, before the ada existed, and how that was celebrated. that we would provide access for everyone in our community to have full ability to be a part of our community. upon hearing that we had 11 businesses who had ada violations, and were being sued in federal court, i went and spoke with these business owners, and they are heartbroken. the woman who owns the meat market said i need to know when he was here. well, what happened? everyone who is a part of my business is a family member. we pride ourselves on coming out and helping out and making every reasonable accommodation we can and i said, but your counter is too high. it doesn't matter that you're trying to go above and beyond, your counter's too high. she was literally in tears. she said, i don't think you understand. my choices are to settle out of court and pay punitive damages to pay to have something fixed. i don't even own the space, it's not my building. there's big misconceptions in the business community about their responsibilities and while the federal law has existed for 26 years, changes and regulations that have happened on a state level. and then how those are enforced on a local level with the local municipalities have left a lot of business owners confused and particularly those mom and pops who are working 15, 16 hour days. who are first generation americans and who want to live the dream of being able to provide for their family. the oval neighborhood in our community is severely depressed. if these businesses close it'll mean vacant property. there aren't large corporations who are going to come and invest in this part of our community, and it's going to leave a neighborhood without a butcher, without restaurants, without a retail store, and so it's heartbreaking...
[{'start': 18, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1093, 'end': 1099, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Moffatt: Good morning. Mr. Chair and Members of the Committee, John Moffatt, on behalf of the City of Azalea, in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 54, 'end': 66, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brittany Sitzer: brittany jonah sitzer from the civil justice association of california, also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Baker: can we sit? good morning, mr. chair and members, kevin brittany baker for the american civil liberties union. i think we all have great respect for the difficulty of being a small business owner. not only are there public accommodations laws, but there are tax laws, there are environmental laws. there are a lot of complex issues that small business owners face. so i think understanding and appreciating that complexity is a good starting point. i think that the difficulty comes when we are suggesting that people should be relieved of their obligations when they open a small business that's open to the public to comply with civil rights laws. so the previous witness in support testified that when she spoke with the business owner about the height of the meat counter. there was, in fact, a violation, as i understood the testimony, and that's the kind of problem that we want to fix. and the chambers of commerce presumably could be helpful in educating business owners about the steps that they need to take in order to make sure that there is compliance. there is a significant problem of property owners putting tenants on the hook for these violations, and not taking steps up front. this committee has dealt with that issue and there have been other proposals, in terms of trying to change the incentives so that property owners are not leasing property to tenants that's no in compliance with the ada and putting tenants on the hook for these kinds of violations because there are people who are unaware of these things. and it is one of the complexities along with tax and environmental laws and everything else that a small business owner needs to do. the problem is that if we say that somebody can't sue until they have given notice and an opportunity to correct, there's no remedy for the person whose rights have been denied, along with all of the other people who attempt to use that business in the time, and there's no way to determine whether there's actually been compliance without another lawsuit, and it also doesn't protect people from their liability under the americans with disabilities act, which is federal law, of course, as you know, mr. mathis. that also applies in these situations, and is going to expose folks to lawsuits that they may, unfortunately, think that they're protected from by virtue of the bill. so it's a unfortunate situation, we do need to take steps to help prevent these problems, right, get folks into compliance voluntarily, get them the information that they need, but a bill that proposes to block them from their remedies and their rights is unfortunately in our view, not the right approach. thank you.
[{'start': 49, 'end': 69, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2174, 'end': 2180, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Randy Hicks: Randy Hicks, California's Disability Rights opposes Assembly bill 150. We absolutely oppose notice and right to cure loss and we've seen this come again with 11 86. We saw it come again with 16 08. We saw at 251, except they lost the tax credits. We see this coming again and again and again, and all the time it puts disabled folks like us at risk, and we don't think that is right, and so, for many reasons we oppose this measure, thank you very much.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Connie Arnold: thank you chairman stone. my name is connie kevin arnold, i'm from elk grove. and i'm very opposed to this bill, this bill is another procedural hurdle for persons with disabilities to enforce their civil rights to have equal access in society. the laws have already been on the books for over 48 years, architectural burials act. title 24 in june of 1981 has been on the books well long before the ada. the ada has been on the books about 27 years. i think that's come this july, and it already expected that all the businesses would have complied with barrier removal deadlines. post when they went into effect, post enactment of the americans with disabilities act. this bill sets forth all of these procedural matters; expects the person with the disability to be knowledgeable, and inform a business, and give them notice of all their barriers, and then tell them how to remove the barriers before they can proceed in civil action to enforce their laws, and before any damages, whether they can get any damages based on the discrimination that they've already experienced and encountered. i don't think any other protected group would allow their civil rights to be trampled like this bill will do. this bill just basically gives a gold star to all the scoff law businesses, and there's millions of them, that still remain non-compliant with disabled access laws in their parking, their path of travel, their bathrooms, entrance and all their facilities. as required by existing laws that have gone back as far as 1968, and maybe even before, when the a17 was circulated. so i'm opposed to this bill and ask you to please oppose it, and stop rewarding and incentivizing businesses to wait to be receiving a letter. and i want to point out that it- (miss arnold). i'm wrapping it up. (thank-) i just wanna point out that at clint eastwood's trial over his mission ranch being inaccessible that he said, and i was there watching the court proceedings, that he refused all certified letters. so he never got notice. so he could say he never got notice. so this is a real big problem, places of business remain completely inaccessible across california. and there's millions of people with disabilities and a growing population of seniors becoming disabled. we need better enforcement, we don't need this bill, thank you very much.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 24, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 37, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1759, 'end': 1765, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1828, 'end': 1844, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Saveena Takhar: saveena connie takhar with the consumer attorneys of california in opposition.
[]
Hannah Hastings: good morning my name is hannah saveena hastings. early september of 2013, i was a passenger of my friend syd's sports car i also had my 15 month old, eli, in the car seat behind me. sorry, this is really hard for me. we were rear ended and i didn't realize at that moment what happened until we were in the ambulance. i realized that he suffered with bleeding. his forehead was caved in. later on when we got to the hospital he had permanent brain damage and lost facial nerve on the left side. we are very lucky that he is alive. we are not sure what type of damage is done to him, to his brain, but, sorry this is really hard for me. i'm sorry.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 105, 'end': 108, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 150, 'end': 153, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nikki Moore: Thank you, members, Nikki Moore with the California Newspaper Publishers Association here in support of this measure. I think that access to court records is a hallmark of our court system and there are other instances where courts are familiar with reviewing records and determining whether they should be sealed whether they should be kept confidential on a case by case basis. I think that this legislations allows for that you can still protect the constitutional right of privacy. You can still protect trade secrets, but when there is a public interest in release of this information a judge can consider that as well. Also a lot of times we find out about this things not necessarily when the agreement is submitted to the court, but maybe weeks or months afterwards. And I think this bill provides for a method to work for a reporter or any member of the public with an interest to access those records when they learn about something and they can go articulate to the judge, here is the public interest in disclosure. So for these reasons, we urge an aye vote.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nancy Peverini: good morning, nancy hannah peverini on behalf of the consumer attorneys of california. we sponsored similar legislation with then attorney general bill lockyer, back in 2001, didn't pass, people are still dying. we have to do something. these secret settlements keep information that should be public so that kids won't be hurt and people won't be killed. so we do strongly support this legislation, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 147, 'end': 159, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
David Pinduchi: david nancy pinduchi, and i'm from santa barbara city college. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Larry Doyle: Larry Doyle on behalf of the Conference of California Bar Associations, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Aaron Lewis: Aaron Lewis with the Consumer Federation of California, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Barrera: good morning, mr. chair and members of the committee. barrera on behalf of the california chamber of commerce, and we are opposed to ab 889. i want to start off by first thanking the author of the bill and his staff for working with us so far on the amendments that happened taken prior to hearing in the middle outlined. in the committee analysis, we appreciate the work on refining this proposal and we look forward to continue working with him. unfortunately, the bill is not in a position yet where we are comfortable with some of the standards that have been put into place. i want to say right now it's tragic the story you that you heard from the witness. of course, it's horrible to hear of anybody being injured and much less a child, so i don't even want to take away for one second that that is not something that's tragic and certainly sympathetic. and we're not interested in maintaining the secrecy of public dangers that could harm the public, the health or safety dangers. what we concerned with is the interference that this bill and this current standards would create in civil litigation. i kind of just want to walk through that for a moment. we're not talking about the sealing of records at trial, that's a different standard altogether. there's a first amendment, constitutional right to access at trial. so when there's evidence submitted at trial, the court has to go through a balancing that's much higher to maintain public access to the trial and the evidence made at the trial. we're talking more about documents that are exchanged during the discovery process between parties, okay? so the discovery process is meant to be free flowing of information to get to the merits of the claim. it's broader than what the standard is for admissibility is at trial because you want parties to exchange that information to get to the merits, okay. so some of those discovery requests are very broad, and they can certainly ask for information that is confidential in nature. yes, we've heard about trade secrets. it's a huge concern. privacy with regards to financial information, medical information, personnel records, all of that information is presumed to be confidential and private. and right now, protective orders are utilized to maintain the confidentiality of that information. the court determines whether or not there is good cause, whether good cause exists, or whether protective order so that the parties can exchange that information, but the confidentiality of a trade secret is maintained. so the both parties have access to that information to determine whether it's relevant to the merits of the claim. but yet the public is not allowed to look at that information, because it's presumed to be confidential. that's what a protective order is utilized for, right now, not to hide any public danger, not to hide any danger to the safety to the public, but to maintain the confidentiality of information that, by law, has been deemed to be confidential. this bill would change that. from our perspective, it would essentially limit or ban the use of these protective orders, because the standard it proposed is so high, substantial overriding interest with regards to the confidentiality, that outweighs any right to the public for disclosure accessibility. that there's no other means alternative available that's less intrusive. that's a pretty high standard to satisfy and our concern is that you then jeopardize our ability to maintain the confidentiality of trade secrets based upon an allegation of a public danger, a safety. there hasn't been proven at this point that there's any danger. and it's based upon an allegation. so we're concerned about that imbalance that has been created right now where we don't believe that there's a harm that exists. let's talk about the public danger and safety and notification to the public. one, the first document that's ever filed in court is the complaint. it's the charging document that identifies the parties, the name of the company or employer. here, whoever has the alleged defective product, it sets forth all of the factual allegations supporting the allegations of a product defect or some harm to public safety and danger. that document in and of itself is never a subject to a protective order. it is never hidden from access by the public. it is always accessible. we have a changing dynamic in the world today with social media. i can tell you that i can look up on my google or my phone. and i can find all of these alleged defects without having to go through a protective order, or undoing a settlement agreement. it's out there. the social media is out there. volkswagen case, the firestone case. all of those things we heard about well before, you ever saw anything with regards to a protective order or settlement agreement. so to say that there can't be any access to these allegations of public danger or safety without undoing protective orders or confidential settlement agreements, i think it doesn't take into account our changing dynamic in society, especially with regards to social media. the second part i want to get into is with regards to the settlement agreements. settlement agreements, we want to encourage settlement agreements. we want to encourage parties to work things out amongst themselves without having to go to trial and utilize our judicial resources that are already overcrowded dockets that are already limited with regards to their resources. a settlement agreement is basically a contract. i have never seen a settlement agreement that actually outlines any facts with regards to the underlying claim. i've never seen a settlement agreement where anybody specifies, in that agreement, trade secret information, or confidential information that would be disclosed to the public. what's in a settlement agreement is the recitals of the claim from the lawsuit, reference to the case number, a waiver of the claims against them, confidential settlement amount, which i appreciate that the bill now allows for the confidentiality of the settlement amount. usually, had no admission of liability by the business or the company. and then you have contractual terms, like severability, places where it's going to be litigated if there's a dispute over the contract. there's nothing in those settlement documents that disclose any public danger or safety. and yet, under this bill, because you would be opening up or limiting your right to utilize confidential agreements, you'll be interfering with our ability to settle cases and then forcing them to go to trial. so we're concerned with these standards that are being utilized, because we don't think it addresses the need with regards to making sure people are aware of a known public danger or safety. it's based only on an allegation, and for those reasons, we are opposed. but we, again, look forward to continuing to work with the author on these issues.
[{'start': 54, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Faith Conley: good morning, conley with the civil justice association of, california, in opposition.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim DeVorth: morning, tim david devorth, national federation of independent business, also in opposition.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dorrell Cook: dorrell tim cook with the california manufacturers & technology association, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sharon Riley: Next witness please. Good morning Mr. Chair and Members. Sharon Riley on behalf of the Judicial Council. Judicial Council is the sponsor of AB 1443. As the Assembly Member indicated, AB 1014, which established the gun violence restraining orders, did not establish a retention period for the gun violence restraining order records so, this bill is a necessary follow-on to AB 1352, which did establish retention periods for court records. It also includes a couple other provisions. It improves the efficiency of courts by eliminating the requirement that superior courts report to the Judicial Council on local records destruction. The Council believes that this reporting requirement is unnecessary and burdensome on courts. While the requirement has been in effect since 1995, the Judicial Council has never received a request for that information, nor is that information being used for any statewide purpose. Finally, AB 1443 removes some obsolete code references. I'd like to thank Assembly member Levine and his staff on behalf of the Judicial Council for working with us on this and I'm happy to answer any questions you may have, thank you.
[{'start': 57, 'end': 69, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1004, 'end': 1010, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Susan Riggs: yeah, good morning. susan dorrell riggs with the aspca, the american society for the prevention of cruelty to animals. setting aside, for a moment, the predatory nature of this lending practice, we're really concerned that dogs and cats are being treated like. automobiles that can be repossessed and parked somewhere. the lending company is not in the business of taking care of these animals. they need constant care, not to mention the love of the family that they had been living with. so we're really concerned about that. and i want to mention, there's an issue that's been raised that somehow banning this practice would limit the ability of folks with little or no credit available to them to have a purebred dog, but that's absolutely not true. there are multiple, multiple rescue groups that are very specific to pure bred dogs where a person, if they really want a pure bred dog, can go and get that dog. and certainly from the aspcas perspective we would prefer the dog be rescued rather than to get a pure bred dog and have it turned over to a shelter. so thank you very much.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 939, 'end': 945, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sevina Tucker: good morning, mr. chair and members. sevina with the consumer attorneys of california. we are in strong support of this bill. last year, we sponsored ab 2159, gonzalez which provided some protection for personal injury wrongful death claims. we believe this bill provides the necessary clarification and earns strong support. thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jim Lights: good morning, jim on behalf of the california airports council representing the 32 commercial airports in the state. we're the sponsors of the bill and appreciate the committee's work on this issue this year, and happy to answer any questions the committee may have.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christianne Foy: yes, christianne here on behalf of the burbank, glendale, pasadena airport authority, and we wanted to thank the assemblywoman for introducing this very important bill. ab 1286 will ensure that airports have the flexibility and opportunity to effectively plan and manage rental car facility capital programs within the parameters of local economic conditions and airport capital planning needs. we think this is a very important bill and ask for your aye vote. thank you.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Virginia Early: thank you, mr. chair and members. early with the legislative analyst's office. so today, i'm going to provide an overview of the state's child care and preschool system, some information on recent trends and a high level orientation to the budget. the sergeant is passing around a handout, so you can follow along with me as i go through it. on page 1 of the handout, we provide a chart that has brief descriptions of each of the child care and preschool programs as well as their estimated slots. as you can see from the chart, we attempt to categorize the programs in three ways. child care programs for families participating in the states welfare to work program, calworks, child care for families that are not participating in calworks, and preschool programs, and you can see a brief description of each. on page 2 of the handout, we walk you through some key components of the programs. all programs that we listed on page 1 have eligibility criteria, but the eligibility criteria vary. so in calworks and most of the non-calworks child care programs, families, to be eligible, have to have incomes below 70% of the 2007 state median income. that's about $42,000 for a family of three. transitional kindergarten does not have any income requirements. programs also set eligibility based on the age of the child. most programs serve children ages birth through 12, but state preschool serves three and four-year-olds, and transitional kindergarten serves children born between september 2nd and december 2nd. the state also has what's called expanded transitional kindergarten, which allows school districts to serve children born between december 2nd and the end of the school year, but the state provides less funding for this particular program. finally, eligibility varies. most programs require parents to be working, in school, or in a training program. however, part-day state preschool and transitional kindergarten don't have these requirements. in terms of access, access to the programs also varies. so for the calworks and transitional kindergarten programs, the state has traditionally allowed every single eligible child, who's interested in receiving the services, to be served, but for the other programs, the state has a certain number of slots, and those are prioritized based on family income. the state provides care in four types of settings. licensed centers, which tend to be larger, more classroom type settings, licensed family child care homes, where the provider serves children in their own home, typically about 6 to 12 children. license-exempt homes, which tend to be family, friend, and neighbors just serving the children from one family, and license-exempt school classrooms that are similar to those in kindergarten. so in terms of programs, calworks and the alternative payment program can access centers, family child care homes, and license-exempt providers, but the other child care programs can only access licensed centers and licensed family child care homes, and of course, transitional kindergarten uses school classrooms that are very similar to those used in kindergarten. standards also vary across the programs. all programs have to meet certain health and safety standards as well as standards regarding staffing qualifications and staff-to-child ratios, but the specific ratios and standards vary across the programs. some programs also require the inclusion of developmentally appropriate activities. so for example, in state preschool, programs are required to provide basic numeracy and literacy activities. on page 3 of the handout, we provide an overview of how the programs are funded. the funding model varies across the programs, with a combination of vouchers, direct contracts, and school district allocations. so for example, calworks is funded primarily through vouchers, which means that families can choose the provider of their choice and the type of setting that they like, and then the state pays that provider on behalf of the family. this voucher value varies regionally across the state based on a survey the state conducts every couple of years and the state typically sets this regional market rate so that families can access a certain percentage of providers in their area. by contrast, for the other child care programs, such as state preschool and general child care, the state contracts directly with individual providers to provide the service to children. and pays a set standard reimbursement rate that's the same across the state. finally, transitional kindergarten is funded based on average daily attendance through the local control funding formula, similar to kindergarten. on page 4, we summarize some trends over the last decade. so funding was cut during the recession and increased during the recovery. as you can see from this chart here on page 4, it decreased by about $1 billion between 2007-8 and 2013-14, and since 2013-14, the funding has increased by about $870 million. rates were mostly held flat during the recession with some reductions to the license-exempt rate, and the amount the state provides for administrating voucher programs, but since 2014-15, the state has provided three consecutive rate increases to both the regional market rate and to the standard reimbursement rate, with expanding on rates in 16-17 about $400 million higher. slots were what is responsible for the major funding reductions in the recession and when we talk about these reductions, we really have to talk about calworks reductions. and non calworks reductions separately because as i said before the state typically funds all eligible calworks families and it does not fund all eligible non calworks families. so between 2007, 2008 and 2013/14 on the calworks side of the house slots decreased by 65,000. these reductions were primarily due to state actions that reduced the number of eligible families. so for example, in 2009, 10, the state exempted certain calwork families from the work requirement and allowed them to continue receiving cash aid while staying home with their children, to create the savings for child care. since 2013/14, slots have increased due to the net effect of the state re-engaging this families on the workforce. and offsetting decrease in the overall calwork case load due to an improving the economy. on the non calwork side of the house slots again decreased during the recession by about 44000 slots due to cross the board funding reductions and since the recession has ended, the legislature has added funding that has resulted in there being about 25,000 more slots in 16/17, than there were in 13/14, and most of these additional slots have been for preschool. page five of the handout has a sort of summary chart of the governors proposed budget for 17/18. as you can see, the governor's proposing $3.8 billion for these programs. this is a 2% increase, or $76 million increase from the current year, and that $76 million increase we break down in a little bit more detail on page six of our handout. as you all know, the governor and the legislature had a multiyear budget agreement. the governor is implementing certain parts of that agreement and choosing to pause other parts of that agreement. so the majority of the 76 million is due to annualizing certain rate and slot increases that were part of that agreement. so that's where we get that $91 million increase. however, the budget does not include funding to annualise the standard reimbursement rate initiated in the current year. funding for new state preschool slots or funding for additional rate increases. in terms of our comments on the budge proposals we discussed on page seven, while the governor has not added additional state preschool slots, we know that the legislature is interested in this because that was part of the deal, and so we wanted to share some comments with you. based on a recent history, we've seen the state add a lot of full-day state preschool slots for local education agencies, particularly school districts in recent years and many of these have gone unused. so for example, in 15 the state funded almost 6,000 full day state preschool slots for lea's, but lea's were only issued about 1,600 of these due to a lack of applicants. so cda had to issue the remaining funds to as full day slots for non lea's and part day slots for a mix of leas and non leas. so we think, so why is this happening? we think the school districts likely have strong fiscal and programmatic incentives that prevent them from applying. so because they have the option of serving children in expanded transitional kindergarten who are the same age. and because the per day rate for transitional kindergarten is 21% higher than the average full day rate for state preschool and because transitional kindergarten requirements are significantly lower and less restrictive, allow for more local flexibility in state preschool. we think that school districts might be choosing to serve these children in expanded transitional kindergarten instead of state preschool. as a result, we would recommend that if the legislature is interested in adding additional full day state preschool slots that they allow all types of providers to apply for any newly funded slots so that the slots can be utilized as the legislature intends them to be utilized. thank you and that concludes my presentation. happy to answer any questions if you like.
[]
Brianna Bruns: thank you. good morning, bruns, department of finance. the 2017/18 governor's budget balances spending for child care and early learning with available resources and provides a measured approach to providing ongoing funding to these programs. this budget includes $3.7 billion for these programs, representing a 2% increase over the total 2016 budget act allocation. these augmentations are attributable to full year implementations of items included in the 2016 budget, act as well as increases in calworks cost of care. this budget proposes pausing additional augmentation associated with the 2016 budge act multi year deal in order to better align expenditures with resources. this would extend the originally scheduled three year augmentation plan to four years. thank you for your time, happy to answer any questions that you have.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Holmes: jessica jonah holmes, department of finance. so, throughout the recession and then the subsequent recovery, decisions are made about where to put funding back into the system, and most of those decisions centered around increasing slots, and increasing rates, and increasing quality. the state income was not identified as a place for reinvestment in those discussions and the recovery budgets.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Hulsizer: mr. chair and members, michael jessica hulsizer here today on behalf of the 47 school districts in kern county. i'd like to speak to the staff recommendation regarding supporting full funding on the deal that was made in the budget act relative to preschool slots and expansion. we certainly think the staff recommendation is well intentioned. we would support and concur with the ed coalition's position that hopefully at may revision, there will be significant increases to prop 98. but relative to mr. chavez's comments, since that agreement was made, we've lost over $5 billion in revenue. and we're down another $250 million in the current year based on the lower revenue estimates, and the local control funding formula went from 2.1 billion to 750 million in the governor's budget. certainly, the deal is the deal and the governor certainly has not backed away from that deal. he's just saying, we don't have the money right now to pay for it. so, our recommendation would be that you simply wait until may revision. hopefully, there will be more money available to you and then the deal could be honored. thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 505, 'end': 511, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nina Buthee: Hello, good morning. Nina Buthee, Executive Director of California Child Development Administrator's Association. Actually, I really appreciate the conversation today. Absolutely we do believe that need to hold fast to the budget agreement from last year, especially in reference to the 10% increase to the standard reimbursement rate. There are many programs that gave raises contingent upon that 10% now only getting 5%. They're actually going to have to cut wages in their programs. Additionally, one of the questions that was brought up was state preschool programs and how do we increase the eligibility and uptake of the state preschool program. Well, I have an idea for you and that is actually to change the age of the preschool for CSPP. When TK came in we actually changed the age from 2.9 to 3 years old. We set back the eligibility age, Excuse me, for those children in the state preschool program. Our recommendation is to change that date back to what it was prior to TK coming into being. And you will get an uptick in the number of CSPP slots that are taken up, because those 2.9 years olds will be able to be served in CSPP, and not CTTR so you will get funds that will be fully up ticked. So I have some language here for you, which you're welcome to review and just another proposal thank you for the conversation, and thank you all for being supporters of early education.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ron Rapp: Good morning, Mr. Chair, Members of the Committee, Ron Rapp on behalf of the California Federation of Teachers. We represent over 120,000 educators and education support professionals from Head Start through the UC system. Had an opportunity to meet with the Early Childhood Committee Members this weekend, and got some really good feedback. Clearly, we support the staff recommendation to oppose the governor's proposal. We believe that the state needs to fully fund that agreement that was made last year, that's one of the main objectives of ours. The other one is thank you Assembly Member Chavez for bringing up the SMI. Our members are saying that they're losing children because those rates, that median income level has not been updated. And so if mom gets a little raise, or dad gets a part-time job, or something else, then they're losing their children. They're no longer eligible. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 51, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 594, 'end': 600, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Martin Castro: Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Members of the Committee. My name is Martin Castro, I'm the CEO of a non-profit operator of center based programs. It's called the Mexican American Opportunity Foundation based in Los Angeles. We serve about 2500 preschool children in seven counties In California and at 42 centers across the state. We've been in operation since the 70s and gradually have grown more as the investments in early care education have grown. We serve part day preschool, full day preschool, full day child care, and a small percentage of migrant children. And as the speaker before me said, we, as non-profit operators, have been counting on the 10% increase to the SRR. And some of us have, in several geographic areas are unionized. And the unions knew that there was a 10% increase, and so discussions had been taking place when we were negotiating that contract. And we had indicated to them that on July 1 of this year the other 5% would kick in and we would be able to then give their members, our employees, a raise. Luckily, MOA did not sign that contract. We wanted to make sure that the money was going to be made available. But now it puts us in a really and condition of really trying to keep up with rising costs, if you will. Health insurance keeps going up, rents keep going up and without this 5% increase it's going to make it really really hard on us to continue operating without losses.
[{'start': 65, 'end': 78, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Martha Alvarez: good morning. martha michael alvarez on behalf of acsa, the association of california school administrators. similar to prior speakers, we also share concerns with the policy in the pre-school rates. particularly, at a time when we have higher minimum wage implementation across california, and we have much more higher also cost of living in california. so, we believe that as part of the may revision conversation, this conversation about the reimbursement rates needs to be brought up to light. we also understand the sensitivity about the issue, given that it's a prop 98 implication, and that it will be depending on how much money we may have in the may revise. along with these lines, we also want to acknowledge and appreciate the comments made by mr. chavez and hopefully, also supported by other members of the committee regarding the state medium income. so now that we have higher minimum wage, we're seeing higher cost of the programs, but also families not being able to qualify into the program because they're making more money. so we hope this too can just be addressed in the may revision and further conversations. thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 760, 'end': 766, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Monique Ramos: Good morning, Monique Ramos on behalf of the Early Learning and Care Coalition, here in support of the staff recommendation. And we like to thank the Committee for their leadership on this issue. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rosanna Carvacho: Good morning, Mr. Chair and members. Rosanna Carvacho here on behalf of the Alameda County Board of Supervisors. The board is opposed to the governor's proposal to pause the funding, but is in support of the staff recommendation. And I'll echo the comments of the speaker before me and thank the Committee for their work. Thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Josefina Ramirez Natsuna: josefina martha ramirez natsuna with children now. we are in strong support of the staff recommendation. in particular, we ask that you prioritize reimbursement rate increases, including the additional 5% increase that was promised. in addition, we urge the committee to be bold and consider investments above and beyond to protect families and to help families with infants and toddlers as well as to address the unintended impact of the minimum wage. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shannon Case: Shannon Case from Child Action and Northern Directors Group, and we support the staff recommendation to reject the governor's proposal to pause on this current budget agreement, and we also support CAPA's request to hold harmless, extending the hold harmless indefinitely for providers. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Donna Sneeringer: good morning, donna josefina sneeringer with the childcare alliance of los angeles, and we want to thank the staff for all their work putting this together and all of you for your ongoing support of early childhood education. and we support the staff recommendation. and i would say there were concessions made to get to last year's deal, and nothing else is paused. the cost of doing business isn't paused, minimum wage increases aren't paused so the programs really need to continue moving forward and we thank you for your work on this.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Larry Drury: i too would like to thank you for your work in putting this together. i'm larry donna drury, the executive director of go kids out of the bay area. we serve santa clara county, santa cruz, monterey, and san benito county. i'm the executive director of a non-profit with a mission of serving families in their needs. i can't help but look at this today and say, in ms. early's notes, that the standard median income, a state median income, families are eligible if it's less than 70%. with the increase in minimum wage, if that family of three, about 42,000, if the family of three, the two people work full-time and minimum wage, their income is 43,680. they're not eligible. so i think assemblymember, your comments were extremely well taken, thank you.
[{'start': 74, 'end': 91, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 368, 'end': 373, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mary Ignatius: hi, ignatius with parent voices california. we also agree with the staff recommendation to reject the pause unless we can pause further income inequality and poverty. we should not be pausing access to childcare or the cost of living that it takes to provide child care. and i'll save the smi for the next round. thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lola Cornish: Lola Cornish, with the California Childcare Resource and Referral Network. We also support the staff comments to reject the governor's pause. And thank you all for all of your rich conversation this morning.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Gardenaz: Hi, my name's Ignacio Gardenaz. I'm going to do the translation for her. Anna Fiero is a provider from Stanislaus County, she's part of UDW Local 3930. And she's afraid of taking in subsidized kids because she doesn't know if she's going to get paid or not. Without an increase to her reimbursement rate, she will continue to struggle for her family's needs. And she rejects the governor's proposed pause on the reimbursement rates for next year. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 73, 'end': 83, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Celicia Turnit: Hi, my name is Celicia Turnit and I am from Stanislaus County. I'm a childcare provider With UDW, and we need to continue increasing reimbursement rate for family childcare providers. That way I can hire an extra child care assistant. And that way I can provide high quality child care. I do reject what the Governor proposed pause in funding, and urge that we honor last year budget commitment, thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Lapisco: good morning, my name is lapisco, and i'm a childcare provider for the county of santa barbara, and i'm here with the udw. the income ceiling for subsidized childcare have not kept up with inflation or minimum wages increase. as a result i can easily lose my children in my care. i urge the committee to update the eligibility guidelines of the state median income. thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amber Hammonds: hello, my name is amber larry hammonds, and i'm a family childcare provider and i'm here today with the udw. i wanted to let you know that unfortunately there is a huge need for subsidized care, but providers like myself are unable to provide that. i'm only able to take in three children, because i never know if i'm going to get paid. so unfortunately i've lost personally thousands of dollars and have been out money because of that. low income families receive subsidized care and have not reported, but they have to report within five days their changes their family size or their childcare need. these frequent reporting requirements are burdensome and cause families to lose their care. i would like to seek continuous 12 month eligibility, so families do not lose their care. and for example, i just received a letter yesterday from child action that a family that i have been caring for for years lost their child care back in december. so i now know i will not be getting paid for january, february, and the care i provided this month. thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pamela Gibbs: good morning mr. chair and members. pamela amber gibbs, representing the los angeles county superintendent of schools. we want to urge you to continue the fine work that you're doing. we do support the committee's recommendations. we urge that the agreement that was in place continue. we are in full recognition of the budget situation, and so we know that there are a lot of moving parts here. lacoe does provide state preschool, and we also have the largest head start service in the state, possibly the nation. so we also appreciate the alignment that the governor has put in place to try to cross all of these programs together and your overall approach to kind of seek an answer to addressing these issues. we did put a letter out to you, and will continue to work with you to refine some of those points. so we look forward to working with you in the next couple of weeks as we move forward. and urge your continued support, thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Patti Prunhuber: good morning, patti pamela prunhuber from the child care law center. i want to echo the comments that have been made. that we strongly endorse the committee's recommendation to reject the governor's pause, a delay by any other name, of a multi-year agreement. and i want to in particular thank assemblymember chavez for highlighting the state median income issue. we see families every day who are losing their child care, particularly in light of the new increases in the minimum wage. i know this issue will come up throughout the day. but it does tie to the large number of preschool openings that have not been able to be filled. that would be one of the primary ways we could address that issue. thank you for your hard work.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 309, 'end': 315, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dionne Erriner: dionne patti erriner on behalf of seiu and afscme united domestic workers. i want to thank the committee's recommendation, thank the staff for that. we would also hope that you will reject the governor's pause. i also want to thank assemblyman chavez for bringing up the state median income, i hope you're also thinking about the 12 month eligibility issue, right? we are talking about stabilizing not only families, we're talking about stabilizing the providers lives as well. and i'd just like to point out to you where we really have a crisis, because i know we have a lot of discussion going on regarding state preschool, but where the crisis is for families is in care for infants and toddlers where we are missing so many providers, and we need to start focusing on that at this point. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 244, 'end': 250, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Christopher Maricle: Good morning, Christopher Maricle, Executive Director for the California Head Start Association. I want to thank this Committee for their wonderful work, I want to thank the work of staff. There's about 150 Head Start agencies in California, serving over 100,000 kids. A lot of those programs are also in state preschool programs, so we appreciate the work of the staff, and we support their recommendations. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ky Jackson: good morning, mr. chairman, colonel, members, staff. thank you for addressing this issue. my name's ky dionne jackson for san diego unified school district. you've heard a lot from many people here today, so on behalf of san diego unified, i just acutely reinforce that early childhood education is a priority for us. and it is a priority because ultimately we believe that educating and developing these kids early on in their development positively impacts how they will do. and addressing income eligibility is acutely important to us being able to serve more children, so we appreciate your focus on that. and while this will come up in another panel, we also appreciate your attention to the alternative title 22 compliance which also has an impact to our ability to serve more kids. thank you.
[{'start': 100, 'end': 117, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debra Brown: Good morning, Debra Brown on behalf of State Superintendent of Public Instruction, Tom Tarlickson. I think Ms. Early and Mr. Bruns covered not only the Governor's proposal and the background on the issues well, and we don't have a position, so don't have much to add. We've provided some I think technical support to the Department of Finance, on the proposal, and if the Legislature were to move in this direction, then we would probably have some input at the technical level on how to do it in particular, given that it would change the relationship the Department of Education, excuse me, has with some of the contractors. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 83, 'end': 97, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 111, 'end': 116, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 125, 'end': 130, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brianna Bruns: Brianna Bruns, Department of Finance. I would note that our proposal is very much to help align that streamlining process, and we see this proposal as removing a duplicative requirement for state preschool programs operating on LEA facilities. And we would note anecdotally in our research and talking with folks through the last spring process, the summer and the fall. Again, not data, but anecdotally we've heard it can take anywhere from three months to 12 months get a facility license through the CCL process.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Patti Herrera: thank you. good morning, patti with early edge. we haven't taken an official position on the trailer bill language in the alignment proposals. however, we appreciate the staff's recommendation and the committee's willingness to hold this item open, because although we have some quality concerns about several of the provisions within the governor's proposal, we do believe that it is meritorious in terms of it's up potential to increase access for the states children. it also has the potential to improve quality in our transitional kindergarten programs as well as to elevate our workforce, our early learning workforce. and for those reasons, we really do appreciate the committee's willingness to keep this open. so that we can have a more meaningful and deeper conversation about how we can advance this important reform. thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danene Nicoletti: Danene Nicoletti, representing Kappa. I'd like to align myself with the comments previously heard. Additionally, I'd like to thank the LAO for the recommendations. I think that their proposals are well thought out, and they deserve a lot of consideration. I'd like to bring attention to, in your agenda, there was an ask from the alternative payment program for 11 million in one-time funding for technology. Alternative Payment Programs are the data repository throughout the State of all the families who are accessing childcare. The data infrastructures for the agencies have never been funded appropriately. And what's happened is that in the last six years, case loads have surged from a case worker supporting 40 families to a case worker now serving more than 150 families. None of the work done up front to deem a family eligible is paid for. And so there has not been a holistic thought process on how agencies are funded. I need to bring to your attention that the data that the agencies collect are used by the local planning councils. Right now we have a lot of pilot programs going through in the state, wanting to look at individual counties doing childcare, determining their childcare differently. That data is from the Alternative Payment Programs, but our data infrastructure is failing. So I ask that you please look at the $11 million, it would go to servers that are 10 years old. Updates to software, in addition I'll bring to your attention when the San Bernardino shooting hit. Or shooting hit, that's a bad plan words, occurred there was not a phone system to let the families known of the center located less than two blocks away that the families were okay. So this IT infrastructures desperately need it.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Martha Alberts: good morning, martha in behalf of acsa, the association of california school administrators. i strongly support on behalf of our members from across the state, each and every one of the governor's proposals for the flexibility and alignment. we urge the committee as you continue these discussions to consider each of the proposals. to mr. chavez's point about the superintendence from your region who had supported the flexibilities. the proposal and the governor's general proposal, would do that. title 22 exemptions is an alternative way for school districts to meet the facility requirements. we, in lea world, we currently have other alternative requirements title 5 regulations, that we can talk to your staff more about it, that the private providers do not have. so we believe we all ready have some health and safety standards that we have to comply with. we support the alignment between tk and preschool so we can better operate programs, and to increase access to kids in california. so with that, we strongly urge you to consider these flexibilities as you move forward. especially at a time, my last point. especially at a time when we don't have enough resources to increase access. these flexibilities will allow leas to better support students at the local level. thank you
[{'start': 14, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 340, 'end': 346, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Valerie Dinero: hello, valerie ky dinero with californians for quality early learning. and i echo all the statements that first five california just made, as we agree 100% wholeheartedly with their concerns. and also, we're thanking the lao for their robust look at this and recommendations. we definitely support the recommendations being made. however we do have some great concerns about the proposal to increase teacher child ratio and the facility issues as the health and safety of our children are our number one priority in the first five years of their life. we want to ensure that these programs are developmentally appropriate when we're providing care on elementary school campuses. so we look forward to some more dialogue and conversation with regard to the alignment of title 22 and title 5 standards, thank you.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kate Miller: hi good morning kate valerie miller with children now and we do appreciate your growing awareness around the need to ensure more alignment between pre school and tk given how complicated and nuanced this issue is, we do encourage the committee to look very closely at these policy proposals to ensure against any unintended consequences. and think the system barriers more holistically. for example appreciate your attention assemblymember chavez,  as to the so looking at the licensing side of the issue as well. thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 440, 'end': 446, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ina Boothy: Hi. Good morning. Ina Boothy, California Child Development Administrators Association. We support two elements of this proposal that's the electronic application and the alignment with the homelessness definition. However, my organization strongly opposes the ratio change as well as the licensing shift. Similar to the conversation today, we feel that this a major step backwards. This is not putting our children first. This is not putting them in high quality early education programs. We are actually removing elements that ensure that quality is put there in place so strong opposition to that one. Thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Queisha Anzui: Good morning. My name is Queisha Anzui from the California Childcare Resource and Referral Network. And to echo what has been said by several people in front of me, we strongly oppose the change in ratios. It goes against what research has known of quality of care for young children, and we also oppose the licensing requirements and I'll add on that licensing allows for clear steps that parents have to know the quality of a facility, and to follow through on complaints. And to answer your question more directly Assemblyman Chavez we've been working for the last two years to have annual inspections for child care facilities as California is highly concerned with the health and safety of our communities. We have our elevators inspected, or our food inspected, we strongly believe that the facilities that young children are in should be just as inspected. Thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 529, 'end': 535, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Shannon Case: hello, case, on behalf of northern directors group. we strongly support the authorization to use the electronic application, as well as the state and federal aligning the definitions of homelessness. we also support kappa's request for the technology upgrades, but we also have some concerns that a one time ask is not enough and that ongoing funding for this is probably more in line of what's needed. thank you.
[]
Donna Sneeringer: donna kate sneeringer, child care alliance of los angeles. we don't have a formal position on these proposals, however we share many of the concerns raised by the childcare and development administrator's association and the resource and referral network. ratios are the foundation of quality. in an early learning program, and annual visits are what ensure that someone from the outside is coming in to take a look and making sure kids are safe. thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Larry Drury: larry donna drury, executive director of go kids, i wanted to add to that. i strongly oppose those recommendations are coming from the governor's office. i think the other thing we forget sometimes we are not just subject to licensing, but when you look at what is out there, the professionals say about what's good for kids take a look at accreditation standards, both for early childhood, as well as national accreditation council out of washington dc, all of them. historically, for decades and decades and decades have said that these are the best ways to make sure they're good for kids. and that's what we're all about.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ron Route: Mr. Chair, very briefly, Ron Route from the California Federation of Teachers. We oppose the Governor's proposal to increase the ratio of students for teachers with multiple subject teaching credentials. We also believe that these teachers need to have training and experience in early education and are not qualified with a multiple subject credential to teach preschool.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Greppi: jennifer larry greppi with parent voices california, and we just don't agree with increasing access by compromising the health and safety of our children. i have a two and a half year old granddaughter, i care for her, she's one child, and that's like extremely challenging, and so caring for 12 children with one adult really compromises the health and safety of our children. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dion Aroner: Dion Aroner on behalf of ask me and SCIU. We haven't taken a formal position either. I want to talk as a parent and a grandparent however. How would you like to take care of 33 3 and 4 year olds in a classroom? Don't think that sounds very good I think this proposal sounds much more like something that's trying to help adults, meaning the adult administrators, as opposed to the children that we're supposed to be serving. So I think this is a policy discussion that really should happen in a policy Committee. This takes much more thought process, and I appreciate the LAO's remarks, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 36, 'end': 40, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kareem Jackson: Kareem Jackson San Diego Unified School District, sir with respect to how long it's taking to get some facilities up on average for San Diego Unified School District it's taking a minimum of six months to get up and going. We support with respect to title 22 alignment the governor's trailer bill language. And we look forward to continued conversations. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Donna Sneeringer: Good morning, I'm Donna Sneeringer, and I'm with the Childcare Resource Center. We are a nonprofit organization that does childcare services in Los Angeles and San Bernardino. County. And I'm here today on behalf of the Early Childhood Education Coalition, and that's a statewide partnership of advocacy and service organizations. And we've been working together for the past few years to try to really align our asks and work with all of you to move the ball forward for these programs we all care about so much. I do want to thank you for the action you took earlier to reject the pause. That was our top priority last year. And we were very pleased to put into place a multi-year deal with all of you to continue to address reimbursement rates. And I think it was critically important that you take that step now. Across our industry, we're at a critical juncture for family eligibility. During the Great Recession, there were many measures taken to make reductions, while preserving the infrastructure so that we'd have something to build back when the recession was over. One of those things was that we did freeze the family eligibility level at the 2007 level, which was actually data from 2005. So we've made some progress in reimbursement rates and some of the other areas, but we have not yet fixed this. And what we are seeing, as program operators, is parents who are earning 2017 wages being judged on eligibility based on 2007. And they are losing access to childcare far earlier than they are able to actually pick up the cost themself. So we are having families over income by very small amounts of money, a couple $100 a year, and looking at childcare bills that range from 7,000 to 13,000 a year. And it doesn't take much math to figure out that that just isn't going to work out for them. And we're putting them in pretty precarious situations. And after the investment we've made to move them further along in their own economic stability, it seems foolish to all of us. I think many people have mentioned the issues related to the SMI and the fact that we've now priced out a family that has two minimum wage earners, as of January of this year. I think that that's just one part of the equation. And we also believe that the estimates that have been made of what it would cost to actually implement this are a little on the high side. The Department of Finance and LAO last year estimated that to actually fully implement this would be around $30 million. But that's assuming every family that leaves our program goes out because they're over income. What I know from my own agency, looking at data from last fiscal year, is only 6% of the families that left our program were actually leaving because they're over income. These folks are working in service industries, they're working at Walmart, they're working in nursing. And the idea that they're making vast increases in wages and all going off the program because they're over income is a little preposterous. We're very supportive of this proposal, and I know my colleagues are going to speak of it as well. And also very supportive of looking at 12-month eligibility to provide greater stability for families, so that they can go to work, their kids can learn, and we can all be successful. Thanks.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2052, 'end': 2055, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2387, 'end': 2390, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Monica Walters: Good morning, Chair Mccarty, honorable members. My name is Monica Walters. I'm the Chief Executive Officer of Wu Yee Children's Services in San Francisco, established in 1977. Wu Yee today is the largest provider of Early Head Start and Head Start services in San Francisco, and also operates 12 CDE-contracted Title V centers, serving over 500 children citywide. We're also one of the two R&R agencies in San Francisco. And we also administer local childcare city subsidies to over 400 low-income families with children zero to three. Our comprehensive services reach over 8,000 families annually. I'm here today representing the California Coalition for Equity in Early Care and Education, a statewide coalition of over 90 community-based, nonprofit early care and education providers. Our coalition represents the front-line agencies, like Wu Yee, that face the daily crisis of unworkable state median income requirements for the parents we serve. We're the ones who lose quality teachers and care providers because they can't afford to support their families at salaries that are barely above the minimum wage. Which is clearly directly related to outdated and suppressed state reimbursement rates. We're also the ones who can't afford to fix or get new facilities for our educational programs. Our coalition fights for the hundreds of thousands of working parents who need access to early care and education to survive financially, but are blocked because there's not enough slots to accommodate their children. Last fiscal year, the $530 million of increased funding for ECE was provided in the budget deal between the Governor and the Legislature. And these funds were to be doled out over five fiscal years. In the current fiscal year, funding was suspended with the promise that it will be returned later. Parents and children who have no early care and education don't understand the debate over the pause, the May Revise Department of Finance projections versus the legislative analysts' projections. All they know is that doors to early care and education are closing for their children. We're here today to ask you to open the doors and say, welcome. We want the best for our children. We believe every child in California deserves to be safe, healthy, and to learn. We respect hardworking families, and we believe in you. We believe in California's future. To be entitled to say these things, we respectfully urge you to do the following. Revise the state median income requirements so that more children have access to ECE. As you know, the SMI requirements are currently frozen at 70% of the SMI for a family of three based on 2005 figures, as calculated then. For a family of three, this translates to 3,500 per month, or 42,000 annually. The income level's actually less than 60% of the SMI for a family of four in 2014. Keeping the SMI low is a policy designed to keep the poor, poor. Here's Hobson's choice of this policy, forcing parents to choose between having childcare so they can continue to work at barely above minimum wage. Or getting a raise and being forced to place their child at a market rate ECE, which often takes up most or their entire monthly wage. This is truly an all or nothing choice. To understand the financial squeeze parents with young children endure in California, take, for example, the 2016 median monthly two-bedroom apartment rent figures: $4,730 a month in San Francisco, $2,740 in San Jose, $2,710 in LA, $2,050 in San Diego, 2,000 in Long Beach, and 1,750 in Santa Ana. Couple this financial squeeze with the fact that almost 40% of California's children ages three to five are not in preschool or kindergarten. A figure that rises to almost 45% among Latino children. And it's clear that we are sending a very negative message about whether we care about the children who will lead our state in the coming generations. We're also sending a message to these children's parents that the policy supports a $15 living wage does not apply to them. We are, in effect, saying that the way to assure that your child has access to early care and education is to resign yourself to income inequality as a way of life. Such policy decisions have a cascading effect throughout society, as the underpinnings of intergenerational poverty and underachievement are institutionalized as California state policy. The LAO's office has recommended raise SMI to 70% of the 2015 SMI, the most recent figures that would raise the eligibility level from a family of 3 from 42,016 annually to 51,957 annually. Consider that at even this increase, in San Francisco the median rent is still $400 more than the SMI eligibility requirement. And in LA the median income to rent an apartment would consume over 62% of a family of three's SMI monthly income eligibility. To further compound the pressure on working families is the issue of the needs recertification requirements, for every four months working families have to recertify their need whether they're in school, training, seeking worker housing. In simple terms and under current rules, the changes in the status of the families activity determines the hours of care, to which their child is eligible. So providers and parents are both burdened by ongoing recertifications throughout the program year. And families seeking employment are severely hampered by a 60-day window. Student parents are punished by losing care or having these hours cut or reduced if they take a scheduled break in classes or need to cut back on their hours, are their studies for a short time. If a parents hours or studies are reduced, so is their child's time in preschool. Our youngest children, those infants and toddlers and three year olds who don't have access to even part day CSPP are hit the hardest by this, and children are churning in and out of the classroom, disrupting their development, and learning goals, and also stressing the parents. 31% of families in Wu Yee's program fall into this trap and would have either been terminated or run the risk of termination during their 12 month program. This is not only heartbreaking, but it's disruptive. Fortunately for Wu Yee, children caught up in the 12 month eligibility rule were subsidized by local San Francisco city and county funds, so that they could remain in care for at least a part of the day, or for the remainder of the program year. But this is a luxury that most families don't have access to, because few, if any, counties have such generous local programs. So currently the legislative fix for 12 month eligibility rule track proposed in AB 60 is one that we fully support. However, AB 60, like recalculating the state median income rate are minor fixes to the way California approaches ECE. When a major overhaul is really required. To truly focus on minor fixes misses the point of the ECE crisis. Nothing less than a full commitment to real funding dollars will even begin to address the costs. What is left unsaid, that which screams out for justice, is addressing the overall funding drought for ECE. Specifically, this means three critical funding needs, in addition to the inappropriate adjustment in the SMI income calculation. Increasing the state reimbursement rate so that teachers and care providers will not be driven out of ECE as they're forced to seek a living wage. We're losing teachers who have dedicated their lives to preschool education and have degrees in that field, to go work at Costco or Starbucks, because we cannot afford to pay them the wage that they deserve, given the rates that we're paying. Providing for additional slots for families, particularly the over 300,000 that are on our waiting lists. And assuring quality facilities for children so that all can learn and grow in a safe environment. In conclusion, if we're really serious about addressing income inequality, intergenerational poverty and the appalling high school drop-off rate, and even the cruel path to incarceration, we must first be serious about whether we fully fund early care and education in California. Thank you members, for your leadership and the opportunity to testify.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 59, 'end': 73, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 843, 'end': 849, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2911, 'end': 2917, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5940, 'end': 5948, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6146, 'end': 6152, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mary Ignatius: Good afternoon, Mary Ignatius, the Statewide Organizer of Parent Voices. The issue around the issue of eligibility is something that our parent members have come to this Committee hearing for the last four years. And because of the state minimum wage increases, the urgency to fix these issues is greater than ever before. To us, the sort of small amount in cost of implementing these eligibility issues will impact over 250,000 children who are in CDE funded programs. We have an opportunity here for real long term systems change with a relatively small amount of money. And we also need statewide solutions, there are attempts at the county level to try and play with eligibility, but because of the state minimum wage, we need statewide solutions. And it shouldn't matter if you're in LA or San Diego or San Francisco or San Mateo or wherever you are in the state, all parents should have the consistent eligibility issues. Around the need for annual redetermination, the idea of having mostly low income women of color having to come in and recertify every three to four months is torture And we need to talk about and recognize what this is really about and it's this idea that women are lying and it's just not the fact. These women are coming in every three to four months, showing their documentation, proving they're eligible, and it's a stressful tortuous situation and it needs to end. Today's equal pay day and so for white women who would need to make the same amount as a white man counterpart, that is today, for women of color, it's much later down the road. And for these women who are taking pay cuts and turning down promotions because of these outdated income guidelines, we have an opportunity to end that today. And so we appreciate you're holding this open from a revise. But we really hope that out of this Committee the number one priority and recommendation is to update SMI and annual redetermination. Thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeff Anka: jeff at riverside county superintendent of schools. just very quickly, adjusting the smi is critical to our collective efforts to meet the needs of all families and serve all children in this state. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Martha Albert: good morning, martha on behalf of axa. two quick points, i'm part of a coalition of a school district and county offices who are supporting both the smi updating the income eligibility, as well as the governors proposals. combining this coalition will represent more than 2 million kids in california k to 12, preschool through 12th grade. and something just one quick last point the lao mentioned before hand that leas were not taking the full day preschool slots because, perhaps, lack of interest. i would want to encourage you to think about the reason why we can't take up those slots was because families were no longer able to qualify for those income eligibility thresholds. and then also because of the stringent requirements on the preschool slots. so we believe that with the smi updating those incomes threshold and with the governors ... proposals we can improve access in california. thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 34, 'end': 37, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nina Buthee: hi, good morning, buthee ccdaa. strongly support the state median income proposal. both the incoming ceiling of 70%, outgoing ceiling of 85%. until the 1990s california's outgoing ceiling was 100% of the state median income. with commensurate family fee increases along the way. so incredibly supportive of this proposal, thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 30, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Shannon Case: hi, shannon jennifer case from child action. i was going to speak to the smi, but i think some of our parents in our recent parent surveys speak to it better than i do. and some of their comments were, when we asked them how to improve our program was to increase the maximum income. i'm in a situation now where i cannot promote, otherwise i will lose child action but not make enough to pay for care. and on paper as a single parent, it seems as though i make a decent amount, but the cost of living and other expenses, i barely can make the monthly payment. but i'm very grateful for this program. raise the family income cap to allow parent who can't afford daycare to continue utilizing the service. i was terminated, because i was $200 over the household limit. although it may seem like the income was great, i'm still not able to afford daycare at $400 to $500 a month. adjustment must be made to the income limits and parent fee process. childcare is still very difficult for me to afford now that my parent fee has been raised, please listen to our parents. thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 20, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 73, 'end': 76, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Gladys Soto: good morning, assembly members. i'm gladys, i'm part of parent voices and i was on the waiting list twice. and i remember that i receive a phone call when my kids were on kindergarten. and at that time i was working full time, not making enough for the high living costs in san francisco living. how do you say? cost of living, yeah, in san francisco. but i was making a little too much to qualify for child care, so it's kind of hard. so we support updating the smi, and increasing eligibility and annual recertification. thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Elvia McKinley: good morning, assembly. my name is elvia shannon mckinley, and i am part of parent voices. i am here to support the one-year reporting and increasing eligibility, and updating the smi. it is important that families have stable childcare, and bond with their children and providers. and also, i am looking forward to going back to work, and finding quality childcare for my child. thank you.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kate Miller: hi, kate with children now, just echoing the comments of a colleague's. we're strongly supportive of this proposal and really appreciate you taking the lead on it, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Patti Prunhuber: Patti Prunhuber from the Child Care Law Center. We are one of the co-sponsors of this bill, and we think there's just an urgent need to update the SMI, and I appreciate this Committee's commitment to that in last year's budget, and we urge you to try to include it in this year's budget. I do want to just briefly say something about the estimate, the $30 million estimate. We believe that one of the things that will happen when SMI increases is that more of the funds that goes out to counties each year can actually be utilized and won't be sent back. And that is one of the benefits that will come from 12-month eligibility, and raising SMI, and that will not require additional funds. So better utilization of the money that already goes out and more continuity of care, it's kind of a win-win. I appreciate your help and support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 147, 'end': 150, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Debra Brown: good morning again. debra elvia brown on behalf of state superintendent of public instruction, tom torlakson. so i'm going to discuss the department's quality improvement activities. the cd is the lead state agency for the federal child care and development block grants at the ccdbg. and as such, the cd manages federal funds that are distributed through direct contracts or services and through vouchers administered by alternative payment programs. besides the direct support for financial assistance for child care services, the ccdbg also requires states to spend a certain portion of the funds along with matching grants on quality improvement activities. and as part of the reauthorization of the ccdbg, which we talked about earlier, the percentage of the set aside is increasing over the next few years. and so we have, in this year, we're at 7% must be spent on quality programs. and if you look at page 20 of your agenda, that provides a summary of the items that we're proposing to spend the quality dollars on. i would note that for the state fiscal year, so again, this is crossing over federal fiscal year and state fiscal years, so for the state fiscal year, we are proposing to spend $78 million on quality programs. and so the governor's budget doesn't allocate any new quality funds for the quality expenditure plan at this time. in the development of the proposed plan, the department conducted stakeholder outreach. so during november of last year, the cde early education support division conducted two stakeholder input sessions. the first was on november 1st, and the second was on november 14th. and they were focused on the requirements of the act as well as the qris rating system, which i believe ms. early will discuss in more detail in a few moments. and so it's based on this feedback and the recommendations that we received that we developed the draft expenditure plan. and again, as it's outlined on page 20 in your agenda. so i'll just briefly go over some of the changes. so it's primarily, i will compare the changes that we proposed to make over the 16-17 year for this year. so really, the purpose of this was really trying to maintain the balance between the infrastructure of quality improvement activities that it has developed and refined within each, provide some continuing support for the infant-toddler qris block grant. and so you'll see there's several reductions that were made, and so this includes reducing early learning resources, the faculty initiative program, the childcare initiative project. and also, we proposed to reduce, probably the largest reduction is nearly 2.7 million to the child care retention program, more commonly known as ab 212. and this is, again, significant. this is about one-quarter reduction. off-site by child development contractors having access to the local qris block grants to support staff retention. so this program provides funds to lpcs for child care staff retention activities to retain qualified staff who work directly with children and state-subsidized center-based programs. the lpc has developed county-wide plans in accordance with approved guidelines, and submit these plans to the department. the funds are intended to supplement, not supplant, existing efforts and investment to retain qualified child care staff at the local level. recent data has shown that 42% of the state pre-school qris block grant, which is $50 million, has gone directly to staff working in this program. and since these are the same recipients of the ab 212, these dollars were restructured into the infant-toddler qris block grant which partially back fills the 24 million in one-time funds appropriated in 15-16 for the purpose of the qris consortium. and then i think the evaluation activities focus on the selection of quality improvement activities in each contract cycle. so recent cycles have included a study of r and r training activities, including the child care initiative project, the california preschool instructional network, and the california collaborative for social emotional foundations. the current stays include in the local childcare and development planning councils ab 212 and family childcare at its best. results are used to review the projects, their alignment with the state quality and improvement efforts and funding adjustments. evaluation of the quality improvement activities information can be found on the department's website and we can also share that with you directly. again, i think the lao's going to provide some additional information including the recommendations and we should just say that we're continuing to have open public input sessions in the fall and continue to get feedback. and as we are moving from state and local quality efforts, we're looking to make sure that the quality of the dollars are spent in the most effective way possible.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 95, 'end': 108, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1689, 'end': 1693, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1729, 'end': 1734, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Virginia Early: hello mr, chair, members, again virginia with the legislative analyst's office. i've been asked to provide a sort of background on the state's quality programs and discuss our assessment and recommendations on cd's plan and on the system as a whole. we're passing around a handout now. you got a lot of handouts from us today. and starting on page one we provide some background on the programs. so as ms. brown mentioned, the federal law requires us to spend a certain percentage of our federal funding and state match each year on activities to improve the quality of childcare. that was 78 million in 16, 17, because the percentage is going up, as was mentioned before, assuming federal funding remains flat, we'll be required to spend $95 million on quality improvement activities in 2021. federal law allows us to spend this money for a wide range of activities, including licencing enforcement, developing early learning resources, doing trainings for childcare and preschool providers and so forth, and california currently supports about 30 different quality improvement programs. some of these programs are specified in the budget act each year, such a resource and referral agencies and others are programs that c has developed over the years to respond to needs or things they've identified would be useful. but the majority of the funds in question, are funds that cd has discretion over. california counts--the programs are split into three categories. what we call state level activities, where the state has either developed some sort of training that is the same for everybody in the state or it does some sort of state level activity like licensing enforcement, then the state also funds core activities of certain local or county level support agencies that are involved in doing quality improvement work. so for example, the state funds resource and referral agencies, r and rs, and local penning councils. r and rs are responsible for collecting data on child care providers and helping parents find child care in their areas, while local planning councils are responsible for identifying areas in their county with the greatest unmet need for child care and helping other child care folks in their county coordinate child care services. finally, the state also counts towards this quality spending requirement specific programs that are run by these county support entities in addition to their main key responsibilities. so for example, resource and referral agencies receive additional funding to conduct specific types of trainings while local planning counsels receive money as ms. brown mentioned for what's called the ab 212 program that provides stipends to providers taking child development courses. and community colleges also received some funds to support student's application fees as they apply for their child development teacher permit. on page three of the handout we give you an overview of the quality rating and improvement system, so of those 30 programs i mentioned, one of those programs provides $800,000 in 16-17, for qris consortia, up for child care programs serving migrant children. but outside of those 30 programs, and the funding that the state is required to spend, california also allocates 75 million to cure qris consortia. of this 75 million, 50 million has provided annually in proposition 98 funds for state preschool qris. and 25 million is provided by the first five california for qris all types of programs. in addition, you also heard cde talk about how there had been a one time infant and toddler qris block grant in 2015-16, some qris consortiums still have funds from that block grant that they're using. these consortia have a small presence in many areas of the state, there are 48 consortia covering all 58 counties. and the consortia are comprised of various county level entities that are involved in improving the quality of childcare such as the r and r or such as the local planning council, but it also includes local education agencies. it includes the first five commission in the county, community colleges, and even potentially some child care providers. these consortia rate providers and offer resources to help them improve and maintain high quality ratings. so as i mentioned earlier, it's a five tier matrix with tier one being licensing standards. and tier five being the highest quality above licensing standards, and this matrix examines many aspects of providers, including child to teacher ratios, staff interactions, how child observations are used to inform curriculum planning, use of developmental screenings, classroom environment, and several other things. consortia have flexibility once they've rated an individual provider, and how they choose to use their remaining resources to support the provider. so for example, consortium might choose to give a scholarship to teachers, to help them get more classes, if that's identified as the thing that will help that site progress. if the program is having trouble with their classroom environment, the consortium might choose to give some grant funding to help them purchase supplies. so consortia have a lot of flexibility to respond to the needs of providers. on page four of our handout we go through the revised quality improvement expenditure plan. i won't go into too much detail on this since cd has already covered it. but basically, as she mentioned, the 2016-17 budget directed cd to come up with a new plan for how to spend the quality funding, retaining funding for resource and referral agencies, licensing enforcement and local planning counsels but prioritizing the rest for qris. so the revised plan shifts funding from, shifts about 5.1 million in funding from nine other programs into a qris block grant for infants and toddlers. so while it's reducing funds for the ab 212 program that ms. brown mentioned, the consortia could continue to use these funds that their local planning council had already been getting for the same purpose. it's just now they have additional flexibility if they decide they want to do more of it, or they want to do less of it, they're able to make those decisions. in addition, cd is also proposing to add some rules to existing programs, requiring providers accessing some of the state level programs to be participating in qris. so on page five we share our assessment, as we looked at the system, we think some activities are really important to supporting the subsidized childcare and preschool system, including helping parents find child care, collecting data on child care providers, identifying areas in the state with the greatest unmet need. and these are activities that the r and rs and lpcs are currently doing. but we also found that quality improvement spending at the county level can lack coordination and be difficult for these entities to direct to their highest priorities. within each county these entities are not required to have an over arching quality improvement plan. that addresses both the folks in qris and not in qris. so, without a plan, there's no guarantee that the funding will be coordinated, that it will be efficient. there's no guarantee that training, for example, is not duplicative. so, in addition, the detailed requirements of having so many different training programs that these county level support entities are running means that they're unable to direct funding towards their highest priorities, that they hear from their child care providers in their area. additionally, while there have been some evaluations of the state level programs, and there is some data available, we don't think these evaluations and this data is sufficient to enable the state to know whether the programs are cost-effective. on page six, we continue with our assessment. we also found that of the $28 million cd is proposing to allocate towards training activities, a large amount of it is being prioritized or restricted to contract-based providers. so specifically 28% is restricted to contract-based providers who are already required to meet higher standards than voucher providers. and under cd's revised program rules, another 37% would be prioritized for providers participating in qris. and these providers tend to be contract based, and so we're concerned about this focus on contract based providers because nearly three-quarters of the infant and toddler population and one-quarter of the preschool population in california of subsidized children are served by voucher-based providers. and so we'd like to see some spending on the quality where these children are being served, especially if they're in settings that don't have to meet as high standards. finally, while we think that shifting funds to qris provides county-level support entities with more flexibility in terms of the types of activities they can offer, we also recognize that only a small percentage of providers statewide participate in qris. so restricting funds to qris consortia could limit the pool of entities that can benefit from the quality improvement funds. so on page seven of the handout, we summarize our recommendations. we recommend the legislature retain funding for essential activities such as helping parents find child care, collecting data on providers, and identifying unmet need. and as i said, these are activities that are currently done by the r and r agencies and local planning councils. but moving forward, we would recommend the legislature repackage other county level funding into a block grant, so there are currently seven programs that are going to county level, sort of funding streams that are going to county level support entities. it's about $21 million, so we would recommend combining this into one consolidated block grant that all the entities currently receiving the funds would get together and collaboratively decide. they would have to agree on a plan for how to spend the funds, taking into account the subsidized population providers in their area. we recommend that the block grant be allocated across the state, based on each county's share of the subsidized childcare and preschool slots, and then collect data from each county on how the funds were used. we'd also like to recommend rejecting cd's proposal to limit access to certain state-level programs to qris participants, as it means that non qris providers wouldn't have access to some of the resources in the state. and finally, given that there are a number of state level programs, that there aren't good evaluations or data for, we recommend the legislature and the state hire an independent evaluator to assess the effectiveness of these programs and make future funding decisions based on the results. and so the state could start with the largest programs and work its way down the list over a period of several years. thank you so much. i'm happy to answer any questions you have.
[{'start': 406, 'end': 411, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2607, 'end': 2612, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5856, 'end': 5861, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brianna Bruns: hello, again. brianna debra bruns, department of finance. i'll keep my comments brief as ms. brown and ms. early have done a great job of outlining the plan and its background. the department of finance was able to attend two of the quality plan stakeholder meetings and we're happy to see the improvements made by this updated budget. our priorities are to see more funds allocated to locals to use with their discretion, we look forward to engaging in annual discussions regarding how we can further improve the allocation of these quality dollars so that they are more effective, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 93, 'end': 98, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 107, 'end': 112, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Donna Sneeringer: hi, donna with the child care alliance of los angeles and i share many of the opinions of my colleague from first five california and i did want to mention a couple of specific things. one, i really appreciate the understanding of the critical infrastructure that resource and referral agencies play, they really are part of your local delivery system and i think it is nice to hear that it is understood, the work that we do. as far as these recommendations from the department. i think that they merit, looking at, i do have some concerns that we have some things that do very different, play very different roles. the child care initiative project is your only funding that really recruits family child care providers and we sort of have a crisis. we have a declining family childcare population and a real big need for infant care. so i'm concerned about that being singled out. and ab 212 specifically was designed for wage support. so they're not really quality training programs. they're a little bit different and i think we need to take that into account. and lastly, as someone who interacts with three different qriss in three different counties, and one is a commissioner in sacramento, i think the biggest challenge we face right now is the split in funding, that some of the funding is prop 98 and can only be used for state preschool really limits what folks can do. and there is really very little access for license exempt providers and family child care, so we really need to tackle that, thanks.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kate Miller: hi, kate brianna miller with children now, and i appreciate the committee looking at this much closer. we definitely support the better alignment of the various quality and permit in work force development expenditures, and we've long encouraged thoughtful consideration and multi-year planning about this and how we should be using, particularly, the federal funds for the quality set aside and to that end there was some interesting recommendations made and worth considering. in the short term, we are pleased to see designation of funds. excuse me, designation of funds for ongoing infant toddler block grant, however, we'd like to consider additional flexibility to that grant. there was some limitations in the way it could be used and we think that it should be more accessible for more providers, so worth considering. and we're also concerned about cutting other programs to support it. we were supportive of this establishing an ongoing infant toddler block grant but really with the idea that the increase over time of the federal qualities set aside would be used for it and we hope to see some increases go to that. but do need to be cautious about cutting other programs, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dionne Erriner: Dionne Erriner on behalf of SEIU and AFSCME and I also happen to be the author of AB 212. So I have a little personal stake. First of all, I want to align myself with the remarks that have been made previous to this. Because I think it's wonderful that we are looking into total perspective of the quality money. I am concerned, however, when AB 212 was set up, we had to negotiate, right, life is to negotiations in this building, we got-
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 28, 'end': 32, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 37, 'end': 43, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lola Cornish: Hi, Lola Cornish with the California Childcare Resource and Referral Network. I'd like to echo a lot of the statements made by others. We certainly are appreciative of the recognition of the hard work that our member agencies do as resource and referral agencies and generally support the plan as it exists. That one thing that we have some serious concerns about is the block granting to communities without a solid evaluation plan that seems like it may have some unintended negative consequences that could actually negatively affect the data that's being gathered statewide now. Thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shannon Case: Shannon Case from Child Action, and while we appreciate the acknowledgement that so many of our youngest children are being cared for in family childcare and exempt childcare through voucher programs, we also are a little concerned about the SIP program being put into this block grant process since the SIP program is one of the few resources for these exempt and family childcare providers. So we have some concerns about that, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Monique Ramos: Monique Ramos on behalf of the ECE coalition. So we have requested that the second phase for the R&R database which costs about $2.1 million be funded out of the QR program, and it's not part of that plan. So as we move forward we've already, as a state, invested $300,000. This funding is the next step in order to sync that and get the data that so many of you have been requesting, and also to build toward a cell one day. So as we move forward we would request contemplating how we fund that. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carol D'Elia: Thank you. Again for the record, Carol D'Elia, Executive Director of the Little Hoover Commission. So I won't go over anything that I just said in the prior bill, what we looked at here is that there's a dearth of easily accessible information about the veteran population, we have a hard time knowing who they are. We have data on demographics by age and by gender, but we don't know what their needs are going to be. We don't know what their healthcare needs are now. We don't know what they're going to be going forward. So as this Committee and others policy makers are planning, we don't have the connection on whether the needs,
[{'start': 33, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Gonzales: rebecca jonah gonzales, national association of social workers california chapter in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carole D'elia: Good afternoon, Committee chair and Committee Members. My name is Carole D'Elia and I'm Executive Director of the Little Hover Commission. As I'm sure, Chair Erwin knows it was a result of a request from her that we actually began this study in late 2015. It culminated with eight recommendations, major recommendations, that our commissioners agreed upon unanimously last month. Two of these are addressed by this bill. AB 1365, when we were asked to look at the veterans home program, part of it was because this is a 306 $1 million program that serves very few veterans and that it was with that the Commission, embarked on the study knowing that we have 1.7 million veterans in our state and the home program conserve. Is at 2610 beds that are authorized serving a few more people than that because some cycle in and out, but never the less, this is an expensive program serving a very select few. It's almost like winning the lottery to get in to one of this homes. So we warned about trying to save the state money for save. What we were trying to do was how could we better utilize the money were spending to serve more veterans. So we held two public hearings here in Sacramento, we held an Advisory Committee meeting at the West L.A campus, another meeting at Theato Campus, and our commissioners repeatedly ask, why does it cost so much to serve so few veterans? So, we have a variety of recommendations that we made, but today, I'm just going to focus for the purposes of time on the ones that relate to this bill and the bill that will come out next, which I'll address after that bill is up. So as far as the financial information, we're doing our study we found out a very hard to understand their budget. It is one of the most complicated budget i think. In part because, they allocate money for the beds and the money that reimburses which could come from USTBA, it comes from medical medic aide, private insurance of the veterans themselves. Doesn't always track until later. So their programs looks like it's even more expensive than it actually is. If we set out to determine by home and by serious level what it cost and it took a lot of effort to do that and so, the recommendation, which is part of this bill is to make that information readily available, make it transparent. The second part stemmed from in part what we heard in our west LA meeting which focused on what are the needs of veterans and is a home exactly what's needed of the current and future veterans and so we had a lot of experts at that meeting on longterm care. One of whom was someone who served on a Governor Gray Davis. Task force that actually recommended the building of the five most recent homes and he said times and circumstances have changed. Most people whether they are veteran or not, want an agent place. They want to stay in their community as long as possible and so was that discussion that led us to consider what are we doing with our homes and particularly homes that have been around for more than 20 years, it takes 20 years if you use federal dollars to not have a potential penalty, and so we weren't saying necessarily to shut them down when it hit that mark but exactly what this bill would do. It's like have a review. Maybe they need to be repurposed, maybe we need to change the mix of what they're offering or maybe we do need to shut them down. But at least once we hit the 20 mile mark have a review and that's what this bill would do. So because this bill implements two of our recommendations, we support it and I urge your aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 66, 'end': 79, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 158, 'end': 163, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2606, 'end': 2616, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Don Harper: good afternoon again, don rebecca harper with american legions. we support the concept and the bill. thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lorna Greece: lorna don greece, military officers association council of chapters. we support this bill, also in concept.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Frederick Romero: Frederick Romero with the American GI Forum. This is a great bill and we hope and we strongly support it and hope you pass it. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ray Connaty: connaty representing 15 veteran's groups including the three that just testified in you ought to give a round of applause to these people who show up at all these hearings and testify for their groups. this bill is a great bill and we really owe a great debt of gratitude commission for taking this issue on because they've spent more time on this than probably many other issues as well as the lao it'd be really nice if somebody could redo the antiquated military and veteran's code, if you're looking for something to do, but anyway, last year there was a bill, sb 980 by senator nielsen that got all the way over here with no no votes till it got to assembly appropriations committee. and this committee voted for which would have updated a lot of the military veterans code and that bill is back at sb 485. so we look at this as a companion bill and i want to thank the author for bringing it forward. thank you.
[{'start': 583, 'end': 590, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Pete Conaty: Pete Conaty representing 15 Veterans Groups, about a half a million veterans, and the National Guard Association. And while we do not have a letter because we got this bill very late and I have 80 Veterans bills I'm working on in both houses. The majority of which never come to this Committee, we are in support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Don Harper: good afternoon again, harper with american legion. we are strongly in support of this bill, so we can connect all the dots and make sure the process goes quicker for the veterans applying. thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lauren Agreath: Lauren Agreath, Military Officers Association Council of Chapters. We support this bill also.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Frederick Romero: frederick lorna romero with the american gi forum of california and we strongly support this bill also.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carol D'Elia: carol frederick d'elia, little hoover commission, we do support the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jim Luby: Madam Chairman, I'm Jim Luby, National Guard Association of California and we support AB 897. It's a valuable measure that would simply require the military department to provide retired state military reserved members, who honourably served 10 years or more with a retired ID card. The California State Military Reserve members serve for free unless theyre activated. Under current state Military Reserve regulations, members who complete 10 or more years of the SMR service may be transferred into the SMR retired list, though ID cards are authorized, both State military Reserve members are not always issued them. Furthermore, state military Reserve members who retire are required to return their State Military Reserve ID card upon retirement. A retirement ID card would send a message of thanks to retired members, other states have the state Military Reserve equivilent, they do issue retired ID cards. Many California counties, cities and businesses offer military and state military Reserve members discounts and services, these included admission to things like fares, free parking, free fishing boat launches, etcetera. However, an ID card is required, retired SMR members don't receive benefits because they don't have an ID card. We urge an aye vote for this valuable measure that will provide retired SMR members with a retired ID card, thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pete Contay: madam chairman, members, pete carol contay, here on behalf all the groups listed and as jim mentioned, when this new legislative of year begin and i was contracted for by national guard association and put in bills about the smr, i really didn't know that much about the smr. as a matter of fact in order to understand it, i put together the fact sheet you just now have in front of you and so, i want you to understand what we're talking about. smr members who retire who have no connection to the service are the only people connected to the military who do not get a retired id card. 20% of the people in the smr have never served in the service and are never going to serve in the service, they are doctors, they are dentists, they are lawyers and to have a good year of credit of what's the 10 years are required, they must attend a drill day once a month, where they train side by side with their national guard counterparts who are being paid to be there. so once a month, at their own expense for gas, food, and lodging, they go to their drill assignment in a uniform that they have paid for by themselves, for themselves. and this uniform, a pair of boots costs $125, a total work uniform up to 300 and there's an expectation that they will buy a dress uniform, which would cost upwards of $500, and they do this for 10 years. and not every, so i mentioned not all of them get an id card. but i have also since learned the only thing they do is not to be called up when the national guard is called up. they helped men, the oes emergency action center, they are on call, they go to training to learn about the military, they attend courses put on by fema about the urgency or the emergencies we have in california. if i can find it, for example for the fema courses they attend, radiological emergency management, introduction to hazardous waste, building for earthquakes, animals and disasters, civil rights and fema disaster alerts. these are the people, these are the citizens that are protecting california because of their patriotism, and their pride, and their desire to serve, and they certainly deserve a little modicum of respect from this state and they should get a retired id card, thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 88, 'end': 91, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lauren Greece: Lauren Greece with military officer Association council chapters, we support the Bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Don Harper: don again with american legion. we strongly support this bill, thank you very much.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Don Harper: Again, my name is Don Harper with American Legion. We have to get ahead of this curve, the suicide curve in mental health prevention. So whether it's a prevention interaction and follow up. We have to make sure we connect all the dots. And make sure no veteran is forgotten. And these stats are really important so accept them. A better program for these veterans coming back home. Thank you and we support the bill.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jim Louby: Good afternoon, I'm Jim Louby, National Guard Association of California and we support this bill also.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Lange: Good afternoon, madam Chairman. Karen Lange on behalf of the Placer County Board of Supervisors. The data that this would produce would actually help counties develop programs that could be most efficient. So, we ask for your support today, thank you.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chuck Helget: chuck pete helget with the california association of veteran service agencies in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Frederick Romero: romero for the american gi forum of california and we also support this measure. and i was kind of thinking, i don't know if it's been done before but we were talking about that every veteran, when he comes back out, should register his dd214.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Don Harper: [silent] madam chair and members of the committee, i am don, we represent american region in california. we have over 100,000 members, in strong support of this bill cause it's going to help a lot of veterans. so please vote aye on this matter. thank you.
[{'start': 56, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lorna Greece: Colonel Lorna Greece representing Military Officer's Association, California Council of Chapters. We have 41 chapters from the Oregon border to San Diego. We support this bill.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Frederick Romero: hello, my name is frederick chuck romero and i'm the commander of the american gi forum in the state of california. and the department of american gi forum for california strongly supports this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pete Conaty: pete frederick conaty, represent the american legion hamburts, california association of county veterans service officers, california state commanders veterans council and vietnam veterans of america and we're in support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Newmark: thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today about the eitc. my name is david jonah newmark. i'm chancellor's professor of economics at uc irvine and i direct the economic self-sufficiency policy research institute, or espry. espry receives foundation, university and donor support to see how to improve public policy and increase the ability of individuals and families. to become economically self-sufficient. i'm not here to advocate for or against a bill under consideration. rather, i'm here to tell you what the research says about the effectiveness of the eitc. and what this might imply for the proposal in ab 225 to increase the number of california families eligible for the credit. and the amount of the credit available to those families. my research over many decades now has focused on the effectiveness of various anti-poverty policies. most notably, the minimum wage and the earned income tax credit at both the federal and state levels. and a good deal of research by espry affiliates, including other uc faculty, has documented positive effects of the eitc on other outcomes. ranging from children's health to academic achievement. i will not have time to discuss these other findings today, but i urge you to look at our review of the research on the eitc on the espry website. and i'm happy to share my statement, which has the url listed. my research on the eitc leads to a few key conclusions i think you'll find interesting. on here i draw mainly on my worker with bill washer from the federal reserve board. first, a more generous earned income tax credit boosts employment of lower-skilled adults who stand to benefit most from the policy, predominantly single mothers. second, because female-headed households, i.e., single mothers, have very high poverty rates, the eitc reduces poverty. third, a more generous eitc increases the number of families who earn their way out of poverty. for example, our evidence says that a 10 percentage point increase in a state's eitc supplement reduces the share of single mothers below one-half of the poverty line by about 3.3 percentage points. and reduces the share of single mothers below the poverty line by about 2.2 percentage points. let me just elaborate on this last result, to make sure you know what it means. we can always reduce poverty by simply writing checks to poor families. but that's a very expensive proposition and runs counter to our pre-disposition to alleviating poverty whenever possible through work. the magic of the eitc, if you will, is that it provides sufficiently strong work incentives. that it reduces poverty even before you take account of the eitc payment. and that's because of the strong employment effect it induces. in my view, the evidence at the eitc induces more families to earn their way out of poverty. that is its unique ability to alleviate poverty by encouraging work explains the historical bi-partisan support for more generous eitc at the federal and many state levels. i should also point out, these findings are driven, in large part, by variation in eitcs that other states have adopted. there are currently 27 states, including dc, that supplement the federal eitc. however, most of these other states simply add a percentage to the federal eitc, for which a family is eligible. and hence, the income range over which families are eligible is much wider than under california's eitc. this suggests that under ab 225 by moving california's eitc closer to the structure of other states, which see more of the employment increases and poverty reductions that have followed from other state eitcs.
[{'start': 81, 'end': 100, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1497, 'end': 1508, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Stephanie Robertson: madam chair, the committee members, stephanie david robertson on behalf of cna proud sponsors of the bill. we hope that this bill enjoys passage.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lee Adara: Good morning Madam Chair and Committee Members, my name is Lee Adara and I'm speaking on behalf of the California State PTA and over 800,000 members, in strong support of AB 424. PTA recognizes the importance of a safe learning environment and attaining the highest level of student learning and achievement. We believe the most effective day-to-day climate to be gun free. I'm asking you for your support for AB 424.
[{'start': 59, 'end': 68, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tristan Brown: Thank you Madam Chair and members. Tristan Brown at the California Federation of Teachers, here in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cindy Gustillo: good morning, madam chair and members. gustillo at the faculty association of california community colleges in support.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sam Perez: Madam Chair and members. Sam Perez representing Gun Owners of California and the National Rifle Association, the California Rifle and Pistol Association and the firearms policy coalition in strong opposition to this bill that purports to close a loophole that was never a loophole. As a matter of fact, Senator Wolk who testified in this Committee specifically said that she felt that the responsibility as to whether people should be allowed to carry with concealed weapons permits on campuses should lie on the shoulders of school administrators.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 311, 'end': 315, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lizzie Buko: thank you. good morning, madam chair, members of the committee. lizzie stephanie buko at the aclu california in respectful opposition to ab 927 which would provide $10 million from the general fund for law enforcement services for private schools. we feel this is a harmful use of $10 million that would result in reducing the safety of school campuses, particularly for students of color. as the analysis points out, there's not been a demonstrated need for law enforcement services, for supplemental law enforcement services, at private schools. what we do know is that when law enforcement is stationed on school campuses and patrolling school campuses, we do see an increase in school-based arrests, which is correlated with increases in students becoming further involved in the criminal justice system and dropping out of school. we're also very concerned that this money is going through the bscc. the bscc is a board that is dominated by law enforcement, does not have any educators on the board. their expertise is in building jails and programs that are involving people involved with the justice system, not in creating supportive learning environment. so for these reasons, we are opposed to ab 927. thank you.
[{'start': 64, 'end': 85, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Larry Doyle: doyle, on behalf of the conference of california's bar association we're the source of the bill. this is, as they say, a bill about parity, about fairness. and it's also, fiscally makes a lot more sense to be able to get small fines than to have people doing time in prison and costing the state money that way.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : good lizzie morning, lizzie madame lizzie chair, lizzie pamela lizzie gibbs lizzie representing lizzie the lizzie los lizzie angeles lizzie county lizzie office lizzie of lizzie education, lizzie and lizzie we lizzie are lizzie in lizzie strong lizzie support lizzie of lizzie this lizzie bill. lizzie we lizzie think lizzie it'll lizzie help lizzie stabilize lizzie the lizzie teacher lizzie core lizzie and lizzie result lizzie in lizzie savings lizzie in lizzie the lizzie future, lizzie so lizzie we lizzie urge lizzie your lizzie support.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 35, 'end': 41, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 49, 'end': 55, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 56, 'end': 62, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 63, 'end': 75, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 76, 'end': 82, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 96, 'end': 102, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 107, 'end': 113, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 147, 'end': 153, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 161, 'end': 167, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 171, 'end': 177, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 189, 'end': 195, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 200, 'end': 206, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 210, 'end': 216, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 221, 'end': 227, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 231, 'end': 237, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 245, 'end': 251, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 260, 'end': 266, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 270, 'end': 276, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 282, 'end': 288, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 295, 'end': 301, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 305, 'end': 311, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 318, 'end': 324, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 331, 'end': 337, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 343, 'end': 349, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 360, 'end': 366, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 371, 'end': 377, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 386, 'end': 392, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 398, 'end': 404, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 409, 'end': 415, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 423, 'end': 429, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 433, 'end': 439, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 448, 'end': 454, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 458, 'end': 464, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 465, 'end': 482, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 484, 'end': 490, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 494, 'end': 500, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 504, 'end': 510, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 516, 'end': 522, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 528, 'end': 534, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Leah Derrick: Leah Derrick, California State PTA, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sue Vang: Sue Vang on behalf of State Superintendent of Public Instruction, sponsor of this bill, ask for your support, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 8, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lynn Fox: good morning, lynn  fox in behalf of the california music education association, the california art educators, and filling in for the california alliance for our education, all in strong support of the bill and asking for your support. thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 22, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Karen Lange: Good morning, Madam Chair and Members. Karen Lange on behalf of Mayor Edwin Lee and the City and County of San Francisco and the San Francisco Commission on the Status of Women. Both in support, thank you.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 70, 'end': 79, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cory Zalzone: Cory Zalzone on behalf of the California State Sheriff's Association. We share the author's intent that sexual assaults be investigated and perpetrators not go unpunished, but unfortunately, we are in opposition to the bill today. Requiring this reporting to DOJ regardless of the method will take time and resources. This is another unfunded mandate in the wake of several recent unfunded mandates on law enforcement. Not the least of which AB 953 on racial profiling, so we'd ask for your no vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ronald Coleman: good morning, ronald lynn coleman here on behalf of the california immigrant policy center here in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : anybody ronald from ronald the ronald audience ronald wishing ronald to ronald speak ronald in ronald favor ronald of ronald this? ronald in ronald opposition? ronald department ronald of ronald finance? ronald nope.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 14, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 20, 'end': 26, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 31, 'end': 37, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 47, 'end': 53, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 62, 'end': 68, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 72, 'end': 78, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 85, 'end': 91, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 95, 'end': 101, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 108, 'end': 114, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 118, 'end': 124, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 131, 'end': 137, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 141, 'end': 147, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 160, 'end': 166, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 178, 'end': 184, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 188, 'end': 194, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 204, 'end': 210, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Estella Cisneros: Good afternoon, Madam Chair and Committee Members. My name is Estella Cisneros. I'm the directing attorney of the Fresno Migrant Office of California Rural Legal Assistance, Inc. CRLA is a non-profit legal service program founded in 1966 to represent the low-income residents of California's rural communities. Although we have 19 offices throughout the state, 6 of these offices assist agricultural workers exclusively. As legal advocates, our attorneys and community workers are at the front lines of what has gone wrong and continues to go wrong in the agricultural workplace. Including the problem that SB 295 would help ameliorate, the pervasive and rampant workplace sexual harassment of both men and women by farm labor contractors. I have been asked by Senator Monning to give remarks on the need for SB 295 based on my experience as an attorney for farm workers. As their representative today, I will give voice to just two of their stories. A female client worked alone with one male supervisor in the shipping and maintenance area of a ranch from mid 2015 through mid 2016. The sexual harassment began during her first month at work, when her supervisor came up behind her and hugged her tightly. She pushed him away and realized there were other supervisors who had witnessed the harassment, but had done nothing. She complained to her ranch manager, who also did nothing. She endured cat calls, sexual comments, and various forms of grabbing and touching on an almost daily basis for over a year, mostly from her direct supervisor. Even after she complained to the Human Resources department and the harasser was fired, she continued to be treated the same way by other co-workers and supervisors because the tone had been set by that first supervisor and his superiors who did nothing for almost a year. The effect of the sexual harassment on our client is difficult to quantify. She no longer feels comfortable in her own skin. Even when she's not working in the fields she covers her face with handkerchiefs and wears two tight sports bras and loose clothing to hide her figure. She was suicidal, continues to see a psychologist, and has suffered setbacks in her romantic relationships. Her training on sexual harassment consisted of a single 15 minute meeting where she was handed a brochure with no explanation or discussion. In 2015 and 2016 a female client in a packing house was sexually harassed by two different foremen during two different seasons. The first foreman touched her leg and bottom with his leg. And asked her out multiple times, even though she kept telling him no. When she turned him down he would yell expletives at her and tell her to take off her top so he could see her body better. He would then put her to work by herself and was constantly changing her job tasks in retaliation. When she was working, he would sit in front of her and stare at her breasts. Other times, he would sit behind her, and when she bent down, her bottom would touch his knees. She would ask him to move but he wouldn't. He would also tell her coworkers this one isn't leaving here alive. The second foreman, who worked with the first foreman, told her that in order for her to be hired for the coming season she had to go out with him, she refused. When she started working he continued to ask her out and she continued to refuse him. While she was working, he would threaten to fire her, telling her he would only hire men for his crew because women were worthless. They only cause trouble, and he didn't want any women working for him. He would retaliate against her by giving her more difficult job duties. Although she complained to a supervisor and the Human Resources department after the foreman was disciplined she continued to be treated poorly by her coworkers, like our first client. One of her coworkers who was related to the second foreman threatened her, "you don't know what's going to happen to you". On another occasion another coworker yelled at her, "effing dog". She didn't receive any training on sexual harassment. In conclusion, SB 295 is needed because the problem of rampant and pervasive sexual harassment in the fields, various packing houses, and nurseries in California is alive and well. While SB 295's predecessor, SB 1087, was an incredibly important and critical first step in helping address this terrible problem, there remains much work to be done. And for these reasons I support SB 10, excuse me, SB 295. Thank you for your time and attention.
[{'start': 62, 'end': 78, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Schacht: Yes, thank you Madam Chair, members. Mark Schacht, California Rural Legal Assistance Foundation. We sponsor the bill. We would like to thank Senator Monning for his leadership. I've distributed to the Committee an update on the spreadsheet that we provided the Committee earlier showing the results of farm worker interviews in 12 rural counties. We were interested in finding out from the workers we interviewed whether they and the crew they worked on had been trained? How long the training was and whether they'd been given the required record of their training along with the Department of Fair Employment and Housing Sexual Harassment pamphlet? The interviewees were individuals and members of crews, totaling more than 1,230 workers. Of these, you'll see that 236 were not trained at all, that's 19.2%. Even though statute requires that every worker be trained at the time of hire. 240 were trained 20 minutes or less. That's 19.4%, which we believe is insufficient to provide the minimum training required by the statute. Finally, those that were trained, 42.5% were given no record at all of their training, which is a critical failing on part of the industry. Because many foreign labor contractors utilize their supervisors to conduct the training. And many of those supervisors have been implicated in sexual harassment of farmworker women. The record of the original Monning bill requires not only the date of the training, but the name of the trainer. And that might become important down the road if there's subsequent harassment. We think the only fair conclusion that you can draw from these results if there's a significant segment of the industry. Thanks very much, there's no button on this one. A significant segment of the industry is in non-compliance. And we think that bill goes a long way to addressing the concerns that we've identified in the form of verisimilitude through surveys. We ask for your support.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 149, 'end': 156, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nicholas Chavez: nicholas jonah chavez on behalf of the united farm workers, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Gearing: Good afternoon, Jennifer Gearing on behalf of Defenders of Wildlife in strong support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 24, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Juan Altamirano: Juan Altamirano on behalf of Audobon California, and strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Romo: good afternoon, michael nicholas romo on behalf of 350 bay area, san diego 350 and fossil free california, in strong support of sb 50.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rhea Aganaldo: thank you. good afternoon members of the committee. my name is aganaldo. i am the northern california outreach manager for small business majority. i'm here to convey small business majority support for sb 63 and i wanted to also applaud chair jackson for introducing a bill that's important to california's employers as well as employees and their families. small business majority is a national small business education and advocacy organization. we're headquartered in the bay area. and through advocacy and outreach and education, we support small business owners to make sure that they can continue to grow our local economies and our national economy as well. as a representative of 28 million small businesses in america, and 3.6 million here in california, we strongly support sb 63, which would provide 12 weeks of job protected maternity and paternity leave for california's small businesses and their employees. as part of advocacy work we conduct scientific opinion polling to gauge small business owners' views on whole host of policy issues. so, as senator jackson mentioned, we conducted a national scientific poll during february 8th through 13th of this year of 512 small business owners across the country. i wanted to share some of the findings from our poll that are relating to support for this bill. we found a majority of small business owners and operators support paid family leave insurance pools, which provide employees with a portion of wages for a limited number of weeks when an employee has a serious illness or has a new baby to take care of or to take care of a seriously ill family member. small employers support state administered paid family and medical leave insurance pools like california paid family leave program. and that was mentioned today. 61% support state paid family leave programs funded by both employer and employee contributions. and 56% support programs funded entirely by employee contributions. in terms of the job protection piece, we also know from our polling that small business owners support extending job protections to employees when they need to take time off from work to care for a new child. 71% support expanding job protection from businesses with 50 or more to those with 20 or more. so, as we mentioned here in the state current law covers job protection for employers that have 50 or more. so, just to sort of reiterate on the importance of that point. 73% of employers between 20 and 99 employees support extending job protection. so, really looking at the subset of employers within that 20 to 99 range. and it's also important to note that small employers, seven in 10 small businesses have some type of policy that we polled, whether it's formal or informal. and that being said, although small businesses have the interest in setting up family leave policies, the vast majority of smaller businesses are really unable to provide paid benefits for that extended leave. so, what that really means is for smaller employers, it puts them at a disadvantage in terms of hiring and retaining employees as larger companies have that benefit in terms of setting up their policies. and then to close, we as an organization also do a great deal of outreach and education here in the state of california. we conduct education helping small businesses navigate local and state workforce policies under our healthy employees, healthy bottom line. and so, here within the state, i work directly with businesses in northern california. and i firsthand see that there is really overwhelming support in terms of what i hear from small business owners, and being able to offer paid leave to their employees. many small businesses consider their employees as families. and so, being able to support the growth of their families and being able to have family friendly workplace policies is very beneficial to small employers. thank you.
[{'start': 63, 'end': 71, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 244, 'end': 251, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1071, 'end': 1078, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alicia Lewis: lewis on behalf of the american association of university women of california as well as the american congress of obstetricians and gynecologists of california.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jenya Cassidy: cassidy, california work and family coalition, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brandon Roberts: roberts here on behalf of the health officers association of, california, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Aaron Lewis: Aaron Lewis for the Consumer Federation of California, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Seth Bramble : Seth Bramble here on behalf of the California Teachers Association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alicia Sanchez: Alicia Sanchez representing the California Medical Association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Barrera: Good afternoon Mr. Chair and Members of the Committee. Jennifer Barrera on behalf of the California Chamber of Commerce, and we are opposed to SB 63. We've had this debate discussion for a couple years now, and I can reiterate that we are not opposed and do not disagree with the social benefits that come with providing a leave for families to bond with their new children. I don't anybody's going to disagree with the social impacts or the medical benefits that are associated with that. So we're totally in agreement with Senator Jackson on that issue. However, we disagree that there is no burden to a business to mandate the 12 week leave of absence on top of an existing, already four month protected leave of absence for employers with five or more employees under our pregnancy disability law. To suggest that this is not a burden and that there is no cost associated with that, I think fails to recognize the implications of actually running a business. This is applicable to any employer with 20 or more employees within a 75 mile radius. So it's not 20 employees at that same location. But yeah, you could have five employees in a separate location and that's the location that's going to be actually impacted by the leave. A mandated leave means that you don't get to take into consideration the fact that there are other employees out on one of our other cumulative list of leave of absences that we have specifically here in California. Our paid sick leave law, school activities leave, bone marrow organ donation transplant leave, kin care. I can continue to go on and on with the list of California specific leaves that we have, and yet, we don't get to take that into consideration when an employee comes in and says, I now want four months of leave under pregnancy disability and an additional 12 weeks of new parent leave with regards to that. That's equivalent to seven months, and yes I agree that not every pregnancy results in a four month disability but the potential is there to have a seven month protective leave of absence on an employer that may have limited employees at one particular location. That's a significant burden and what do you do with regards to an employee? You can't replace that job, you have to keep it open for the employee to return, because that's the nature of protected leave of absence. You have to hire somebody, usually at a higher price, because the time that they're going to be there is more limited. So the contract for their labor's higher. Or you have to pay overtime for employees to be pick up that work. Our overtime rate continues to go up as the minimum wage rate continues to go up year after year. So there is a cost associated with that as well. And then let's talk about the other piece that seems to be getting some attention now, which is a good thing from our perspective, the litigation aspect. This would be defined as an unfair or a fair labor employment practice under the Fair Employment and Housing Act. And that comes with it, the private right of action with damages for back pay, punitive damages, attorney's fees and costs. That's pretty significant. There was a study that came out two years ago that said just the cost of defense is $125,000 for a small employer just to defend themselves in one of these lawsuits regardless of whether there's any merit. There's already existing stats that show that employers, large employers who have a dedicated human resource department, who have a dedicated legal department already facing significant lawsuits under our California Family Rights Act. So we have sophisticated businesses who just can't seem to get it right. We disagree with that. There's abuses under that law. For example we have cases that we've represented in our letter where an employee was out on their 12 weeks of leave. An employer granted them additional time off and then when they failed to return after that additional time off the employer let them go, and they sued the employer under the California Family Rights Act for interfering with their rights to family leave. So, there are abuses that are going on. We are concerned that those same abuses for small employers who do not have a dedicated human resource staff, who do not have a dedicated legal department will be facing the complications of implementing this law and will face the cost of litigation. So last year when we we're at the table we discussed the possibility of developing a mediation program that's already in existence to the Department of fair employment and housing and have that to be a mandatory aspect, to have any lawsuit that is going to be filed under this new leave for the parties to be mandated to go to mediation before the Department of Fair Employment and Housing act. Why? To eliminate that cost and that risk to that employer. From our perspective, it's a good thing not only for the employer but also the employee if you can resolve the dispute at the beginning. The employee may be able to get back to work in time and not suffer any job loss as a result of this disagreement on their leave. That was not taken but yet, again the comment is we'll one I've heard that, well, that's unprecedented. We don't mandate that for any other existing leave, so why would we mandate it here? This new law is unprecedented. We don't have such an extensive amount of time for a small employer with 20 or more employees. And then the other comment was through the Department of Fair Employment and Housing there's already a voluntary option for mediation, or it's a mandatory. That's only if you go through the DFEH investigation process. What happens for the majority of these cases is the exhaustion of the administrative remedy. Which is you go online, you fill out a form, and you hit the button that says immediate right to sue letter, you're giving your immediate right to sue letter. That takes maybe a minute of your time to exhaust that administrative remedy. If you elect to go for the immediate right to sue, there is no voluntary or mandatory option for mediation through the Department of Fair Employment and Housing any more. So that is not necessarily applicable again to this new leave. And we're requesting that we mitigate that litigation aspect. If the true intent of this bill is to have family leave and the bonding time and the medical time is the important factor of this bill then why not address the litigation piece that the government recognized in it's veto message last year and that them employer community finds so objectionable for those reasons, we are opposed.
[{'start': 55, 'end': 71, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 533, 'end': 540, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Chris Micheli: Mr Chair, Chris Micheli, on behalf of the California Ambulance Association. As healthcare professionals, I think we do our utmost to ensure employees have excellent working conditions and benefits. The fundamental problem here is that while the proponents expressed concerns that they might be subject to firing, the employers on the other side are concerned about the litigation aspect as Ms. Perrera outlined. The fundamental problem is that the bill adds a new section to the government code under the Fair Employment and Housing Act which as she indicated allows not only reinstatement but punitive damages, attorney's fees etc. And that is a huge burden potentially for employers. The Federal Government, under the Family Medical Leave Act, chose 50 employees to strike that balance to ensure that there aren't too many people out on leave, that there's coverage, etc, that there won't be undue cost. The NCSL says that 40 plus states adopt that 50 employee threshold. Although Senator Jackson has often noted that we're going in a different direction at least only eight or nine states offer something beyond what the federal government utilizes and there is that good reason. I would also note that this bill is far more expansive than last year's bill. Not only does it not address the Governor's veto message about suggesting is a viable option, I think was his terminology to utilize a mediation process. But the bill that got to the Governor's desk was 6 weeks and not 12 weeks. Thank you.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 394, 'end': 401, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 991, 'end': 998, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ken DeVore: thank you chair and members. ken with the national federation of independent business. as the largest membership based national small business association. we're opposed, and i won't reiterate the reasons that were stated here.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dennis Salviani: Dennis Salviani on behalf of the California Family Business Association. We oppose.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matthew Allen: allen, western growers association, we're also opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Dolan: danielle michael dolan, civil justice association, we also oppose.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dane Hutchings: Dane Hutchings, League of California Cities, oppose.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christina Gagnier: good afternoon, madam chairwoman, committee members. my name is gagnier, i'm a partner practicing in a firm that specializes in online harassment and law related to non-consensual pornography, i'm sorry that is a practice area of law here in california but of necessity. while revenge porn is often attached to the malicious and abusive acts that are perpetrated on victims that are being addressed by this bill, i want to focus on the truly non-consensual nature of what is happening here. these are often times men and women who are unwittingly victims of these crimes. they don't discover these crimes until maybe weeks, years later when they find images of themselves and other abusive content on the internet. the current judicial process often forces victims to essentially revictimize themselves. in the civil discovery process, by necessity you have to give up evidence. we're essentially asking victims to go on the internet and pull these images, pull this content and then entrust the courts and entrust their counsel to make a case they can seek justice. further, these civil actions are often a necessary predicate to removing content from the internet. so the victims are forced to go through the judicial process in order to remove these images and other content associated with these images. essentially, if this privacy measure is not added to existing legislation, we are expecting victims to potentially, even if it's unwittingly by opposing counsel, expose themselves to further humiliation and republication. essentially asking someone to repost a nude photo of themselves on the internet, albeit the civil court system and the public access records, but still, it's asking a victim to engage in that measure. i appreciate, though, as a first amendment lawyer and a privacy lawyer that there is a balance here between first amendment concerns, news gathering for the media, as well as the privacy concerns of victims. i believe that the amendment that appears to be accepted by the author will actually ameliorate that concern. considering that if the court can make this decision on a case by case basis, they are weighing the concerns of the victim. in terms of making sure they're not revictimizing themselves, republishing this content with the concerns the media and the public policy interest in general public interest in the media knowing about these types of actions, because often times the media is shedding light on these actions and making sure that further legislative measures can happen. that being said, i think there is a prevailing public policy interest here in ensuring that victims are often non-consensually being abused by this content. and if we are forcing them to have to go through the legal system and revictimize themselves, it is essentially a deterrent for these victims coming forth in the first place to seek justice. as an advocate, i can only tell my clients that i can, as much as possible through the current system, protect their interests. i'd like to 100% be able to tell my clients that i'm not going to harm them any further if i take them into a civil case. so i do ask this committee to consider the fact that even though there are some first amendment concerns, that the overriding privacy concerns the victims be taken into account here, so that victims can seek the justice they deserve. thank you.
[{'start': 64, 'end': 71, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dan Pone: chair and members, dan danielle pone for the judicial council. the council does not have an official position on this bill or the prior legislation that's there. we provided a lot of technical assistance, both that time around and now. actually, the idea for this particular bill came from a justice who is a member of our civil and small claims advisory committee. she handled a writ that went to her court of appeal based on a court that had inappropriately posted on its public website the pleading that was designed to be kept confidential. after issuing the writ, she had been talking with the lawyers in the case. and frankly, even though the original statute we thought was broad enough to ensure confidentiality throughout the entire proceeding and not just at the pleading stage, as she talked with the lawyers in the case, they were not clear on exactly how the discovery would occur, as ms. gagnier just indicated and sort of throughout the litigation. and so, it was her idea that we brought back to the author and to the folks that worked on the original legislation to see what might be able to be done to strengthen the underlying act and then we in turn, like we did last time, can adopt a revised implementing rules and forms to make sure that the original legislation and these tweaks are done in a way to ensure that people are being protected, not re-victimized as she indicated. we've been really happy to provide that technical assistance. we will continue to work in that vein with whatever further amendments might move forward on the first amendment issues.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 902, 'end': 909, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dan Pone: Dan Pone.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Abe Hejaila: Abe Hejaila on behalf of the San Francisco Unified School District. This is a top priority for the governing board, they're working cooperatively with the city and County of San Francisco, appreciate the offer bringing the bill forward, a strong support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shawn Tabakian: shawn jonah tabakian with the california apartment association and we support this creative bill. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Speck: jennifer shawn speck, on behalf of the california association of realtors, also here in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Winger: Yeah. John Winger, on behalf of the California Charter Schools Association, we currently have an opposed unless amended position on the bill. Currently the bill doesn't apply to charter school teachers, we think that the bill should apply to all teachers, but we're happy to continue talking to the author and the staff on the bill.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Theresa Cooke: Good morning, Theresa Cooke on behalf of the County of Alameda in support, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anya Lawler: Anya Lawler on behalf of the Western Center on Law and Poverty and the California Rural Legal Assistance Foundation in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Arvin Buckley: arvin, housing california also in support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Deborah Carlton: good morning members, and chairman. my name is deborah jennifer carlton, with the california apartment association. first, let me start by saying, we don't want people to go out of business. that's what we do. we represent apartment owners, like this, and individuals who own the sro type housing. what we want to make sure, however, that we do is not disincentives future rental property owners who may devise this type of housing. in fact we had a legislation here this morning, to encourage cities like oakland to put forth efficiency units like this. we don't see it happening enough in our cities and unfortunately what we also see, this is some of the most important housing. privately funding sro hotels, but in some cases, they're desperately in need of funding just to survive. the fire, as the witness told us, was a very perfect example of what some of the housing needs. i know oakland has done a wonderful job of encouraging this type of housing when it comes to providing funding. we want to make sure we don't disincentives cities to help provide the funding, by simply saying you must stay in business. i think that's a challenge if they don't come to the table to help some of these folks survive. so we're going to ask that we provide some sort of either amendment to look forward to providing the funding to help these owners survive. or that we just don't push forward legislation like this. so thank you for your consideration.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 71, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Justin Paddock: hi, justin on behalf of the california association of realtors. we're also in opposition of this bill. in essence, just to add to miss carlton's comments, it really doesn't behoove the city of oakland to actually force a business owner to remain in business when they don't wish to be. over the long term you're going to see services drop. in addition, the city of oakland sounds like resources are coming to make sure those who are trying to keep these hotels open remain that way. we ask for your no vote, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 135, 'end': 142, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brian Hebert: thank you, good morning, mr chair, members. i'm brian deborah hebert. i'm the executive director at the california law revision commission. as mr gallagher said, this bill would implement a commission recommendation. i'm very happy to say that our recommendation was developed in partnership with uc davis's king hall law school. we worked with law students there in the development of the proposal, and doing some of the legwork in the legislative process. i'm mostly here to be available to answer any questions about this fairly technical bill. and i'm joined today by eliza shae, who's a current student at king hall.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 68, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 146, 'end': 155, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 572, 'end': 582, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Eliza Shae: thank you, mr. chairman chu. i'm eliza brian shae, one of the law students at king hall, and thank you for this opportunity.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 33, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vanessa Guerra: Good morning, Madam Vice Chair and Committee Members. My name is Vanessa Guerra. I am a Project Manager with Mutual Housing California. We're an affordable housing developer that develops housing throughout the State of California and we focus on farmworker housing. And I have actually a professional and personal experience in understanding the need of farmworker housing in this state. I grew up as a farm worker. My family was a farm working family and we lived in substandard housing and understanding the need of having decent housing is so important. It affects the stability, and the health of these families to not have a decent home to live in. Having these simple changes made to this type of program is so important and I say this because it gives us the opportunity to really develop more of these housing in these remotely rural areas that don't have that local funding source or resources to really make these housing developments possible. With that said, I appreciate all of the work of that Assemblymember Garcia has done to push this bill forward, and I encourage you all to please support this bill.
[{'start': 65, 'end': 79, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1024, 'end': 1030, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Joanna Carman: carman from eden housing. eden housing was founded nearly 50 years ago by a group of local community volunteers in hayward, california seeking to build more affordable housing in their community. since then eden has grown to own around 8,900 affordable apartments throughout california and we house more than 22,000 low income californians across 15 counties. in addition to building new, affordable homes eden is also really committed to maintaining and preserving our existing portfolio of affordable communities throughout the state. in 2014, eden merged with another non-profit affordable housing developer in the monterrey bay and salinas valley regions. and that included nine existing farm worker properties, providing more than 250 affordable apartments home to more than 1,000 low-income californians. in 2016 we completed construction on a converted farm labor camp in soledad with 44 homes for farm workers and their families. and eden's farm worker properties have various layers of financing, range in ages from 10 to 30 plus years old, and are throughout the monterey, santa cruz, san benito, and santa clara counties. but they all have one critical thing in common, these farm worker properties are home to the farm workers and whom our food systems all depend on. the changes that are proposed through ab 571 will allow many more properties and projects throughout the state to be able to leverage this really critical resource. just for example, eight out of eden's 10 farm worker properties will now be eligible to utilize the farm workers state tax credit. leveraging local and federal funding and allow the capital improvements that are needed to ensure that these critical farm worker resources are available for generations to come. so thank you so much and we appreciate all of your time and your support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Augusta: good morning members, brian with california coalition for rural housing and the california rural legal systems foundation pleased to co-sponsor this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tyrone Buckley: tyrone eliza buckley, housing california, also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marina Wiant: Marina Wiant, California Housing Consortium, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anya Lawler: anya tyrone lawler, on behalf of the western center on law and poverty, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Speck: Mr. Chair and members, Jennifer Speck on behalf of the California Association of Realtors. We are the sponsors of the bill and would be happy to answer any technical questions the Committee may have.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Frank Aloia: I'm Frank Aloia, with the California Association of Community Managers and I'm here to thank Jennifer for incorporating our amendments into the bill.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 93, 'end': 101, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Shira Noel: Hi, my name is Shira Noel. I work as Policy and Advocacy Coordinator for the Homeless Youth Alliance in San Francisco. I also grew up homeless in San Francisco from the ages 13 til I was about 20 and it was hard enough. I mean, to get the basic things that you needed to get buy, food, access to a restroom, a safe place to sleep, and all dealing with other pressures. Violence, social stigma and just really trying to get by to make it, to survive. And not just as a homeless person, but as a homeless woman. Part of being a woman is that once a month, you bleed. This is something that since I've been housed I do sometimes take for granted. But as a homeless woman, this time could often bring about a feeling of hopelessness, of uncertainty, of despair, just compacting what I was already feeling and already trying to deal with and already going through. I never knew, I couldn't. Sorry, I get a little emotional with that, but I often had to improvise to take care of sanitary needs. I didn't know if I could confidently face society. Only impacting the immense issues that I was already living in and trying to work out of poverty. The shelters I visited and the showers that I could sometimes have access to, gave me a great confidence, but did not always have simple things, such as clean towels and tampons. Now that I am living, now that I'm lucky enough to be housed, and to be helping the population that I once was in, I work directly with countless homeless women. And I'm constantly being pulled aside on outreach, and one on ones, and asked usually in a really deep whisper do you have a tampon? And if you could see the look, and know what that feels like in your heart, you would absolutely have no objections to funding this bill. It's something that we deeply need, and it's often overlooked, and I really, really, please ask you to put this through. We need it. Thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Colleen Rebecca: my name is colleen anya rebecca and i'm advocacy program lead at st. anthony foundation in san francisco. we're a non-government funded organization that provide a range of services to poor and low income san franciscans and we're based in the san francisco's tenderloin neighborhood. i was involved in san francisco's establishment of a local ordinance called the standards of care which we worked on in 2007, which i think was the year before, now i suddenly remembered she was elected to the board of supervisors, so it wasn't something you got a chance to vote on on the board. but it was something that i know we've talked about at the city level. the standards of care set up, basic standards for homeless shelters, and this was something that was brought to the san francisco board of supervisors by homeless people and also by homeless service providers who wanted to see basic standards so that we could really ensure respect and human dignity within the services that we're providing in our emergency system for homeless folks. within that law, one of the things that is provided for is menstrual products for women in shelters in san francisco, along with other sort of basic health standards. and standards around food and standards around how far apart beds can be from each other just to sort of set up the basic standards that are similar to what would be in a hospital or what would be in a nursing home or what would be in a nail salon. the basics that you can expect for health and safety. and so recognizing that providing for basic needs is an important factor for stability for homeless people just as much as shelter can help people stabilize and be ready to transition out of homelessness. the provision of basic things like tampons and pads, these basic medical products, are something that is a very stabilizing force for people not having to worry about where you're going to get them, or if you're going to have beg, steal or borrow to find them is something that we have seen is, it's a very important psychosocial support for homeless folks, for people whose literally day to day existence is always up in the air and nothing's for sure. and as a nonprofit organization, we've seen that this is not something, tampons, pads, these are not something that we regularly get as donations we'll get donations of food, we'll get donations of socks, we'll get donations of little shampoos and those are all really needed. but it's not one of the first things that donors think of when they are thinking about our services and our guests and what people need. we have to really do a lot of acrobatics and gymnastics and put on like, special drives for products in order, and specifically ask, in order to get these types of products for women. so we're glad to be able to ask our donors for that, but we also think these products should be available for people, period, that need them. no pun intended. not based on sort of whims of donors, or the ability to successfully fundraiser do a drive. they're that important to women's lives. and so, that's why we hope that you'll support this bill and see it as an important piece of our shelter system in the state.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Gonzales: rebecca colleen gonzales, national association of social workers, california chapter, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nathan Pierce: Good morning, Nathan Pierce, Private Home Educators of California, want to thank the authors office for working with us on concerns we had on details, thank you very much
[{'start': 14, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Speck: jennifer rebecca speck on behalf of the california associate of realtors here, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicole Wordelman: Nicole Wordelman on behalf of Habitat for Humanity California and the San Bernardino County Board of Supervisors, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Rhine: Good morning, Mr. Chair and members. Jason Rhine, League of California Cities, also in support of the bill.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Watta: jennifer jennifer watta on behalf of the california association of community managers, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erin Guerrero: guerrero, on behalf of the california building industry association, also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Pariset: hi and good morning. thank you committee members and chair, and to assemblymember santiago, thank you for your leadership and commitment to fair housing. michelle jennifer pariset with public advocates. public advocates is a non profit, civil rights law firm and advocacy organization. that's been working to challenge the systemic causes of poverty and racial discrimination since 1970. we are cosponsoring ab 686 with western center on law and poverty and the national housing law project. title 8 at the civil rights act of 1968 known as the fair housing act prohibits discrimination in the rental, sale, or financing of housing on the basis of race, color, national origin, religion, sex, family status, or disability. in addition to prohibiting discrimination, the act includes a powerful affirmative mandate that federal agencies actively work to dismantle segregation and create equal housing opportunities. known as the affirmatively furthering fair housing or affh obligation. this obligation was flushed out by the obama administration to make it explicit that states, local governments, and housing authorities must take meaningful action in addition to combating discrimination that overcomes patterns of segregation and fosters inclusive communities free from barriers that restrict access to opportunity. unfortunately, we have been given every indication that we'll lose this important tool for fair housing under trump. republicans in congress introduce hr 482 and s 103 in early january with the intention of gutting the affh rules. hud secretary ben carson has called the rules "government engineering" and doesn't appear to be inclined to protect them. california law does not explicitly include this obligation and it is our intention to remedy that with ab 686. the people of california are looking to our legislature to reject the backward policies emanating from washington, to protect the progress we've made, and to lead the fight to expand opportunity for all californians. in closing, i want to point out that yesterday was the 49th anniversary of the assassination of dr. martin luther king. students of history may remember that king led the fight for the fair housing act. in fact, the last time dr. king spoke in sacramento, he spoke about fair housing. although he did not live to see the act pass. after many years of struggle, the fair housing act, this finally signed on april 11th, 1968, just one week after the king assassination. if ab 686 is passed and signed by the governor, it will come into effect in 2018. it is our hope that we can celebrate the 50th birthday of the fair housing act, and honor the memory of dr. king by seeing this legislation enacted. i ask for your aye vote today and for continued support as this bill makes its way through the legislature. thank you.
[{'start': 82, 'end': 90, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 154, 'end': 179, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1429, 'end': 1434, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1564, 'end': 1574, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2100, 'end': 2118, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2158, 'end': 2162, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2230, 'end': 2234, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2448, 'end': 2452, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2658, 'end': 2662, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rebecca Gonzales: rebecca, national association of social workers california chapter, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tyrone Buckley: Tyrone Buckley, Housing California, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shawn Topaikin: mr. chair, members, shawn michelle topaikin on behalf of the california apartment association, we are in support. obviously we are facing a serious housing crisis in california. efficiency units are some of the most affordable and fastest housing that we can have built. ab 352 will help encourage these construction and this is a small but important step to address our housing crisis and we ask for an aye vote. thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Speck: speck on behalf of the california association of realtors, also in support for the reasons previously stated.
[]
Paul Soter: thank you very much, senator dodd. my name is paul jonah soter of the law offices of paul jonah soter in san francisco. i've specialized in financial services compliance law for 35 years. my clients include banks, finance lenders, lead generators, money transmitters and factoring companies. i'm honored to be able to assist senator dodd, as a technical consultant, with regard to the cfl law and the law of long finders in california. and i appreciate his willingness to address an issue that's required attention for many years. the cfl law is california's basic lending law and it governs all non-exempt lenders making installment loans in california. however, the cfl law has two key flaws in the area of lead generation. first, the law contains no workable definition of broker. rather, the law defines a broker as one who engages in brokering activities and leaves and termed brokering activities undefined. second, the cfl law fails to clearly and consistently regulate finders, that is persons who introduce prospective borrowers to prospective lenders without negotiating long terms or participating in credit decisions. finding is recognized, under both california supreme court case law and in lending business practice, as separate from brokering. but it's not clearly addressed, in that way, under the cfl law. as senator dodd has just described, lead generators operate websites that ask for information from potential borrowers and pass that information on to potential lenders. the generators play no role in the credit decision but rather act as channels to introduce borrowers and lenders. in other words, lead generators act as loan finders, not as loan brokers. sb 297 updates the cfl by adding workable definitions for both brokering and finding and putting into effect the regulatory framework around current activity. the bill's definition of finder reflects the complexity of lead generation in today's marketplace. in a paper published last year the federal trade commission discussed the any different business models used by lead generators to pair borrowers with lenders. the definition we chose in sb 297 encompasses those different models. finally to be clear, sb 297 does not authorize nor incentivize new types of activities. it takes activity that is currently occurring and places a regulatory framework around that activity. by clearly stating the law as it applies to finders under the cfl, we are benefiting not only lenders and lead generators, but also the borrowers who use those businesses. thank you very much senators.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 33, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 46, 'end': 62, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 85, 'end': 101, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 333, 'end': 337, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1335, 'end': 1339, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jason Romel: My name is Jason Romel general counsel at leadsmarket.com. We're a California based lead generator and I'm here in support of SB 297. This is good for California consumers and here's why. First, the bill creates a systems of accountability. You can go online and find thousands of lead gen websites, most of those not owned or operated by CFL licensed brokers. You'll be hard-pressed to find who actually owns many of these websites, and you will not find consistent disclosures which help the consumer understand they're dealing with an intermediary. Which is the second thing this bill addresses, consistency and properly worded disclosures. Keep in mind lead generation is not just about setting up a website, as Mr. Soter mentioned. There are dozens of marketing strategies to reach consumers, and SB 297 would cover all of those. Third and most important, good lead generators with their compliance management systems, sophisticated data protection and vetting of lenders serve to protect consumers. Too much regulation, no matter how noble the intent harms the consumer. If reputable, law abiding companies are not able to compete due to a confusing, inconsistently applied or overly burdensome regulatory scheme, they will stop doing business here. There are many current federal and state laws in place to protect consumers, including statutes prohibiting unfair, unlawful, or fraudulent business practices, and we want those laws enforced. But we also want to system accountability for all lead generators. If it's relatively easy to comply and not too costly, even the little shops will participate. If over regulation pushes the good guys out, you automatically give the bad actors more prominence especially online where the vast majority of consumers go to look for financing. These bad actors are often oversees, and it's difficult, if not impossible to find and shut them down. As a California company with California employees, we care about our consumers, we are California consumers. We support SB 297 because it allows good law-abiding business is the ability to outrank and outperform the bad actors. We encourage your aye vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 720, 'end': 725, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Murray Shocker: good afternoon chairman and members of the committee. my name is murray. i've worked in the financial services business in california for over 30 years. i've worked as a store manager, district manager, regional manager, director of operations. i've been a partner and owner right now, i serve a role as vice president of operations for a franchise company. we run one store called spectrum franchise group in anaheim, california. we have eight franchisees that operate nine stores in california. all brick and mortar stores, we offer no online lending whatsoever. none of this business they're offering online loans, lead generations or anything. being small business operators, we've got a limited number of funds to market our businesses and find that lead generation companies can provide this a cost effective way to obtain new customers. unlike other businesses in california, wells fargo, bank of america, xfinity just a few examples. we are not allowed to offer a refer of a friend program to our customers. we support and welcome sb 297 deregulation of occasional loan referrals by non professional persons that will help us and other small business to compete in the very competitive marketplace. thank you for your time.
[{'start': 65, 'end': 71, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Scott Govenar: mr. chair and members, govenar here on behalf of the california financial services association, in support. thank you.
[]
Paul Donahue: good afternoon mr. chairman, paul paul donahue on behalf of opportunity fund, in support.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Bower: good afternoon mr. chairman and members, paul paul bower on behalf of elevate, an online lender in support of the bill today. thank you.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Greg Steiger: Good afternoon, Greg Steiger on behalf of Lind Up here in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 42, 'end': 46, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Greg Porter: mr. chairman and members of the committee, greg paul porter with the online lenders alliance, supporting the bill as well.
[{'start': 43, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Suzanne Martindale: Mr. Chair, Mr. Vice Chair, Members of the Committee, my name is Suzanne Martindale, I'm here on behalf of Consumers Union. We appreciate the opportunity to testify today, with respect to SB 297. Although we very much appreciate the intent of the author to shine a light on online lead generation activities, we believe that this bill does something quite different, given the implications for deregulating and permitting unlicensed third parties to offer at a physical location, California Finance Lender loans. And for these reasons, we respectfully oppose the bill at this time. We submitted a letter, which at the time had 19 signers. I have an updated version, we have 22 signers now from a range of community legal services, small business organizations from across the state who share our concerns. Also notably, we are sitting here with Oportun, the largest lender of pilot loans as well as CFO loans of 2,500 and up, because we share concerns about this issue. So again, we agree that there are significant concerns with the proliferation of online lead generation activities, and where there are real questions as to what the ground rules should be. Online lead generation is prevalent not just in consumer lending and payday lending but also in promoting education services. I mean, you look at on Google and you're going to see an ad for University of Phoenix, right? There are a lot of industries that use online lead generation. However, we believe that the bill as drafted does something quite different than the stated intent. The finders and brokers have long been recognized at common law as two distinct categories. The distinction is essentially this, that a finder is like a middle man, someone who brings parties together, collects their finders fee, and then leaves it up to the parties to negotiate their agreement. But by contrast, a broker is really an agent of a particular business. A broker helps bring parties together but then remains involved and has an interest in seeing parties reach that agreement. The broker maybe handling customer information, sensitive information such as Social Security numbers, and may be making decisions as to whether a potential customer matches a business's preferences for who they want to, say in this case, lends to. So, as it stands, finders are really only explicitly referenced in our small dollar pilot program in the CFLL, which several of our groups have been involved in. And we've been very careful to ensure that finders, to the extent that they are engaging more actively in helping facilitate loans that we want to make sure that there are protections there. So we have asked that, certainly under the pilot, that those finders who are really helping facilitate, and even go so far as disburse loan proceeds for example, are actually required to have a license under a relevant license to ensure that we have people with the right oversight and expertise conducting those kinds of transactions. Meanwhile, brokers are regulated, as previously mentioned, in the CFLL. And so you have to obtain a license under existing law, if you want to be a broker. Now the Committee analysis for the bill states that this would, that SB 297 would help regulate finders by codifying their activities into law. However, we believe that as written the bill really changes the definition of finder to include and permit certain activities that would actually be considered brokering activities. And therefore would otherwise require the entity to obtain a license. because again, we're not talking just about online lead generation in terms of this legislation. This legislation would permit brick and mortar third-party origination of loans. Therefore, we believe that this effectively loosens the regulatory oversight that currently exists under the CFLL. Not to our knowledge, online lead generators are not expressly regulated by states, mentioned in name in statute. However, they are subject to DFTC Act and to state UDAP laws. So these are laws that prohibit businesses from engaging in unfair or deceptive practices. The analysis, in fact, notes that the FTC did a study on lead generation, mentioning that lead generators are used in the online context in payday, debt relief, mortgage lending, and so forth. And the takeaway from this report really is that online lead generation is a new version of a long standing practice using third parties to market products and services, but it has unique characteristics. And furthermore, it raises law enforcement concerns, not just policy concerns, given that there are probably activities that these companies are engaging in that are already illegal. So, again, we acknowledge the author's intent to better oversee lead generators, specifically online lead generators. However, we do not believe that this bill in fact advances that goal. And believe that a better approach would be to define the practices and characteristics unique to online lead generation to develop a regulatory framework that better takes that into account. Because at this point, what we see happening with this bill is the potential for unlicensed third parties to be acting as agents of lenders and originating loans with no limits on compensation. And that reminds us all too well of the previous decade when we saw similar activities in the subprime mortgage lending context, and we just don't want to go back there. So again, I'm happy to continue the conversation with the author and we'll continue to discuss in good faith how to find common ground on this really important issue. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 64, 'end': 82, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ezra Garrett: All right, thank you, Mr. Vice-Chair, Members of the Committee, Mr. Chair. I'm Ezra Garrett with Oportun. We are a community development financial institution, which is a US Treasury certification given to lenders who make loans in pursuit of a mission focused on community development. Our mission is focused on serving low income families with little or no credit. And we have about 150 locations here across the State of California. And we originate over $2.6 billion in low cost, small dollar loans for families to help them build their credit. We respectfully submit our opposition to SB 297 as currently drafted. We understand the bill's intent to regulate the emerging area of online lead generation. However, we're concerned that the bill would also represent a fundamental deregulation of third party loan origination in the CFL through the use of finders. At present, finders and brokers are already tightly regulated and as part of that, finders are not allowed within the CFL outside of the tightly regulated confines of the California pilot program. Within the pilot, finders are allowed to operate under many restrictions and consumer protections that have been negotiated through several bills over several years. This proposal would unravel most of those protections, creating a new supercharged class of finders. And allowing them to originate loans across the entire CFL without limitation on interest rates, on loan size, and without limitation on compensation and incentives for finders for generating those loans. There's also no limit on the ability for lenders to pass the cost of that compensation onto the borrower. The current definition and regulations on finders within the CFL addresses each of these areas, specifically and with intention. We look forward to working with the Chairman and staff to ensure that SB 297 sharpens its focus solely on regulation of online lead generation activities, and we would also suggest that the proposal focus on studying the prevalence of these disallowed activities in the space and on ways to enforce current rules on those activities. Thank you for your time.
[{'start': 79, 'end': 91, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Garcia Lapointe: hi, i'm garcia greg lapointe with the center for responsible lending, and actually been a consumer advocate for more than a decade, was with national council of la raza first. so i just want to first of all thank the chairman for his good work on bills around the wells fargo scandal. i think he has consumers in mind, we want to work together. we don't think we have reached an agreement point here, so we respectfully are opposing this bill. specifically, for us, and important thing is, finders coming into the community speaking spanish, building trust in the community. that's where the latino community got in trouble in the foreclosure crises. that's also something we're seeing with pace loans these different loans that contractors are pushing and not really looking at affordability for borrowers. so we want to make sure that these finders are licensed, that they're regulated, that they're doing good work. there is a space of loans, 2,500 to 10,000 that does not have an apr cap. so 54% of those loans are at 100% or higher. and so, this bill at this point, would allow finders to push those loans into our community more than they are already in our community. so we are working on the assembly side to move a bill to cap those aprs and that's why there are no other consumer advocates here because they're actively working on that bill. but imagine two or three people behind me. but yes, we  respectively oppose and hope to work with the author on this. so thank you.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Soter: I'm sorry. My name's Paul Soter. I'm of the law offices of Paul Soder in San Francisco. I'm a financial services lawyer. This bill only addresses activities under the finance lenders law and only addresses finding for finance lenders. There's a separate statuary scheme that applies to differed deposit lenders, and of course an entirely separate schemes applying to finders of loans to banks and other chartered financial institutions. So, this bill is actually very limited in scope. Does not authorize any activities that are not already permissible under existing law. Rather creates a regulatory scheme for the Department of Business Oversight to be able to register and identify parties who are referring loans to finance lenders.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 59, 'end': 69, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Eric Weaver: thank you, chairman dodd and members of the committee and a particular thanks to senator hueso for authoring this important legislation. opportunity fund is honored to support senate bill 551 to increase the sustainability and integrity of california's capital access program or calcap. my name's eric garcia weaver, i'm the ceo of opportunity fund. i founded the organization more than 20 years ago to prove that small amounts of money and financial advice could help struggling entrepreneurs make permanent and lasting change to improve their own lives. over those 20 years, opportunity fund has grown to become the nation's largest nonprofit small business micro lender. we supported more than 5,000 california business owners with over 164 million in new financing. these dollars are reaching underserved entrepreneurs. our clients are 88% ethnic minorities and 39% women. this impact is statewide as we've reached over 80% of california's counties from rural shasta county in the north down to imperial county at the southern border. every loan we make helps an entrepreneur support an average of three jobs and every $1 we invest generates $2 in additional economic activity. these investments help business owners, their families and their communities. these results would not have been possible calcap without the program. while the businesses we serve are credit worthy, lending to them involves greater risks than traditional financial institutions are willing to take. by providing a small, but meaningful match on each loan we enroll, calcap helps lenders like opportunity fund build up a loan loss reserve pool to cover any potential losses. calcap provides tremendous leverage on state funds. each dollar contributed by the state yields as much as $30 in loans to underserved communities. robust ongoing participation from responsible small business lenders is integral to calcap's success and we believe that sb 551 will increase the sustainability, and integrity of the calcap program to ensure strong lender participation for decades to come. sb 551 would lower the required minimum match for both lenders and the state. by reducing the minimum amounts both parties can contribute to each covered loan from 2% to 1% in the loan amount. the bill ensures the public funds go further while still providing lenders needed coverage against risk. the bill also creates a formal mechanism for recycling funds within the calcap program that simultaneously supports multiple important goals. first, the bill improves program sustainability by allowing cpcfa to recapture any state contributions and any lender loan loss reserves that are above a predetermined threshold, just 20% of total loans outstanding for any individual lender. this allows cpcfa to utilize recycled funds to match new small business loans while also providing needed administrative funding. secondly, by ensuring that lenders have meaningful and predictable coverage against losses, it maintains lender trust and participation in the program. this is particularly important given that lenders make underwriting decisions on enrolled loans with the confidence that they could rely on their loan loss reserves if individual loans and, or economic conditions deteriorate. ultimately, both ongoing funding and strong lender participation are essential for the sustainability of the calcap loan loss reserve programs. the calcap programs are national examples of how to cost effectively support access to capital for small businesses. sb 551 will increase calcap's sustainability and transparency, which will ultimately benefit borrowers across the state. please vote aye on sb 551.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 24, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 89, 'end': 94, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 297, 'end': 315, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Claudia Viek: thanks. you've seen me nodding, so i'll just provide a statewide perspective to everything that eric said. i'm claudia eric viek, the ceo of cameo which stands for that long message that you heard earlier. california association for micro enterprise opportunity and we are a statewide network. made up of 122 business service providers, about 33 are community development financial institutions nonprofit, non-bank lenders, such as opportunity fund who's one of our members as well. you may remember that when calcap was started in about 2010 right in the middle of the great recession, these were funds from the obama jobs act that were specifically directed towards credit enhancements for businesses and communities severely impacted by the downturn. so, what we saw happening is that most of the businesses and most of the lenders went to cal to use the calcap credit enhancement were microlenders. and from that came, the very strong partnership between cameo and calcap. i have to just reiterate how important it is that this credit enhancement is continued and expanded into the future that it's sustainable and we believe that and it's also not just sustainable, but predictable. we feel that the way the bill is currently formatted also with the 20% threshold is going to provide that stability and growth into the future, and we feel it is just imperative to continue the calcap program for the targeted low moderate income, women owned, minority-owned. and the folks who still, as many of you know, have not completely recovered from our downturn. the equity is not there, and liquidity's not there. and calcap really helps plug that gap. so, thank you for your support of the bill.
[{'start': 96, 'end': 100, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 111, 'end': 128, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 613, 'end': 618, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Matt Schrap: hello, my name is schrap with crossroads equipment lease and finance, in strong support of the bill. we're homegrown california lender who looks forward to continued participation in the program. thank you for your support.
[]
Vanessa Garcia: good afternoon mr. chair and members, garcia on behalf of state treasurer, john chiang. we do not have a position on the bill. we just have looked forward to working with the senator's staff and the committee staff on the amendments, and we look forward to working on the bill moving forward. thank you.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 75, 'end': 86, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Hugo Harmona: Mr. Chair and honorable members of the Assembly Communications and Conveyance Committee, thank you for allowing me to speak today on this historic Committee. My name is Hugo Harmona representing Cox Communications, a family owned Internet and cable video operator with markets in Santa Barbara, Palos Verdes, South Orange County and San Diego. I'm here to provide just one example of how the current law impacts our operations since 2014 in just one of our Southern California municipality. Markets, and I should stress that this is one of our smaller municipalities. Cox Communications has spent nearly half $1 million on the forced relocation of our existing facilities. And we are anticipating eight additional projects again in just this one small municipality that are estimated to cost Cox Communications over $1 million over the next couple of years. These are funds that Cox would much rather invest into our fiber network to deliver next generation speeds, And the best services possible to our customers. I thank you again for your consideration.
[{'start': 169, 'end': 181, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christy Weiss: Christy Weiss on behalf of Comcast in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Colleen Dilloway: thank you, chair and members. i am dilloway from charter communications. i'd like to thank the author for working on this issue and bringing it forward. we are in strong support.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ryan Perrini: thank you, chair and members, ryan with southern california edison for the reason stated previously, we're in support.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ivan Altamura: ivan jonah altamura with global automakers, i defer to my previous comments, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Theo Pahos: Mr. Chairman and members, Theo Pahos with Ford in support.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dylan Sherman: Dylan Sherman on behalf of Sierra Club California, and we're in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: ignacio ivan hernandez again, on behalf of turn, same comments as the prior bill. and just to clarify, we do support the overall goal reducing ghg emissions in california. we do see the benefit to all californians in that. once again, we think they're all alternative funding available that rapier is already paying into, so we have to look at those pots first. we also think we need to explore shared responsibility in the funding especially if the ious are getting a rate of return on their investment. to the ratepayers' investment, maybe that's a pot of money that needs to be looked at. the turn did work with, i believe, i'm not mistaken with edison to resolve one of their pilot projects to ensure that there was kind of a shared responsibility, that there was an ownership up until a certain point in the infrastructure to help offset the cost to rate payers. we understand there's going to be a cost to rate payers, but if there's a way to balance it out or share it, that's probably the way to go at this point. and so, we'll continue to work with the author, look for pots of monies. and i want to thank the chair for allowing me to be the first person to testify twice and oppose in less than a minute.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cory Botts: Good afternoon, Cory Botts on behalf of the Electric Vehicle Charging Association. Once again, we have no official position for many of the reasons stated previously with our concerns. I'm looking forward to resolving those concerns with the author's office to support the bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 20, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Andrea Deveau: Andrea Deveau for Technet. Align myself with the former witness. I look forward to working with the author. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Parina Parikh: good afternoon, mr. chair and members of the committee. my name is parina and i'm the regulatory and legislative policy manager for clean transportation at san diego gas and electric. i want to thank the chair and committee for the opportunity to speak on this important issue. sdg and e has long supported california's clean transportation goals and believes ab 1082 will help the state reach its goal of having sufficient infrastructure to support 1.5 million zero-emission vehicles on california roads by 2025. i will focus my comments on three reasons why sdg&e supports this bill. one, reducing emissions in the transportation sector is an absolute must if the state wants to meet its statewide ghg reduction goals. this is particularly acute in san diego. while the transportation sector accounts for approximately 36% of ghg emissions on a statewide level, the transportation sector accounts for over 50% of ghg emissions in san diego. ab 1082 will help with our ghg reduction goals by expanding access to zev charging in our schools. two, we also need to help drivers get over the fear of range anxiety. in order to accelerate zev adoption, refueling or recharging should be as ubiquitous and convenient as with your traditional gasoline powered vehicles. according to the california statewide plug-in vehicle assessment by national renewable energy laboratory, california is only at 6% of the 2020 goal to have sufficient infrastructure to support 1 million zevs on california roads. targeting schools presents and excellent opportunity to install ev charging infrastructure that can be fully utilized by a diverse set of drivers. during school hours, teachers, students and staff will be able to charge their evs and outside of school hours community members such as parents, can use the ev charging infrastructure as well. in san diego, there are 42 public school districts with over 780 schools. this illustrates the vast network of ev charging infrastructure that could be utilized by schools. today, only a handful of k through 12 schools have any ev charging infrastructure in place. charging infrastructure at schools can also facilitate visibility and understanding of electric vehicles to the younger generations. education and outreach is important to accelerate ev adoption today and sustain it for the future. lastly, we support ab 1082 because it requires use of a time-variant rate approved by the cpuc. sdg and e has proven through a multi-year plug-in ev pricing and technology study that customers can be incented to charge their evs during off peak hours, 12 to 5 am and daytime hours when there are abundant renewables on the grid. sdg and e is in the process of implementing power your drive. a cpuc approved pilot which will send drivers an hourly dynamic, day ahead price signal, that reflects circuit and system conditions. this rate is designed to encourage off peak charging and charging when renewables are plentiful on the grid. this not only maximized ghg in air emission reductions, it gives control to the customer, enabling them to reduce their own fuel costs. ubiquitous and widespread access to charging and price signals to charge at the right time of day will play a critical role to achieving our ghg reduction goals. for these reasons, we urge your aye vote on 1082. i will be happy to answer any questions from the chair and members of the committee, thank you.
[{'start': 67, 'end': 73, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Theo Pahos: Mr. Chairman and members, I'm not sure how you follow that. But, Theo Pahos with the Ford Motor Company. I'll be really quick in my remarks, Mr. Chairman. We have to reach a goal of about 15% of new car sales, electric. We're at about 3%, and that tends to move when gasoline gets cheap, it goes down. And when it goes up, it goes up a little bit. When stickers are no longer available, which has happened from time to time, they go down. When they are available, they go up. We hover around 3%. We have a long way to go. There are a number of factors that go into the decision not to buy an electric vehicle. The biggest one is for sure range anxiety. We need as many of these as we can possibly build as quickly as we can so we can reach the mandate and those reasons, we support the bill.
[{'start': 65, 'end': 75, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ivan Altamura: good afternoon, chair and members. ivan ignacio altamura on behalf of global automakers. we applaud the authors' efforts to address charging infrastructure. we know that that's an indispensable part of building a sustainable market, so we thank you for your efforts and we support the bill.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dillon Schurman: hi dillon ivan schurman behalf of sierra club california in support.
[{'start': 3, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: Thank you. Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and Members. Ignacio Hernandez on behalf of The Utility Reform Network, also known as TURN. And we have an opposed unless amended position. First of all, I want to thank the author for bringing the bill forward and also want to thank her office for engaging in conversations and look forward to continuing our conversations going forward. TURN's on record as supporting the state schools and reducing GHG emissions. Our primary concern with this bill is the funding mechanism and I think we're at a point now that there's so much investment in infrastructure that is now in the pipeline. I think just about $2 billion was just approved or is in the pipeline through the CPUC for similar type of infrastructure investment. All of that right now is being paid for by rate payers. Specifically rate payers that are serviced by IOUs. We are now getting to the tipping point where how much longer are we going to only turn to rate payers and these rate payers to fund these projects? We think we are now at a point where we need to look into shared responsibility and shared funding as we expand this infrastructure. These ratepayers should not be the only ones to pay for it, especially when you consider not all these ratepayers will benefit and also there are Californians who will not be paying into these investments. So while there are billions of dollars already out there, maybe we can look at funding that is in existence already, already being approved, already being paid by ratepayers, and use some of that funding to pay for some of these projects as worthy as they are. Maybe we should look into public private partnerships it's something that TURN has pushed in some of the activity at CPUC to try to talk to you know, private investors and work together. The IOUs. Their shareholders are going to benefit from a return on the investment on the infrastructure. The rate payers aren't necessarily going to benefit from that. So we have a situation where the rate payers are funding 100%, the IOUs are not paying into it out of their pocket, and yet they're going to receive some sort of return on investment. So there's just a lot of issues with the funding overall. And so, as we look at these projects, we can't look at them in a vacuum, we have to look at all of the other responsibilities that have been put on the shoulders of rate payers and see if we can start looking at a different way to fund these projects, as worthy as they may be. So for those reasons we have an opposed unless amended, look forward to discussing this with the author. And really, with the Legislature going forward, that we don't just default to the automatic approach of requiring only certain rate pairs to fund 100% of this infrastructure.
[{'start': 50, 'end': 67, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1803, 'end': 1811, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Corey Bolts: good afternoon, corey dillon bolts on behalf of the electric vehicle charging association. we have no official position on the bill right now but are very supportive of the author's goals with this legislation. we do have some concerns that we raised with the author's office about the language in the bill requiring the utilities to install, own and operate the infrastructure. we feel that this would limit marketplace competition and innovation by giving the utilities an unfair advantage over other private sector entities. we are working through this concern with the author's office and we're very appreciative of the open and welcoming dialogue with her and her staff. so looking forward to resolving this and supporting the bill. thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 28, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Andrea Devough: Good afternoon Chair and Committee, Andrea Devough on behalf of Technet. Respectfully, we do not have a official position on the bill. I do align myself with the comments made from the former witness. We thank the author for working with us. We are confident that we will be able to get to the point where amendments are acceptable, and we'd love to move forward in supporting the bill It's well-intentioned, and thank the author again for working with us. Thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Fred Jones: Mr. Vice Chair, Chairman, Senators, my name is Fred Jones. I'm here on behalf of the Professional Beauty Federation of California, so we're based only in this state. We thank the authors in the various stakeholders who have been trying to work out a fix to how we apply piece rate to our industry. I can tell you, before AB 1513 passed, the vast majority of our salon owners and our individual stylists were paid on a Commission basics. For time in memorial, 1513 really hit us blindsidedly. There is no legislative history in AB 1513's passage. So this very bill, so we're kind of torn on this bill. We are in the support if amended position. But because now we have a bill dealing directly with this issue on our industry. Some of our salons will lose the legal defense of saying we didn't even know that 1513 applied to us. Now let me say what this bill is and what we think, why it doesn't go far enough, with all due respect to the Chairman of this Committee. There are two ways to pay Commission for a stylist. One is just a pure flat percentage, you get 60% of everything you bring in to the salon. This bill will not allow for that for purposes of being called Commission. This bill says, which is the other way of paying Commission, we're going to pay you a flat rate, usually in our salons, it's minimum wage. Plus we will give you a percentage of everything you bring into the salon. That way the entire history behind AB 1513 is moot, because 1513 was focused on down time. What do you do with a stylist or any worker who's under the control of the employer but not working? And if they're receiving pure Commission that means they're not getting paid. So the blended approach that this bill calls for is a decent one. And I believe renders the entire piece rate concern moot. Now what is the concern that we have as we support that effort? The concern is that threshold, twice the minimum wage which is 2021 will be $30 an hour. And then and only after you pay $30 and hour, can you give them a percentage of what they bring into the salon? So this bill conservatively will not apply to over 90% of our salons in this state. If the law says everyone is entitled to at least a minimum wage when they are under the control of an employer. Why arbitrarily double that to qualify for something our industry has done since time immemorial? So we would respectfully request and again in all due deference to conversations with stakeholders which I have not been a part of, that as long as you pay a minimum of the minimum wage then you can add to that. A Commission based on some percentage worked out between the salon owner and the individual stylist. And let me just say we are grateful for the author for this bill because it recognizes an incentive pay to our stylist. The more productive, the more successful they are, the more they get paid. So we do want to support this bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Durbin: Hi, Amy Durbin with the California Medical Association, also in support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeremy Merz: mr. vice-chair and members, jeremy jonah merz, on behalf of the american insurance association. we are neutral on the bill. we are one of the parties that have been working with the senator and staff and proponents of the bill. we think this covers a very important issue. it came out of a reform we did last year to cut back on fraud, particularly billing fraud that we see going on too often in worker's comp. the two issues we have left, and i think we're getting there, are the timeline. it's 6 months right now but extended from 30 days. is six months too long? i don't know. our guys are looking at kind of billing practices that they're doing and seeing whether that feels right. i know they've justified the timeline in six months so that's one of the issues. the other issue making sure that it's emergency care in an emergency room setting. that's a big deal because we don't want to see that exploited and have too much care termed as emergency care and be a loophole to extend pass 30 day timeline that should be applied in all other situations besides what the proponent are stating today, but conceptually we're on board with what they're saying and the difficulties they face in identifying whether the injured worker is an industrial injury or not. so with that again we appreciate the work and we are neutral on the bill.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike West: Yes, my name is Mike West, good morning, Chairman and Members. I represent District Council 16, Painters and Allied Trades. Each year, the California Apprenticeship Council and the Office of the Chief of Apprenticeship Standards do great work and make great decisions on behalf of our apprentices. It's vitally important that we get this information into the hands of our Joint Labor-Management trustees and implement them as quickly as possible for the benefit of the over 500 state-recognized apprenticeship programs. The chief of the Das attends the Painters and Allied Trades' graduation ceremony each year and continues to complement our program's efforts to recruit and retain apprentices, including women and minorities. I want to thank the co-authors Senator Newman and Atkins for bringing this important legislation and I urge an aye vote on SB 789. Thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 767, 'end': 773, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 778, 'end': 784, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Steve Caster: good morning mr. chair and committee members. my name is steve jeremy caster. i am the regional directory of the painters and allied trades here in the northern and central valley. our organization represents approximately 10,000 building trades workers here in northern california. we believe that taking a deeper look into apprenticeship programs is a very positive thing that can only yield positive results. and rather than cite a bunch of statistics, and facts, and figures, i'd just like to cite one compelling example of that for you. we have here locally based in sacramento county a small business, an employer, who's owners served apprenticeships with our organization. they worked in the industry, the industrial commercial painting industry for approximately 10 years or so, before starting their own business. where now, they are a small business employing 50 to 75 workers. the make of which is about, probably 25% apprentices now participating in our program. but this particular contractor, again a sacramento county based, has just contracted the industrial protective coatings contract for the sac regional expansion that is going on out here in elk grove. so for that reason and many others, we would ask respectfully for your aye vote here today, thank you.
[{'start': 57, 'end': 76, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert Smith: just briefly chairman and the members, robert steve smith of the painters union in los angeles, we are expanding our apprenticeships. i met yesterday with the mayor of city of commerce, where we currently have one facility and we're in the process of opening up another 60,000 square foot there. we're opening up another training center in bakersfield. and we're looking in san diego area to open up another training facility. so our goal is just to bring people in, and with the best and accurate information that we can have for our employers. and to bring these folks in, these young folks in. we have been stressing to bring women in. and our veterans were looking very hard at our veteran class of folks that are coming though. and i think i just asked you to vote yes on this issue. it's very important.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Dombrowski: good morning, mr. chair, members. dombrowski on behalf of the california association of house services at home, sponsor of the bill. thank you, senator stone for bringing the bill forward. bill's pretty straightforward, but the issue it's trying to solve is really complex. this bill is really about mom, mom's done what she's supposed to do. she went to school, graduated college, she became a nurse. did good, met a young man, got married, had kids. quit her practice, stayed home, raised her kids. did what mom's supposed to do, i think most of us can relate to that. mom's now in her mid 70s, healthy, works in a garden, walks a lot, exercises. perfect health, doesn't smoke, doesn't drink. all of a sudden, massive stroke. she's found a day later, rushed to the hospital. she's going to survive, it's going to take her about a year and a half to get back. she's wheelchair bound, can't get herself dressed, can't get herself out of bed, can't eat, can't cook, can't bathe herself, so what options does mom have? she can stay in the hospital, very costly. health insure is going to keep her there for so long, she can go to an institution, spend her money, get on medical. the state's going to pay for her, kicked out of her home or she can get a homecare worker. the problem with homecare workers is these homecare workers provide services such as bathing, getting dressed, cooking food, that sort of service. unfortunately, even though mom needs this care because of a health care need, it's not considered health care. and therefore is not covered by your traditional insurance. mom is paying for this coverage to stay in her home to recuperate a 100% out of pocket. in this situation because mom had a severe stroke she needs 24 hour care, right? help getting out of bed, help getting dressed, help going to the bathroom in the morning. cooking her food so she can eat it, moving her wheelchair to the family room so she can watch a little tv. she's going to a physical therapy every day, that's covered the health insurance. she's getting speech therapy, that's covered the health insurance. but helping her get dressed and helping her eat, does not. last year, a bill came before this committee that gave overtime to domestic workers, these home care aides. and what that cost? it's made care for 24 hour care, depending on where you're at in california, and with minimum wage going up to $15 an hour up to 15 to $20,000 a month, not a year, a month. i don't know how many individuals can afford that. so what options does she have? well she can not do 24 hour care, she can do 8 hour shifts equaling up, that's 6 to 8 caregivers coming in and out of mom's home every week. not much continuity of care there, but it brings the cost down a little bit. maybe now we're talking 10 to $15,000 a month again, out of pocket because unfortunately, this service isn't covered by healthcare. this bill is really just trying to find a happy medium to make sure that these home carried workers are able to provide a good living for themselves and their families. but also to ensure that these seniors, who no fault of their own, have some sort of health condition that needs assistance, but can't afford it. and not being kicked out of their home, because for whatever reason, they have a random stroke. for that, i ask for your aye vote. thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 152, 'end': 157, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tony Gonzales: Mr. Chairman and members, I'm Tony Gonzales representing the Home Care Association of American, in support of the bill. First, I would like to thank Senator Stone for introducing this bill. I can't add a whole lot to the testimony that has been presented already today, but I would like to mention one thing. About a month ago, I was at a work shop for home care providers in Orange County to talk about best practices and in fact and issues of the day. And one of the questions that was raised or asked was before the Mendiola decision, how many among you in the room had provided 24 hour home care? And every hand was raised, about 100 people in the room. Maybe 90 to a 100 people. After the Mendiola decision, how many continue to offer home care? Absolutely, zero. So we see that this decision has had a significant impact on our ability to provide critical services to many of our customers, our clients. We think this is a reasonable, measured approach to resolving the issue. However, if there are concerns that others raised, we would be very happy to sit down and try to work through those issues if the concerns are compelling today. We thank you very much for your support.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 157, 'end': 162, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 519, 'end': 527, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 694, 'end': 702, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Randy Pollock: mr. chairman, members of the committee, pollock on behalf of home instead and the 60 business owners throughout california who provide this care. we are in support of this legislation. thank you.
[]
Jina Shaw: My name is Jina Shaw, I'm an Associate Professor of law and Director of the Women's Employment Rights Clinic at Golden Gate University School of Law where we represent domestic workers. I was also one of the attorneys who argued Mendiola versus CPS Security Solutions on behalf of workers before the California Supreme Court. In January 2015, the court clarified in Mendiola that is absent express language, sleep time cannot be excluded from hours worked for 24 hours shift workers. Wage Order 15 has never had a sleep exclusion. And in fact, the Legislature has repeatedly rejected efforts to include one.  Wage Order 15 was passed in 1976, excluding personal attendance. When in 2000, the IWC considered extending minimum wage to personal attendants. They discussed and considered adding explicit sleep language to Wage Order 15. The minimum wage extension without an adoption of the sleep exclusion. In 2011, 2013 and 2016, the Legislature has considered including a sleep exclusion to domestic workers in wage order 15. And each time, no sleep exclusion was adopted. Even though neither the IWC, nor the legislation has approved the sleep reduction for this industry, many home care agencies do not pay for 8 hours of work for a 24-hour shift worker. These agencies have been repeatedly sued for not paying for this time. In fact, home care agencies charge significantly more for 24-hour or live-in care to consumers, because the consumer needs around the clock care and the agencies want to profit off of the backs of workers who provide critical supervision and monitoring at night. This bill would result in workers being coerced to give up their statutory protections, because there is really no equal bargaining power between a predominantly female immigrant workforce and private for profit agencies. For these reasons, the Committee should vote no on SB 482.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 229, 'end': 237, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Young: Thank you, Mr. Chair, Committee Members. Michael Young with the California Labor Federation. I will just also add that this is a core worker's right issue, a core labor rights issue. Any time that a worker is under the direct control of the employer, they should be compensated for that time, plain and simple. And also, this bill also implies that there is a fair balance of power relationship between the worker and the employee. However, any time the employer can say, sign this document or you're fired. That dynamic just simply isn't there. So, we urge you to vote no on this. Thank you.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mariko Yoshihara: thank you, mr. chair and members. yoshihara, with the california employment lawyers association. for all the reasons previously stated, we're opposed.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Beverly Yu: good morning, yu with udw afscme local 3930, we strongly oppose this bill as well, as it will undo the progress made to the california domestic workers bill of rights, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Lidam: sarah with the californian domestic works association and we oppose.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Myrna Palumpon: myrna robert palumpon. i'm from pwc, and i oppose.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Pablita Soria: i'm pablita myrna soria from filipino worker center, and associations of filipino workers and community. i oppose the senate bill 482.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Celestina Magallon: good afternoon. i'm magallon. i am the member of filipino workers center. i'm a caregiver working for 24 hours. i oppose the senate bill 482. thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Fred Pengal: hello. i'm pengal with the filipino advocates for justice in alameda county. and we urge you to oppose sb 482.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Myrla Baldonado: hello. i'm baldonado, of the pilipino workers center, a center of over 1,000 caregivers. and i'm also opposed to this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susan Grant: Good morning, I'm Senior Helpers Susan Grant, and I strongly support this because of the fact that my caregivers are being paid well within the law. They are making over $350 a day and the jobs are going away. The clients are not hiring us. We have people calling all the time to ask for live in work. We'd love to give it to them, we don't have those, they've gone underground. So please support this, our elderly need the protection. Our caregivers cost us over $500 a day with a burden. So we take care of them. Thank you.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeff Stone: senator mitchell, i think you bring up a good point, because i don't want there to have any confusion about the coalition. and maybe what we need to do is come up with a form of disclaimer saying that, you as the client or no way course to designing this agreement. or the provider. you're not coerced into doing it. this is a voluntary arrangement, should you choose to exercise it. if you, and she would market it to her employees, saying, listen, i've got jeff pablita stone. he needs 24-hour care. he's looking for somebody that's willing to sleep and not get paid. however, if you get interrupted and you have to take care of him, you get eight hours of overtime. are you interested in working under that arrangement? it's not. mandatory you do this. this is what he's looking for. if you fit the description of the services that he needs, we'll set you up. if you don't, then we'll look for somebody else. it's not going to be a one size fit all for everybody.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 16, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 459, 'end': 477, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Will Stanford: Will Stanford with Futures Explored, one of the community rehab partners, that partners with the Department of Rehabilitation over the last 30 years. We're actually very excited to be able to help kick off SB 644, and try and get folks hired into state service. In an ideal world there would be 6,000 folks with developmental disabilities and state employment to match the normal population, so we have a few to go.
[]
Katherina Gorgino: katherina jonah gorgino on behalf of junior blind, in support of the appointment of ms hargreaves. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 87, 'end': 97, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Catherine Campici: hello, catherine katherina campici, former director at the department of rehabilitation, and i can take credit for having hired kelly to the department. and so obviously i'm here in support of her confirmation. i'm also president of the association of california state employees with disabilities, it's a mouthful and department of rehabilitation works closely with acsed along with cal hr and the state personnel board. we did a year-long project, the joint recommendation on increasing employment of persons with disabilities in state service and i thank very much senator atkins for her comments. we really would appreciate your support along with that of dor and the other departments in working together to get more people with disabilities into employment and particularly in state government which has an excellent infrastructure for support. so, we strongly support kelly, she's a great partner, she does think creatively, she's bringing a lot of energy and passion to her position so thank you very much.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 128, 'end': 133, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 575, 'end': 581, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 874, 'end': 879, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Robert Benson: i want to thank you, wait, robert catherine benson on behalf of the california persons center advocacy partnership. i support kelly hardgreaves.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 126, 'end': 143, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jeannette Zanipatin: Good morning Chair and Committee members, my name is Jeannette Zanipatin. I'm the attorney for MALDEF, the Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund. I am here in strong support of Senate Bill 628. This bill, as Senator Lara mentioned, would delete the requirement that Los Angeles Community College District be elected at large, and instead would allow LACCD the option to be elected by trustee area. MALDEF is the nation's largest leading Latino legal civil rights organization, representing over 50 million Latinos living in the United States, which promotes social change through advocacy, communications, community education, and litigation. SB 628 is a simple straightforward bill that allows LACCD the option to switch its method of election from an at-large system to be elected by trustee area. The California Voting Rights Act of 2001 was designed to safeguard the right to vote in local, at-large elections, where racially polarized voting exists. The CVRA has played a critical and essential role in ensuring that local governments and local jurisdictions compliance with state voting right protections against unlawful voter dilution in these at-large systems. In the past 12 years, prior to this March 2017 election, 16 Latino candidates ran in 11 racially contested elections, yet only three Latinos were elected to the Board of Trustees. In the March primary that was held this year, seats numbers two, four, and six were up for election and three Latinos won the election to the LACCD Board. One election, however, does not validate the election system, that has usually and historically served to dilute the Latino vote, which is consistent with the US Supreme Court decision in Thornburg versus Gingles. In particular, the court in Gingles noted that the minority must be able to demonstrate that the majority votes sufficiently as a block to enable it, in absence of special circumstances, such as a minority candidate running unopposed, usually to defeat the minority's preferred candidate. The Gingles court went further to state that it is this usual predictability of the majority success that distinguishes structural dilution from the mere lost of an occasional election. LACCD is one of the most diverse community college districts in the state, if not the nation. Of its enrolled students population, over 58% of its students are Latino, 10.4% are African American, followed by Asian enrollment at about 7.1%. In addition, about 20% of its student population lives below the poverty line and about 20% of the student population are immigrants. Given that LACCD is at a critical juncture in examining student success rates and transfer rates, a growing and diverse student body, and the need to ensure that policies that LACCD adopt stand to protect its vulnerable population, the option to switch to an election by trustee area is an important tool at LACCD's disposal to address the growing, changing, and challenging needs of the needs of its students. The switch too election by trustee area would also ensure that LACCD is being responsive to the communities it serves. The Board plays a critical role in ensuring that community engagement at the local level, while at the same time ensuring that the Board is accountable to the trustee areas and the districts that it potentially serve. Furthermore, we cannot understate the critical role that community colleges play in California as a gateway to access not only higher education, but as a gateway to access the middle class through its degree programs, certification programs, and the ability to afford many students the ability to transfer to a four-year institution. SB 628 is a good government bill and for the many reasons cited above, we are in strong support and urge your aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 53, 'end': 72, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 230, 'end': 234, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1724, 'end': 1731, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Paul Bauer: Good morning, Mr. Chairman and members, Paul Bauer on behalf of the Los Angeles Community College District. The district does, at this time, not have a position on the bill. However, we anticipate having an official position in support soon. But on behalf of the district, I did want to come to the Committee and state our appreciation for Senator Lara's willingness to work with us to facilitate discussions with all of the stakeholders involved in this important matter. We look forward to continuing the discussion, dialogue and continue to work on the bill as it moves forward through the Legislature, and we look forward to a successful resolution of this matter, so thank you.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 348, 'end': 352, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
David Salo: i'm david jonah salo, mcgraw hill, here as a resource-
[{'start': 4, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Salo: so i'm david david salo, i'm with mcgraw hill here as a resource to answer questions, i'm in support of the measure.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alicia Lewis: we are support of amended. so alicia david lewis on behalf of the california association of college stores. and we do have our support of amended position that we've convey to the author's office. the california association of college stores is the nation's largest organization of college stores, serving students in both public and private post secondary education. the organization's long supported california's colleges and universities having the authority to explore different delivery models for course materials, including the innovative pricing and immediate access. we recently conveyed with the author's office that our concern is of the bill does not currently include consultation with campus bookstores when establishing the institution's policies. other states, most recently florida have an active language that included consultation with college source given the historic and central role that the stores do play in delivering all text and material formats to students. so here in california, the csu system's official guidelines for establishing immediate access programs at their institutions has explicitly included campus stores. while carefully constructed programs manage duplicate stores, like at uc davis, san diego state university, and de anza college have served as national models for the rest of the country. so our organization is in support of the overall objective that the authors aimed at for reducing the cost for college students who are ever possible. and we do look forward to working with author in her office as we move forward in organization's position. thank you.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Edgar Lampkin: good morning, chairman allen and members of the committee. i am dr. edgar alicia lampkin, superintendent of williams unified school district, a rural community, 45 minutes north of sacramento. i'm a member of acsa, association of california school administrators and i'm here today in support of senate bill 463. would also like to share that i'm also part of acsa's equity committee. whose purpose is to build capacity and cultural proficiency of all school leaders. throughout the state of california effectively. as we work towards this eliminating the achievement gap and access opportunities. we see that sb 463 is an issue that supports equity. and we thank senator lara for introducing this measure to establish statewide criteria for classifying english learners. as english proficient with the goal of ensuring consistency in the reclassification standards across the state. my district has close to 1,400 students of which 746, 53% are english learners. closing the achievement gap for english learner students has been a long-standing goal for california and our school leaders. it is known that the longer that an english learner pupil remains in english language development classes. the more limited that they are in their ability to access a full curriculum, and of course a through g course work. so therefore, it limits their ability at times to be prepared to be college and career ready for the workforce. reclassification is a monumental shift for english learners signifying that they're ready for mainstream classrooms. and our administrators support the effort of needing to have consistent criteria. in my community alone, just to share with you, colusa county has four school districts. it's a small county in comparison to other places, but just in our county alone, we compare our a through g course access given we have similar numbers of english learners. actually, our school district has a little bit more. then, the other three school districts in our county. and by working towards establishing some form of consistent criteria even within our district we've been able to go from four years ago 18% of our students being a through g accepted to 39% last year. at this point, we have closed to 63% of our students who are seniors that will be a through g accepted. give or take 10% which is normally an attrition rate that occurs. as students are not able to meet some of the criteria. in comparison to our other districts, that's not the case, and if you start to look at english learners-
[{'start': 23, 'end': 28, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 68, 'end': 88, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 672, 'end': 676, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nivia Gallardo-Ayala: Yes, thank you. Good morning. My name is Nivia Gallardo-Ayala and I am Director of Curriculum Instruction for English Learners Services Carona Norco Unified School District. I have worked with English learners for 36 years including 14 years as a classroom teacher. Corona Norco was one of the 23 school districts in Riverside Country. We are the 9th largest school district in the state, with over 53,000 students, including 7,200 English learners. I am pleased to speak in support of SB 463, which would establish state wide criteria for the reclassification of English learners. The purpose of reclassification is to decide when an English learner has met district establish criteria and can participate equally with native English speakers in regular instructional programs without support services, but current law is not align with this purpose. Existing law allows for each school district to establish its own reclassification criteria. In Riverside County, this would result in 23 different reclassification criteria. Where one district may require English learners to meet the Common Core standards, excuse me, while another may require passing one subsection of the language arts classroom assessment. This inconsistency between districts of English learners in several ways. First, a student may leave his district reclassified as an English proficient student, but upon enrollment into new school district. The student must take the state language assessment again, jeopardizing his or her status as an English proficient student. This is very confusing and frustrating for students, teachers, administrators, as well as parents. Second, a student who stays in his or her school district and meets district established criteria, that is less rigorous may be designated as an English proficient student too soon. Because an English learner student often loses access to support services once they are reclassified, they flounder in regular instructional programs. Finally school districts establish support systems aligned to their reclassification criteria, making it difficult to take into account the reclassification criteria created in other districts. SB 463, is critical step in the right direction to establish statewide criteria for the reclassification of English learners. Based on rigorous standards that are uniform and consistent as my peers have said.  It's also very important that SB 463 become the ceiling, the ceiling and not the floor. To minimize the opportunity for local differences which affect student success. Senate Bill 463 will also result in school districts establishing more consistent support system for the reclassification of English learners regardless of which district they come from. Thank you for the opportunity to speak, and I ask your support of SB 463.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Martha Alvarez: Good morning. Martha Alvarez I'm here with the ACSA, Association of California School Administrators, we look forward to working with the staff in continuing to improve the bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Elias Vargas: Good morning, Elias Vargas, a member of ACSA, as well, also current high school principal in Los Angeles County. This is definitely a current issue that needs to be addressed regularly, and we support the bill.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Hulsizer: madam chair, michael on behalf of the kern county superintendent of schools office, we're very supportive of this bill.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lean Lerry: Good morning, Lean Lerry on behalf of San Fransisco Unified School District and County of Education in support.
[]
Brian Howe: good morning, howe with california federation of teachers, we are in strong support. thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Martha Seragosa-Diaz: Good morning, Martha Seragosa-Diaz representing Californians Together and the California Association for Bilingual Education. Reclassification issue has always been very important to us in terms of making sure that English learners are not only proficient in English, but have the academic ability to compete with native English speakers in the classroom. I believe that this bill strikes that balance and so we support this version of the bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Leticia Garcia: leticia edgar garcia, on behalf of the superintendent of riverside county office of education as well as the 23 superintendents of the school districts in the riverside county, in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Baker: Good afternoon, Jennifer Baker with the California Teacher's Association. We support the direction that these Billers' working to achieve and we very much want to thank the center in this, great staff for the collaborative work they've done with all the stakeholders. The one issue that we're working on is intervention in the monitoring of students after they've been reclassified. We appreciate the conversations of the center's offices leaving, and look forward to where this is going to go.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Vonet: Good morning, my name is Michael Vonet. I work at UC's Dee Medical Center as a patient transporter I've been there 15 years. I commend Senator Lara, I know he wants to stop the UC systematic abuse of immigrant workers. But I'm here as a black man. While only 2% of the UC faculty and 5% of the UC students are African American, UC has done a historic level job with people like me. 13% of the service jobs at UC are held by people who look like me. Those are good jobs. All right, good jobs and great benefits that I support my six kids on. But in opposing Senator Lara's bill, UC estimates suggest that 7,000 of service jobs are now subcontracted out. If you ask UC of those 7,000 subcontracted jobs are held by African-Americans they'll say, they don't know. They don't ask, it's not their responsibility. Do you know how many decades African-Americans had listened to this? Are you going to accept that? I don't. Here's the ugly truth. Just about 100% of subcontracts service jobs defined in this the bill are filled by immigrants. There are more than a handful of African-Americans getting hired by those contractors. I work there, we see it. I will take each of you, and I will show you is it worth your time? I know it's certainly worth mine. The truth is those 7,000 jobs were staffed by UC employees, 900, and I repeat 900 more African Americans will have this kind of job that I have. Thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 143, 'end': 147, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 565, 'end': 569, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brian Allison: mr. vice chair and members of the committee, my name is brian leticia allison. on behalf of the american federation of state, county, and municipal employees, we are pleased to strongly support this bill. strongly support the efforts of our affiliate afscme local 3299 and we are pleased that senator lara saw this issue as one that he needs to continue to beat into the minds of not only the legislators who get it, and has been proven two times over now, who get this, but also into the consciousness of the university of california. when the third largest employer in the state of california is engaging in contracting practices that victimize communities of color we have a problem, and yes sir today we have a problem. and it is unconscionable that these are the types of practices we continue to employ. we need to step up, and hold the university of california system to the same standards that we hold the state, and local governments, as well as community colleges, and another entities across the state of california. we need to ensure that we are doing right by the communities of color in the state, but also in assuring that we are holding uc accountable to their flagship claim. and, ensuring that they are protecting the workers that they employ. so, i respectfully ask for your aye vote today.
[{'start': 56, 'end': 77, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 301, 'end': 305, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kimberly Rosenberger: Kimberly Rosenberger with Service Employees International Union. As I said earlier in the Committee, we are opposed to outsourcing, especially of good public jobs and we are in strong support of accountability and transparency. We urge your aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Young: michael brian young with the california labor federation. we agree this practice of outsourcing without common sense guidelines drives down wages and unfairly burdens taxpayers so we urge your support of this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Balla-Hawkins: David Balla-Hawkins with the CSU Employees Union. We're also in support of the bill. Thank you Senator Lara.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 103, 'end': 107, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jason Murphy: good morning, mr. chair and members. jason michael murphy on behalf of the university of california, we rise today in strong opposition to this bill. we have opposed this bill for each of the last three years. i want to be clear that the university takes very seriously its responsibility to provide appropriate compensation for all of our employees both on staff and contracted. for that reason, president napolitano felt strongly back in 2015 that there needed to be a minimum wage increase at the university of california. it's our fair wage, fair work program has been acknowledged already here today. i'm going to have a colleague of mine speak to the details of that here in a moment. but i want to point out that this measure puts the competitive bidding, low cost bidding procedures that have been directed to the university for decades on its head. it requires us not to seek the lowest cost for services and so forth, but rather the highest cost in many regards. this bill would have significant impacts on the university as well as our vendor community. for the university it would substantially increase both the complexity and the administrative burden of completing our bidding procedures. it would require us to continually establish pay rates and benefit rates for all of the different facilities within the university for which we would plug into our bidding documents. it would preclude the ability of the university to engage in extensions and renewals of our existing contracts, all to the detriment of administrative burden and additional costs. for our vendors, we believe this bill would have substantial impacts as well. the notion that a bidder that would have employees going to work at the university would be paying x amount pursuant to the bill, and the rest of their employees would be doing other salary ranges, we believe is difficult and problematic. we think that, that would ultimately lead to fewer bids coming into the university and higher cost overall. i had pointed out, the university of california has a language in many of our collective bargaining agreements with employees to protect them, and speak to limits on when the university can appropriately contract out. those are occasions where we are seeking special expertise or equipment. short term temporary staffing needs or where we're fulfilling obligations at a leased facility within the university. so those are the situations where we do contract out. at this point, i would like to turn it over to my colleague, bill cooper, who's our uc chief procurement officer, who will speak in more detail with regard to what we've been doing with fair wage, fair work in the minimum wage increase.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 407, 'end': 417, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2516, 'end': 2527, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Amir Casimir: Amir Casimir. Okay, good morning, I'm Amir Casimir with the Social Justice Learning Institute. And I'm a youth leader for the Brothers, Sons, Selves Coalition, and a proud representative of the Alliance of Boys and Men of Color. Senate Bill 607 is not just letters and numbers. It is a real, potential law that, if passed, will change the lives of many real people, just like me. I'm shocked that 90% of the people in the California State prison system were expelled or suspended from school prior to their arrest. This bill will help to eliminate some of these suspensions, and keep people off the streets and out of prison. In fourth and fifth grade, I was regularly threatened with suspension for standing up for myself and my grades. I almost didn't get into my honors class as a result, and would have, therefore, missed out on many of my educational opportunities and rights. Last week, my school announced a policy where we must wear our student ID around our neck at all times. Without it, we run the risk of being suspended or put out of class. The Los Angeles Unified School District gives restorative justice circles, instead of suspensions, thanks to the enactment of the School Climate Bill of Rights, which the Brothers, Sons, Selves Coalition helped to get passed. The School Climate Bill of Rights, a sort of trial run to SB 607, made LAUSD the first district to eliminate all K-12 suspensions based on destruction or Defiance. Since then, student suspensions in LAUSD have gone down from 8% to just one-half of 1%. The School Climate Bill of Rights was a huge victory impacting LAUSD, but only impacts LAUSD, not the many other school districts in California. What happens to the millions of other students in California, just like me, who can still be suspended for willful defiance? Passing this bill will give us hope for a future beyond the streets or beyond a life of imprisonment. Please help push and pass Senate Bill 607, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 38, 'end': 50, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Anabel Agloro: Good morning, my name is Anabel Agloro, I'm a Staff Attorney at Public Counsel. We're the nation's largest pro Bono law firm. And we represent thousands of California's most vulnerable youth each year, including in school discipline proceedings. So that includes students like Robbie, who was suspended for two weeks from third grade for refusing to read, students like Carla, who was suspended from middle school and missed five days of class and teaching time because she didn't have a school uniform. Given Public Counsel's experience, we understand that school disciplinary issues are complex and require a deep understanding of implicit bias and healing, informed interventions. In working with families across the state, we now understand the complexity of these issues. So it's important to be clear that, by passing 607, we will in no way jeopardize the safety or stability of the learning environment. As the Senator mentioned, our coalition has already accepted amendments to allow teachers to remove a student from their class, pursuant to Education Code 48910. Further, 607 does not touch any of the 22 remaining grounds for suspension or expulsion. This includes Education Code 48900.4, which allows administrators to remove a student from campus if their behavior is so persistent that it materially disrupts classwork and creates a hostile education environment. Because of these backstops, there's no need to send a student away from their school community for minor misbehavior. We also know that SB 607 will eliminate an option that is not clearly defined. As a result of 48900k's ambiguous language, it's disproportionately used against students of color at higher rates than any of the other 22 suspendable categories. And this isn't because students of color act out more. It's because research proves that when working with subjective categories like disruption or defiance, there's room for biases to impact one's decision-making processes, as compared to objective categories, where the disproportionality isn't as pronounced. The Legislature has already been working to ameliorate this problem with school discipline. For instance, you've already invested $57 million for districts to implement alternatives to harmful practices that push students out of school. Every district gets a share of over $50 billion through a local-controlled funding formula which requires schools to prioritize student engagement and school climate. And on a policy level, the Legislature has worked very hard to raise awareness across the State of the high rates of suspension we have here and their impact. As a result of these efforts, the raw number of suspensions in California has significantly dropped. However, suspensions for disruption and defiance still constitute a significant portion of the suspensions that remain. What's more, looking deeper into those suspensions under 48900k, we know that the racialized gap in school discipline remains ever-present. Today I respectfully ask the Committee to reaffirm its longstanding commitment to shifting school culture and climate by voting aye for SB 607.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 277, 'end': 283, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 370, 'end': 375, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brad Strong: Brad Strong, Children Now, cosponsor of the bill, and here to answer any questions you might have.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lupita Carballo: Hello, my name is Lupita Carballo, and I'm from the Youth Justice Coalition. When I was 11, I was suspended for throwing a book in the air and telling it to fly. I never got into a college prep school until now, and I'm 17, so please pass Senate Bill 607.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Deborah Escaval: Deborah Escaval, Senior Attorney to the Lawyers Committee for Civil Rights, co-sponsor and in support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kim Doe: kim jason doe from the youth justice coalition. we're also honored to be co-sponsors of this bill. i had my first out of school suspension at age 4 and by age 12 i had my first felony arrest. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carl Pinkston: carl kim pinkston from the black parallel school board, we're also a co-sponsor of the bill. we ask that you support the sb 607, including the amendments. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amethyst Ewing: amethyst carl ewing with the youth justice coalition in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jade Green: Jade Green, representing Youth Justice Coalition and also representing a young black female that was suspended from school for wearing a hair adornment. Please support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Cohen: Richard Cohen from Restorative Schools Division Project. We strongly support this bill and have been working in this area now for 10 years. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Juan Pena: juan amethyst pena with the youth justice coalition in strong support. at age 11 i had already had ten suspensions. one due to having an empty water balloon and twice for speaking spanish. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jordan Thierry: Jordan Thierry, representing the Alliance for Boys and Men of Color, urging your support for this bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cathy Sure: cathy juan sure for the aclu of california in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kathleen Tomasino: Kathleen Tomasino with Youth Justice Coalition, I'm here on behalf of my little sister. Who has been suspended multiple times and now struggling to return to school. I strongly support and urge you to pass the Senate Bill 607.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Preston: I'm Laura Preston with the Association of California School Administrators. And we also have a supportive amended position. We ended up supporting AB 420 a few years, which is the impetus for this bill. And since that time, amazing things have happened before AB 420, I don't know if everybody is aware or not. But every school administrator was trained in their admin programs, and by school attorneys to put 48,900K on every single suspension order. And so they did, that's what they were trained to do. Since that time, we don't, we don't use K like we used to. It has become a much more aware, school leaders are much more aware of the implications of K. We are implementing more restorative justice and PBIS and capturing kids hearts programs. The problem is there are times, and I've talked to our high school principals and high school principals. I'm the only one here who's talking on behalf of the people who deal with this issue day in and day out. When the students, even if the teachers are allowed to suspend the students out of the classroom, it's my members where the students come to. We have no resources that are given to, one, train our folks to do this work. Axcel on our own has taken the issue of equity very, very seriously. We're embedding cultural proficiency into all of our professional development programs. And we're trying to respond to unconscious bias training for everybody, which is really the impetus for all of this. So if you take away K, you haven't changed behavior. We haven't done anything to train people to act differently. And in the few cases that I've heard from our members, in the few cases where K is necessary, we need to be able to use it. It is not used like it was, I assure you of that, but there are rare cases, maybe one a year. If that in some districts where K is the reason when after an administrator has done everything that they can, where they've offered wraparound services for that student. Where they tried to provide mental health care or counselling or alcohol cessation or drug cessation, and the parents refuse to get involved. There's little choice when an administrator, that's what they're doing every single day at the expense of all the other students that they're having to balance. At the end of that time period and it's not after a week, it's not after a month. This is months of trying to help those individuals. There is sometimes nothing left to do and by removing K can make everybody feel better. But for those people on the ground who are dealing with this work you are removing one of the vital resource. Thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Toni Trigueiro: Mr. Chair, Toni Trigueiro on behalf of the California Teachers Association. We have a watch position on the bill. I was asked by the Senator's staff to explain 48910. The ability of a teacher to remove a student for up to two days was a line in the sand for our members.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vicky McLeod: Good morning, Senators, my name is Vicky Mcleod and I'm the Vice Chair of the CSU Employees Union Legislative Committee. Our members oversee and support the operations of the CSU, and we are a sponsor of SB 318. CSUEU represents information technology, healthcare, campus operations, graphic artists, janitorial, clerical and administrative support staff. Over 15,000 mostly middle class jobs located in your districts and the CSU is giving them a way. So what is the bill about? It's about good government. It's about transparency and meaningful oversight and accountability. It's about retaining middle class jobs. Let's be clear, SB 318 does not prevent the CSU from contracting out services. However, it does require a public competitive bidding process, a determination that existing employees are unable to perform the work, and demonstrated cost savings. The CSU does not want the Legislature to oversee its outside contracts. Nor does the C S U want to comply with the provisions that every other state agency in California has had to follow for the past 30 years. Without the legislation the CSU will continue to approve these contracts, which now total 13,000 without demonstrating, cost saving and the functionality and necessity of the projects. Here are a few examples of CSU mismanagement, lack of oversight and waste. At San Jose State University, a 28 million IT infrastructure project was never put out to bid and press accounts reported that the project turned out to be unnecessary, wasteful and duplicated. Following the end of a three year agreement, with it's employees, not to hire outside vendors CSU San Marco's entered into a five year contract with Sanator to provide custodial services. Sanator subsequently underwent a raid by US Immigration and Customs Enforcement and many Sanator employees were deported. Evidence was found linking alcohol and drugs to Senator employees, it was a common practice for Senator to remove CSU San Marcos janitorial supplies and to be used at other sites. In a project that continues to exhibit wastes and malfunctions even after 15 years. The State Auditor concluded that the CSU data collecting common management system had nearly a half $1 billion in overrun costs, with defects in the functionality, questionable procurements, no bid contracts, and conflicts of interest. CMS operational problems continued to persist and employee work continues to be jeopardized by CMS outside contracts. The CSU also entered into a sole source agreement, to spend 100 million a year on a data center, in the State of Utah, as part of the CMS implementation. The previous data center work was done on CSU campuses, by CSU employees. This contract is still in place and is on going. Soon you'll hear the testimony opposing SB 318 by the CSU administration. And they will try to distract you and have you chase the shiny object of collective bargaining. Even though we are in contract negotiations right now, efforts to require cause savings and competitive bidding for outside contracts has been pursued since 2002. But the CSU continues to oppose greater accountability. Don't be fooled, we already have language in our contract that protects our employees from being displaced. A fact that the CSU will ignore in their testimony. What we can't mandate are state, cost savings and a open bidding process which are required of every other state agency. SB318 will provide much needed oversight and transparency of the CSU budget, retain middle class jobs, and help insure that state funds and student fees are not spent in a wasteful and irresponsible fashion. We thank Senator Portantino for authoring this important legislation, and we encourage the Committee to approve it. Thank you.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 3627, 'end': 3637, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kimberly Rosenberger: Kimberly Rosenberger with Service Employees International Union State Council. As a principle SCIU is opposed to the outsourcing of jobs in any form especially good public jobs. Our members had a lobby day yesterday and the dedication and love of their job is palpable. These are workers who care about their job, their school, and their campus. Additionally we strongly support transparency and accountability. This bill does not place an unnecessarily burden on CSU. It is the same standard that state agencies fall under under government code 19130, K to 12, community colleges, and public libraries. It isn't onerous. It just ensures that there is transparency, competitive bidding, good public use of dollars. Additionally, this bill is prospective. And it doesn't prevent contracting out. We just ask for some checks and balances before they contract out. I'm also here for any technical questions. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Balla-Hawkins: David Balla-Hawkins with the CSU Employees Union. Also here to help answer any questions. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christopher Castrillo: Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you Mr Chair and Members. Christopher Castrillo on behalf of the California Faculty Association. I'd like to associate my comments with my colleague from SCIU, believe it's an important accountability and transparency measure. I'd like to thank Senator Portantino for introducing this measure and we encourage your support. Thank you.
[{'start': 53, 'end': 74, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 280, 'end': 290, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brian Allison: Mr Vice Chair and Members of the Committee, Brian Allison on behalf of the American Federation on State County Municipal employees also in strong support.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrew Martinez: Good morning, Andrew Martinez, California State University. We are opposed to the measure. We believe that the CSU is not intended, was never intended to be covered by the Civil Service Act which is what this bill, basically, puts unto us. We believe that for the constitution that is the CSU has always been believed to be a separate entity with a separate purpose and a separate purpose of educating our students. We have time and time again through the master preferred education through the Higher Education Employer Relations Act has established the parameters for how we can manage our employees. We believe that our collective bargaining agreement provide, extends that authority, protections to our employees Tremendously. I would point out to you that per our agreement with CSUEU we cannot displace a CSUEU employee. I heard that we wouldn't own that but that's in our collective bargaining agreement. It is what we live with. It is a bargainable issue. It is the way we operate. We are not allowed to contract out work to third-party institutions, unless it's to insure that our of educating our students is taken care of. That is the reason why we are allowed to use contracting out per our collective bargaining agreement. Whenever we use contracting out for long-term purposes we are required to notify the union of our intention to do so. When we notify the union of our intent to use contracting out, they have the right to request all materials on that contract to be provided to them. We are then also required to meet and confer with our union about contracting out should we use it. Here I said we that we are supposed to have a collaborative approach when it comes to these issues, so meet and confer is not something that we just rubber stamp. It is a serious commitment on the institution to meet those standards. And frankly any violation of this process would be subject to PERB. We would be restricted by how we operate. I want to just take a moment to say, we have not heard any evidence that shows why we should have this authority changed so dramatically, so dramatically. The section of education code that you're altering give the right to the board of trustees the authority to manage his employees. You're taking the Civil Service Act and dropping it in there of the few references taken out. The examples that I heard this morning about San Jose IT not a personal service contract, would not be applicable to this issue. San Marcos, CSU San Marcos is a fairly new campus. It's been around for 15 years when it opened it didn't have janitorial services represented by CSUEU. We have transitioned over to CSUEU employees, again we cannot displace those employees. CMS again that has been around for about 15, 16 years, it's supported heavily by CSUEU employees. Again CSUEU employees support CMS management programs. As far as data sourcing in Utah, I have no idea. That's a new one for me.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark McDonald: mark in behalf of the foothill de anza redwoods community college district and i would just add to dr. houston's testimony that under the bill it's a rigorous process that the community colleges would have to face in order to offer this program. they would have to be approved, they would have to show need, the ability and capacity to implement these programs, and then also be credentialed like any other program. this is an innovative solution to a problem and would urge your support.
[{'start': 103, 'end': 110, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Barbara Nemko: Hi, I'm Barbara Nemko, I'm the Napa County Superintendent of Schools. And I have to tell you, all I can say about this bill is, how do I love thee? Let me count the ways. This is a wonderful answer to a difficult problem. I don't need to tell you the statistics about the teacher shortage. And it's getting worse. You only have to look at the demographics of the baby boomers retiring, and you see what's going to happen. At the same time, what we're asking our teachers to do is more and more difficult. They must be properly credentialed. I went through a regular college, four year teaching in the teaching credential program. And when I started teaching, I was armed with this, a Basal reader where we followed the directions that were given to us with no personalization. There was no technology. Life was simple then. If you think that the curriculum is simple today I invite you tomorrow night to come to Are You Ready for the 5th Grade Challenge at the Napa County Office of Education where the questions are so hard I've had the celebrity contestants want to flee the room. And that's 5th grade curriculum. So in science and math which are the areas of the biggest shortage, we must have properly trained in credential teachers. So what's the biggest problem? People can't afford that extra year when they have to leave the area in which they live. In Napa County we don't have a CSU or a UC. We have one private college, but that's very expensive. We already know that students are getting out of college with a tremendous debt. So if we go to the community colleges, that would afford people the opportunity to live at home and save money. They could work during the day and go to school at night or vice versa, there would be many more opportunities and we're trying to grow our own. So we want people to be working in our. Local districts which they could do if they were being credentialed through the community colleges, learn the technology, learn all of the things that the district requires because every district is different today. So I urge you to help us end the shortage. This is a bill that has so many positives. Please support it.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tony Gonzalez: Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members. I'm Tony Gonzalez, representing the California Workforce Association. We want to thank Senator Dodd for introducing this fantastic bill and we strongly urge your support.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 132, 'end': 136, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tracy Ryan: good morning. tracy cathy ryan, royal county representatives of california in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brandon Tuick: brandon tracy tuick on behalf of ved voice in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 33, 'end': 42, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Linda Wanner: Linda Wanner on behalf of California Catholic Comforts in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Preston: laura brandon preston with the association of school administrators in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Baker: good morning, baker with the california teachers association. in opposition to the measure, we certainly appreciate the efforts and goals that the bill is trying to achieve. and we absolutely agree that community colleges are phenomenal. we disagree with the approach that's been taken. our concern is this is duplicative of something that is offered within the csu system. the broad concern, is that community colleges are increasingly being used, as a panacea, and a solve all, for a multitude of problems, within k-12, and higher ed. the dilemma, that we have, is we are getting an increasing amount of dual enrollment students. that has an impact, on community colleges. particularly, given the significant impact of basic aid courses that have to be offered to our students. on top, as we begin to embark upon these discussions of offering ba programs, specifically regarding credentialing or other areas, without consideration to the long term systemic impact that it's going to have. on the entire community college system on a policy level as well of the physical level. we don't think that it's appropriate to discuss particular issues unless we truly understand the impact that this is going to have on community college students because ultimately while the goal, the bill does. try to achieve our goal of being somewhat cost neutral by having students pay the cost of the bill. that systemic impact is that community colleges are going to be bear the cost and it's going to be an encouragement on prop 98. because when you start to look at the brick and mortar services that are being offered. who is paying for that? that's coming from the community college system. what about counseling, intervention, other programs that are needed, security if there are rural offices, and other types of myriads of programs that are offered within the community colleges. ultimately, it's those students who are disproportionately students of color who are going to have to bear the financial burden. we very much appreciate that the author and this committee is trying to work to solve the teacher shortage problem. we don't believe that it's a problem of not enough slots. there are a multitude of other systemic reasons such as lack of appropriate pay, not enough very positive workplace settings, and a number of issues that have to be addressed that are the core problems of this teacher shortage. we believe it's not appropriate to move in any direction of offering. i do explicative program within the csu system. we believe that at better dealt needs to be taken into looking at how the csu can expand our programs.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alex Gates: Good morning, chair and members. Alex Gates of the California State University and we team as respectively oppose to this measure. We also recognize that school districts need more credentialed teachers in the classroom. However we believe this measure significantly extends the authority of community colleges by allowing them to offer post bachelor teacher credential programs. Unnecessarily duplicating high quality programs currently offered by the CSU and others. There are many reasons why districts struggle to attract and retain credential teachers, one of which is the substantial decrease of enrollment in credential programs. For example, in the early 2000s CSU had roughly 30,000 students enrolled in credential programs, and this past year we had less than 9,000. CSU does not lack the capacity to enroll more students in credential programs. In fact, we provide a variety of pathways through credentials. All but one of our campuses offers at least one teacher credential program. 18 of our campuses recently received over $6 million to expand integrated teacher education programs. For those not located near one of our campuses, we do over our Cal State Teach program, which is fully online, multiple subject teacher credential program, available to any Californian with a bachelor's degree and an internet connection. And in the recent years this has been the largest CSU credential program in terms of enrolment. And in 2015, 2016 it serves students in 53 of the states, 58 counties. Everyone of this programs has the capacity to enroll additional students. And again we agree that districts are in need of more credential teachers however considering enrollment trends in teacher credential programs, existing infrastructure in place via our online programs, integrated programs and associated degree for transfer agreements, We believe the CSU provides a number of high quality approved and accredited programs. We believe that expanding this authority to community colleges will allow for duplicative efforts at a time when enrollment in credential programs does not demonstrate a need for new programs. Thank you for your consideration.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erica Romero: good morning, romero on behalf of the association of independent california colleges and universities. we represent 79 was accredited not for profit institutions including 42 graduate schools of education. our institutions collectively provide 42% of all of california's credentialed teachers that come through higher education. and we must respectfully oppose this legislation. we, too, do not disagree that there is a need for additional teachers however, the issue is not capacity. our institutions are in fact throughout california, including anuba and napa, and also offer for online programs. however we've also seen a decline in the number of individuals applying to become teachers through our programs. and this is why we will be support legislation regarding bitsa, apple, student loan forgiveness to increase the number of individuals who wish to access the teacher credential programs and get through and stay and teach education. however, we must respectfully oppose given the lack of this is not a capacity issue, and it is duplicative. thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Hao: good morning, mr. chair and members, brian laura hao with california federation of teachers. unfortunately, over the weekend, we took an opposed position on the bill. while we appreciate very much the author's intentions, we believe that there are other methods to addressing the teacher shortage crisis. we look forward to working with the author's office to craft a bill into something that can be workable for all parties involved, thank you very much. thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vanessa Garcia: Good morning, Vanessa Garcia on behalf of State Treasurer John Chung who is the chair of the California Educational Facilities Authority and the sponsor of SB 674. This bill will operationalize an existing program within the Treasurer's Office. Which will create a partnership between the California Educational Facilities Authority and local lending institutions by providing a loan loss Reserve for lenders who refinance and consolidate student loans for California residents. This Reserve will protect lenders from defaults and encourages financial institutions to generate more new loans for qualified borrowers. Refinancing these loans will bring much need relief to California's graduates and leave them with some extra money. In their pockets each month for unexpected emergencies, down payments, and enough saved for retirement. We thank Senator Allen for offering this important measure and we respectfully ask for your aye vote today.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 58, 'end': 68, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 854, 'end': 859, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Whitaker: thank you, good afternoon, mr. chairman and members of the committee. my name is jennifer jonah whitaker and i'm the audit chief of the office of state audits and evaluations. we are the audit unit within the department of finance. as you know our report went final last thursday afternoon, march 30th, and we're here to give a summary of the results of that audit and answer any questions that you may have. in accordance with the 2016-17 budget act, finance performed an evaluation of the board of equalization's sales and use tax, resource utilization, outreach activities and the supplemental annual report. this evaluation also included an evaluation of boe's corrective actions taken to address the november 2015 state controller's, internal accounting and administrative controls review.  our evaluation focused solely on findings one through six and included the proposed retail sales tax fund adjustment. during the course of the evaluation, we interviewed over 70 employees at the boe sacramento headquarters, 8 field offices, and 1 of their non-public offices. the interviews ranged from staff level to executive level management. we also, during the time period of our evaluation, were able to attend two boe outreach events. at the conclusion of our field work, we met with all five board members individually to provide a summary of our evaluation, and obtain their perspective. overall, our evaluation noted that boe's operational culture impacted its ability to provide accurate and reliable information. boe had a difficult time providing complete and accurate documentation and response to our inquiries, and in some instances, levels of management were not aware of and could not speak to certain district activities for which they held oversight responsibilities. we focused in on three main areas, one being resource utilization, and when we looked at resource utilization we found that revenue generating staff had been redirected to perform non-revenue generating activities, including outreach activities which directly violates provision one of the budget act. additionally, boe was unable to accurately reflect revenue and cost impacts in its accounting records and supplemental annual report. the second area that we looked at was outreach, and although the external affairs department coordinates the numerous aspects of the education and outreach program and the general policy is for the board members offices to request certain outreach activities through external affairs, this policy was not consistently followed. in addition, these outreach activities have a limited nexus on boe's administrative tax programs and have increased in recent years. additionally, boe had not implemented budgets or cost tracking mechanisms to record outreach activities, when also the hired staff for these activities using practices that bypass budgetary and legislative processes. the third area that we reported on was the supplemental annual report and because of the information obtained regarding the staff utilization practices and also the outreach. the supplemental annual report submitted to the legislature did not comply with the budget act requirements. because of the redirections and the audit and collections, revenue and personnel costs are incorrect, it also skews the cost benefit ratio that are reported in the supplemental annual report. in addition, when we reviewed the processes for the supplemental annual report, we noted other areas of improvement that need to be addressed.  there was an absence of standardized written policies and procedures to prepare the report, and also to ensure that the accuracy and consistency of the information that was reported. some of the examples include the methodologies and procedures used to compile the report were not documented and in some instances were unknown, and significant fluctuations and changes from methodology from prior years was not documented and cannot be clearly communicated. the second part of the evaluation also known as chapter two focused in on the corrective actions for findings one through six of the seo report and also the proposed tax allocation adjustment. and we received 11 different versions of the proposed sales and use tax allocation during the time that we were there and with each version finance continue to find errors and omissions and the information that was provided. the last version was received in february 2017 and as indicated in our report, further review is needed to review that proposed tax allocation. we need to receive some additional information such as the methodologies and assumptions that were used to prepare that allocation. those were not readily available during the time of our review. so in summary, those were the four main areas of our report. and i'll open up for questions.
[{'start': 81, 'end': 104, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 4107, 'end': 4110, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
David Gau: Thank you. Mr Chairman and Members of the Committee. Good afternoon. My name is David Gau, and I'm the current Executive Director at the Board of Equalization, a position I've held for one year and five days. I started my career 36 years ago as an auditor one at the board. I have a brief statement I'd like to read to the Committee after which, I will turn it over to the expert staff that are gathered here today. This past year, my goal has been to chart positive cultural and process change at the agency. We've had a number of successes but we also have continued room for improvement. I think sometimes what gets lost is that we are an agency that administers 39 tax and fee programs alike number of funds, and 205 special taxing jurisdictions.  In 15, 16 fiscal year, the Board collected in excess of $16 billion. We also employ approximately 4,700 dedicated and professional staff and have a budget in excess of $600 million. I take this fiduciary responsibility to the state and taxpayers of California very seriously and have dedicated my career to the goals of the board, and that is fair, effective, and efficient tax administration. I'm excited about the course of corrections I have instituted over the last year that are beginning to show positive results, and I am committed to continue making the necessary improvements to the agency to fill its mission despite the difficulties involved. Now the attention on the Board of Equalization recently, especially as a result of the OSA review, has renewed the conversation about what reforms are warranted. Obviously, this is a policy decision for elected officials. Not one for me, or the other board staff testifying here today. We provide staff input. The finance auditors requested documentation, interviewed staff and board members and kept us surprised throughout their evaluation. There are several items in the report that we, as the executive leadership need to take ownership of and continue to try to make improvements in our organization. I'm aware of other external agency reviews that have taken place or are in process, and those too should be viewed similarly. I'm committed to a transparent operation, open to suggestions, while defending ourselves when and where appropriate as well. And my hope is that we will be a collaborative effort of shared responsibilities between the elected board and agency staff. Many of the problems to be discussed today here are not new. This past year, however, I want to point out that I have instituted a new governance process that involves executives, managers, and staffs across all of our departments, and also includes our field offices. It's modeled after the Franchise Tax Board's governance structure, and the purpose of these committees is to provide analysis and review of pertinent policy and procedural issues that exist or are anticipated, make recommendations, and either Institute them internally or, when appropriate, take the matter to the board for their policy making decision. Now, this past year, we took before the board the issue of the appropriate use of board resources with respect to the volunteer income tax assistance program, and subsequently, the education in outreach activities for the balance of the fiscal year, including an associated budget. There are other board administrative and tax policy decisions to be made on a regular basis. And I know staff stands ready to offer their expertise in presenting recommendations and alternatives to the board for their vote. The board conferred powers on me as the Executive Director to run the day-to-day operations of the agency, and that is a conversation the board and I will need to revisit in the near future, as well as specific abusive behavior issues. I would like to reinforce to the Committee Members the hard work of the BOE staff over the last year, working as a team to implement the improvements at the board that I put in place, and the staff you have here for the balance of the meeting are well aware of the issues and are poised to provide additional comment and respond to questions. Again, I thank you for providing me the opportunity to provide an opening statement, and I'd welcome the opportunity to come to meet with you each of the Committee Members individually when it may be convenient for you. Thank you.
[{'start': 80, 'end': 89, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1492, 'end': 1495, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3824, 'end': 3827, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brenda Fleming: okay, thank you. good afternoon, chairman ting and members of the committee. my name is brenda and i'm the acting chief deputy director for the board of equalization. thank you for the opportunity to join you in today's discussion on the dof audit. joining me today, as i think we've noted, is miss michele pielsticker who is our chief of the legislative division, and then our acting chief council amy kelly. members, let me begin by stating that we acknowledge and appreciate the benefits resulting from audits and evaluations. much like physical exams, the audits and evaluations provide information on the condition of an organization. the resulting information is valuable, as it identifies improvement opportunities, where an organization should focus its attention for the purposes of improving, strengthening, and enhancing the organization overall. we take the feedback from the dof evaluation seriously. we do take it seriously, and we look forward to the resulting improvements it will bring. the release of the evaluation has stirred the public's and the media's interest in boe operations and revenue management. we value transparency, so we respect the public's right to know. however, we wanted to be clear that the allocation errors noted in the evaluation which miss pielsticker will address in her comments more fully are not a misappropriations of funds. boe's board members and the executive management team, take very seriously, very seriously, its fiduciary responsibilities to effectively and efficiently administer the tax loss within its jurisdiction and its obligation to ensure that revenues collected are allocated accurately and appropriately. we understand our role in the state's physical success. i want to reassure the public, the legislature, and the governor that we are committed to upholding public trust, so we respect your comments. allow me to acknowledge, if i may, the good work performed by the employees of the board of equalization. we proudly recognize the hard work performed by these knowledgeable and dedicated team with expertise in tax administration, revenue, and budget management, tax and administrative law, and information technology. this team of professionals performs the work necessary to administer the 39 tax programs that result in more than $60 billion in revenue annually. members, we are prepared here today to provide an overview of our response to the department of finance's evaluation and answer any questions that you may have. we appreciate your feedback and look forward to a continuous improvement and i'll turn it over to miss pielsticker.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 46, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 88, 'end': 94, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 299, 'end': 318, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 399, 'end': 408, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1284, 'end': 1295, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2602, 'end': 2613, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michelle Pielsticker: thank you. good afternoon, mr. chair, members of the committee, michelle, chief of the legislative and research division at the board of equalization. thank you for the opportunity to be here today to address the concerns raised in the department of finance evaluation. i will keep my remarks brief as i know you have a number of questions based on the evaluation's findings. i would just like to note for the record that the state board of equalization's executive management has previously stated, i'll state again, take seriously its fiduciary responsibility to effectively. and efficiently administer the tax laws within its jurisdiction, as well as its obligation to ensure that the revenues collected are allocated accurately and appropriately. we appreciate the suggestions noted in the evaluation and in the last fiscal year, we have been implementing a variety of controls and reforms. there have been reports both from the dof and the press that boe cannot explain why it misallocated millions of dollars in revenue. however, boe staff has worked diligently and tirelessly over the past two years to do just that. boe has exercised due diligence in documenting its methodologies and assumptions used in the computation of the proposed allocation adjustment and also provided dof with complete, accurate, and comprehensive supporting documentation and explanation of the sales and use tax allocation, and propose adjustment methodologies. as a result of the sco audit finding, the boe made system and process changes, including modifications to system reports, and changes to the statistical factoring process to allocate daily receipts that more closely track current reported sales and use tax allocations. boe reconciles daily sales and use taxes collected to amounts reported every quarter, and has worked carefully to ensure controls are in place and documented to verify the accuracy of sales and use taxes collected and deposited into the various fund components. the evaluation also identified issues with boe management and controls. fundamentals to effective management is an effective and transparent government structure through which agency decisions are made and we can thank our executive director for implementing this, governance structure as he described. as you know the boe also is governed by a five member board, four of which of elected to represent four equalization districts, and the state controller is elected by voters statewide. among the board's duties under government code section 15623, the four members elected to equalization districts are charged with investigating the administration, enforcement, and operation within their respective districts of all laws for which the four board is vested with the responsibility to administer and enforce. boe management is strengthening a number of other policies and controls. the board approved the 2017 annual education and outreach plan, which identifies outreach activities scheduled for the remainder of fiscal year 2016-2017, and specifies an allocation of funds amounting to $200,000 for each equalization district to devote to outreach. boe management will be examining each event to evaluate its cost versus benefit to the boe tax payers. to ensure districts are staying within their budgets, the boe is tracking outreach spending. the boe is also updating the board administrative manual to provide strict guidelines to managers and employees regarding attendance and participation at events and conferences and boe has updated its facilities leasing policy also in the board's administrative manual. in consideration of the lao's and dof's concerns about positions loaned to board member offices, the boe has reduced its loaned positions and is developing a formal loan policy consistent with provision one. although the boe continues to encounter challenges to reducing its vacancy rate, we are proud to report that as of march 22nd, 2017, the boe has reduced permanent positions in its temporary help blanket from 157, as of january 15th 2015, to eight today. boe management continues to work toward reducing its overall vacancy rates and to that end has accomplished the following. the boe has formed a vacancy work group that meets regularly to ensure the vacancy issue remains front and center as an agency priority and recognizing that we have aged vacancies. we are working with the department of finance to identify them and apply them against the requested pcps. we estimate a total of 21 vacant pys are available for this purpose, but we still need to work that out with the department of finance. the examination and certification online system recently was implemented and has also reduced the human resource division's processing time by 20 days. further, we have implemented a multi-departmental process to put in front of managers accurate information regarding their positions and available funding. so that they can make conform decisions, and timely fill vacancies were possible. in summary, the oe's executive team does take the responsibilities very seriously as you have heard, and is working toward continue to improvement of the agencies policies, and processes, and we would be happy to answer any questions you may have
[{'start': 64, 'end': 72, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Kelly: Can I help describe the process? Thank you Mr. Ting. Amy Kelly, acting chief counsel for BOE. The events themselves can be either board member developed or they can be part of the annual plan.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 51, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 53, 'end': 62, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Hill: I'm Chris Hill. I'm with Department of Finance. It's somewhat common to have situations where you have, positions are generally budgeted in the mid salary step. So if you have an employee that's been in classification for a long time, making the maximum amount, and you have a lot of them in that position, that could be the case. Regarding Board of Equalization, I can't speak specifically to it. I would just note I think they reverted about $13 million in moneys that were budgeted for positions last year.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tracy Thompson: Great. Thank you Mr. Chair. Tracy Thompson from the Department of Finance, I just also wanted to apologize on behalf of Christen Sheldon, that she's not able to be here at this evening. So, as is mentioned in the overview, we are terming it mission-based budgeting. We feel that that provides for a broader definition and it allows for, really, a more descriptive definition of what we're doing, which is focusing on the mission of the department or program that we're taking a look at, and from there, we would look at, really, what drives that mission. So whether that's federal law, state law, regulation, stakeholder expectations, and from there, take a look at how those mission drivers are implemented, and looking at what historical resources might be available for those mission drivers, and then, from there, look at how we would prioritize those.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 120, 'end': 136, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Deanna Niebuhr: Hi, Deanna Niebuhr from the Partnership for Children and Youth. Just as a high level summary, the community school's approach when robustly implemented results in significant positive impacts, including high rates of family involvement, positive attitudes toward school among students, and ultimately academic improvements. I'd like to say that the power of the community school's practice is embodied in AB 1029 in three ways. First, by elevating the importance of the work around improving school climate as a key part of a whole child approach. Also it will enhance school safety planning processes by ensuring that broad and representative teams are problem solving together. And finally, that by broadening this teams it will enhance the connection and integration across student support social emotional learning and school climate improvement effort at school sites. Each of these three aspects will increase the effectiveness of school safety plans by making those plans more meaningful, and most importantly will help to make school safety and school climate improvement efforts more proactive. I'm going to end just by saying that, in absence of my peer to talk about restorative justice, I would just like to say that adding a restorative justice coordinator to a school site team will enhance school safety work. In the same way as I just outlined. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Crista Koch: Good evening Mr. Chair and members. My name is Crista Koch. Currently I serve as the English Learner Coordinator for Washington Unified School District, which is located in West Sacramento across the river. In the past, I was a classroom teacher for eight years. I have also been an instructional coach for English learners for nine years. And in my work as a coach and coordinator, I have worked with hundreds of new teachers, and have found that they struggled not with subject matter, but with pedagogy. Specifically, they struggle with meeting the needs of English learners, special education students, high-leverage literacy practices, differentiation, classroom management. These skills which are critical to effective teaching. Without solid and extensive pedagogy training, teachers come into our districts lacking the ability to provide support to our most at-risk students. In my experience, teachers who have that strong pedagogical skills or acquire them through professional development succeed at raising student performance and stay in the profession. When teachers lack strong teaching skills they become frustrated and many of them do leave the profession. I feel AB 170 would allow teachers to spend more of their undergraduate studying learning these critical skills, get early clinical experience, learn to reflect on their practice, and ultimately become better teachers. I urge your aye vote on AB 170, thank you.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeff Ross: Jeff Ross, California Association of Suburban School Districts, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brandon Tuick: Brandon Tuick on behalf of EdVoice in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Preston: laura jonah preston, on behalf of the association of california school administrators, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Rivas: Brian Rivas, on behalf of the Education Trust West, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicki Dominguez: Hi, good evening, my name is Nicki Dominguez. I am the Education Services and Policy Coordinator at the Central American Resource Center. And I'm also a steering Committee Member for the College For All Coalition, who is a co-sponsor of AB 699. First of all, I want to say thank you for the opportunity to talk about this really important topic and also my personal experience with this topic. I first want to disclose that part of the work that I do is to work with undocumented families everyday both children and parents in the Los Angeles area. But personally for me I came to this country at the age of seven. I came to California at the age of seven, and I did all of my education within the public school system of California, my k-12 and my UC degree. I started my second grade year in a public school scared. I think that's the best way that you can describe a seven year old entering a system knowing that it's not built for her. Knowing that there was a risk of being found out. I was scared that my immigration status was going to be discovered and how people would treat me differently, because of that. I was scared that my sister, who was older than me, was going to get bullied, because she had a harder time learning English than I did. And I was scared of losing my mom. We left Mexico fleeing the persecution and oppression of women. Not having access to opportunity, being killed systematically in a country that allows it to happen. And so, coming to this country and entering a system that did not allow us to be safe within the walls of the school made it seem that achieving that goal of becoming a contribution to this community was something that was never going to happen. Being scared to lose your own parent is something that is not only terrifying, but it's also something that is traumatizing. And a lot of our schools do not have the infrastructure to support children who are dealing with issues. Parents also are very terrified about the changes that are happening in our community that are making them less likely to contribute and participate in their children's education. We have seen an amazing drop of parent participation in the last couple of months, after our November elections. And we can really target this to parents not fully understanding the fact that they have rights, and the children have rights, and how they can contribute to the community. As an adult hearing these stories now an not knowing how to support families who feel intimidated and uninformed of the rights and protection their children have. But still again, like I mentioned, they look at the schools and the districts as the main source of information on how to support their children.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Betsy Jarre: Thank you, my name is Betsy Jarre. I'm a speech language pathologist. I've been in public schools for 17 years. The past 12, 13 years, I've been a K12 SLP. Right now, I am providing speech and language services to three Head Start schools, a total of 12 classrooms in the Corona Norco Unified School District in Riverside County. In January and February there was a significant decline in the attendance of the three schools that I provide services for, but one in particular. And I'm here to tell you about that one school. Parents were coming instead of the kids being at school, normally there's 16 per kids per classroom. There were fix or six parents that were coming to school. We've very concerned because they saw the ICE agents walking the sidewalks in their neighborhoods. And they were very scared that the ICE agents would enter the schools, and what was going to happen to their kids. That put the teachers in a heightened anxiety level, it put me in a heightened anxiety level, because what are my rights and responsibilities as a service provider? I know my duty is to protect the kids, all of us had that running in our mind but, we had to be calm because kids at the three, four, five year olds they catch the environment that's happening. And we had to be calm for them because we had to provide a safe environment for them so that they can be calm. Because the kid's job is to go to school, to be happy, to feel safe, to learn. Not to worry, why aren't my friends here, why are my parents scared, why are my teachers scared?
[{'start': 22, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Deborah Escobedo: escobedo, education rights lawyer for the lawyers committee for civil rights, and one of the investigators on that report in strong support of the bill. thank you
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Larry Hopper: Larry Hopper for Sacramento Teacher's Association, strong support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrew Medina: Andrew Medina, Asian Americans Advancing Justice California part of the College for all Coalitions, strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Josefina Ramirez Natsuna: Josefina Ramirez Natsuna with Children Now in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Parra: Laura Parra on behalf of the City of Long Beach in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Humberto Lugo: Humberto Lugo, Math and Science teacher for Unified School District, strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shontay Leroy: Shontay Leroy, CTA Hayward Unified, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Charles Shannon: charles laura shannon, second grade teacher, renda union school district, in full support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Liz Escavala: Liz Escavala, Terra seventh grade teacher in strong support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ron Rapp: ron charles rapp on behalf of the california federation of teachers in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cara Kaplan: Cara Kaplan on behalf of California Association for Bilingual Education, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Krista Coch: Krista Coch, Washington Unified School District, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Leigh Low: leigh ron low with the southeast asia resource action center, and member of the college for all coalition, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rocky Chavez: any other comments? then i i'll make a comment. it's not a question but a comment. the response is that fear is already there, i think that politicians have an important responsible position on establishing if there's fear or no fear. last week i was in mexico city dealing with a bunch of politicians from mexico senate and the house of representatives, and there was a lot of statements done about the administration. and as i had mentioned to them that, the relationship between mexico and united states, geographically, historically, economically, is never going to change, regardless of who's in the white house, because we're aligned, and i think that's the same thing with california. being a californian resident and latino, born in los angeles, we have a responsibility as leaders to deal with this. i'm happy to note that on the report that they talk about in the school districts that were collecting this information. not enough of them were in my school district, my districts. i've personally gone to all my school districts and personally gone to all latino media in my district and said, if you ever have a problem with ice or anything like this, my name's rocky, come see me. my job is to take care of this, and i think that if more members would do that proactively within their districts, and that would take care of the issue of fear. so i think there's a responsibility for us, i'm going to support this because i want everybody to know that i don't want children to be scared. but i will tell you this, it's already part of the constitution, as a lot of you guys know, for seven years i ran a school. about 80 percent of the children were not citizens but i loved every one of them and was happy to see them go forward. that's leadership and so we should not scare people, but i'll support this. we have motion to second, would you like to close?
[{'start': 1173, 'end': 1178, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Martha Sarragoza-Diaz: good afternoon, mr. chairperson and members. my name is sarragoza-diaz and i'm representing californians together. as assemblywomen reyes indicated, ab 952 is addressing the issue regarding california's currently bilingual education teachers shortage. we are proposing to do this through the development of a bilingual teacher professional development program. we believe that high quality professional development will yield an increased number of bilingual teachers in a shorter period compared to the four, five years of a traditional teacher preparation program. because this program, the professional development program, would be targeted to two types of persons, those who are fluent in another language other that english who already possess a teacher credential and who's interested in teaching in a bilingual program, and persons who already have bilingual authorizations, but may have only taught in english only classrooms, but who are also interested in teaching in a bilingual classroom. also, ab 952 assures high quality professional development because it calls for the development of standards for this program.
[{'start': 56, 'end': 70, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 132, 'end': 137, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
 : Also, AB 952 assures high quality
[]
Karen Kadero-Kaplan: good afternoon, kadero-kaplan. i'm representing cava who's the co-sponsor of ab 952 along with californians together. i'm also a professor and department cair at san diego state university in dual language and english learner education. my response, i'll make it brief at this late hour, but ab 952 is a good first step in addressing the bilingual teacher shortage as my colleagues mentioned. it focuses on providing the quality professional development to teachers that are fluent in another language other than english and would be interested in adding the authorization. the legislation allows the consortiums to develop and provide specific professional development for two groups of teachers and i think that is the parts i want to clarify. is those teachers who did not have the opportunity to use their due to the move towards english only. we have many of those that come through our programs, and then teachers who are bilingual, but did not pursue the bilingual credential. so, as a department chair of a program that offers bilingual authorization, and a professional development dual language certificate, we work closely with our san diego county office of education. we also work with our local school districts to support this professional development. we've been doing this for the last few years and so together we have programs in place that support quality professional learning. therefore, a consortium model consisting of a university bilingual teacher preparation program alongside county office of education, local school districts or professional organizations will ensure a high quality level of professional development to meet the needs of all our language leaners in quality biliteracy program development. thank you very much.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 48, 'end': 52, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brian Reevus: Brian Reevus on behalf of the Education Trust West, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cathy Mitrip: Good evening, Mr Chairman and members, Cathy Mitrip representing the California Language Teacher's Association, in strong support.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pica Rodge: pica leigh rodge on behalf of los angeles unified in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Betty Hung: Betty Hung, Asian Americans Advancing Justice LA, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 46, 'end': 48, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sue Vang: good afternoon, or good evening. sue pica vang on behalf of state superintendent of public instruction, tom torlakson, co-sponsor of this legislation. i just want to add that in reaching the superintendent's recommendation to remove cahsee as a requirement for graduation, that the superintendent consulted with a broad representation of stakeholders, including teachers, parents, the business community, testing experts as well as the legislature. the superintendent also took into consideration the states new common core state standards as well as the new state accountability and assessment systems and the local controller funding formula. we want to add that the implementation of lcff as well as the local control and accountability plans with implementation, schools, students, parents have better tools to measure students readiness, identifying students who need a support and prepare them for college and career. and we ask for your support. i have with me keric ashley, deputy superintendent of our district and school and innovation branch to answer any questions you may have. thank you.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 104, 'end': 117, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 968, 'end': 980, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tony Rice: Thank you, Mr. Chair and members. Tony Rice on behalf of the Los Angeles Area Chamber of Commerce. I'll be brief given the lateness of the hour. I'll just mention that we were in support of previous Senator Liu's original legislation in this area. We also supported former Senator Hancock's legislation to provide the emergency diplomas at that particular point in time. I say that because we are pleased to co-sponsor this piece of legislation, believe it's consistent with the direction that this Legislature in this state is moving towards. And we strongly recommend and urge your aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 207, 'end': 210, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 281, 'end': 288, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Enrique Ruacho: Enrique Ruacho on behalf of Los Angeles Unified, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Preston: Laura Preston, Association of California School Administrators, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tia Nguyen: Tia Nguyen on behalf of Public Advocates here in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ron Rapp: Ron Rapp on behalf of the California Federation of Teachers in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Keric Ashley: Thank you, Keric Ashley, Deputy Superintendent, Department of Education. Yeah, we're familiar with the study. We actually have no problem with the recommendations. We believe that though the exit exam as it was initially intended was to help raise the standards across all high schools in the state and to at least maintain a minimum level of competency for students earning a diploma. We believe that it accomplished its mission, and now that the state has moved on to new standards with higher standards, and now the emphasis is to make students college and career ready. And we have an assessment to match that. There does continue to be the credit requirements for students to graduate and the overwhelming opinion is that those are sufficient for the purpose of a diploma.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Pfeifle: All right, thank you. My name is Dr. Jason Pfeifle. I'm the public health advocate for Cal Perk. We are the original sponsors of the bill. And we want to thank Assemblywoman Rubio for pushing Assembly Bill 885 to protect children from lead in drink water at school. Lead is highly toxic to kids. Even small exposures can cause irreversible damage to children's cognitive development. And water fountains at schools are a known source of lead exposure for children. There's been a string of recent incidents of lead contaminated water at schools in Southern California, and this could just be the tip of the iceberg. And so, we have a two questions going forward. So, one why wouldn't we test every school to make sure that water is safe for kids to drinks? And two, why wouldn't we put a filter on every tap to prevent lead exposures before they happen? Thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 174, 'end': 179, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Emily Daniel: my name is dr. daniel. i'm a pediatrician here in sacramento. thank you, chair and committee members for the opportunity to speak about this important public health issue today. as we're all aware, lead is toxic. at high levels, we see neurotoxicity and even death. previously, a small amount of lead was thought to be safe. however, we now know that there is no safe level of lead. less than half of the level initially thought to be safe causes decreased iq levels, learning difficulties and neurobehavioral disorder such as adhd. there is no safe level of lead in children. i became a pediatrician to give children a healthy childhood, and the best opportunity for a healthier future. unfortunately, i've seen children in the hospital and in my practice suffering from the effects of lead. although i can remove their lead exposure, and the lead currently in their system, there is nothing i can do to reverse the damage that is already done. i am powerless against the lead that has already damaged the delicate pathways in their brain and will impact their future. the only way i can fulfill my promise to advocating for children is to stop exposure at the source. this bill targets a well-known source of lead in our communities, our water. with this bill, we can ensure the children in our communities have safe water to drink in schools. one more way to prevent this damage before it starts. on behalf of myself and my patients, thank you for this opportunity to speak and support this important action to protect the children of our communities. thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Heinz: hi, i'm dr. michelle sue heinz. and i am a pediatrician in sacramento, also here on behalf of the american academy of pediatrics. thank you all for the honor of speaking here. as dr. daniel explained, the latest research shows that there is no safe level of lead. even at the smallest levels that we can barely detect, iq scores are lower and behavioral problems, including adhd and aggression, are higher. it's tempting to think that preventing those small levels of exposure will not have much impact, but low levels still have profound effects. from undetectable levels to 10 micrograms per deciliter, six iq points are lost. from 10 to 20, one and a half additional iq points are lost. so, as you can see, the small amounts of lead carry tremendous weight. when it comes to adhd, one out of five cases of children within the us can still be attributed to lead. that's one out of five. that was surprising to me. what this means is that the most important battle before us is here now. we must remain vigilant- please summarize. sure, this bill doesn't just affect our children. it affects our communities and the resources provided. so we respectfully urge you to consider.
[{'start': 12, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 183, 'end': 189, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Susan Little: Thank you, Susan Little with the Environmental Working Group in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tony Cairo: tony, california teachers association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Pollock: Randy Pollock on behalf of the Water Quality Association and the Pacific Water Quality Association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ron Rapp: ron michelle rapp, on behalf of california federation of teachers in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Charles Shannon: Again, Charles Shannon, second grade teacher in the Unified School District, in support, thank you.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eric Bach: Good afternoon, Eric Bach with the Los Angeles Unified School District. Happy to be here. I appreciate the conversation we have with the author of staff last week about this bill. I see that there are Committee amendments, if I read that correctly. We have an opposition based on the current draft of the bill. We've iterated that the cost, the timing, the amount of work necessary is a little difficult. Our school district, I'd like to think, has probably the most aggressive plan to address lead. We've been, for the most part, testing lead for about 30 years. We started with developing protocols and best practices around Flushing. To samplings, testing the levels, identifying the high volumes of lead, and addressing those. Whether we install filters, whether we shut off those fountains. But the current version of the bill simply says that we have to install filters on every fountain. We have 47,000 fountains, which have a significant cost. So as I look at the amendments, I'm still trying to figure out how this program would work. So our position is still opposed. We would still want to figure out how this all works and gets aligned with the safety plans that we have in place already. So withhold our opposition until we have a better sense of how these amendments will take effect. So I just want to share that, thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cindy Tuck: thank you, tuck with the association of california water agencies. we're not usually in this committee. we represent about 430 public water agencies across the state. and we definitely care about the intent of this bill, which is to protect children from exposure to lead. we do have concerns with the drafting of the bill, and that's why we took an oppose unless amended, as opposed to a straight opposed position. and i'd just like to list four specific, very quickly, four things. first, we think this places an impossible standard on the schools the way it's currently written. it refers to replacing lead bearing parts. there is not currently a test method to confirm that a part contains zero lead. existing on this area refers to lead free and then defines that with certain very low amounts and that kind of thing. but you can't test and show no lead right now. a second example is we think it's overly broad because right now it would require testing for all the schools. there are state laws that require, for example, since 1995, that the sale of pipe or fixtures that aren't lead free, that's banned. so, we think we can look at your cutoffs and talk about them, and see if the scope could be reduced somewhat beyond what's currently in the bill. third, currently the bill in print requires filters and i think the community amendment addresses that to some degree talking about may use filters. but you should know that there could be problems with filters. if they're not properly maintained, if they stay too long without that maintainance. they can create a public health issue for children. and so you want to be aware of that and think about that in the context of this bill. you don't want to create another health problem with it. the last thing is this bill would create what is called an elevated level, basically setting a california statute in action level. we have a concern, we think that action levels and drinking water standards should be set by the federal and state agencies that have that technical scientific expertise. and so we don't think that should be moved forward in statute. so those are some comments. we have more in our letter. we are willing to work with the author. we think there could be a bill here, but there are a lot of issues technically with how it's currently drafted.
[]
Ian Padilla: Mr. Chair, Ian Padilla with the Coalition for Adequate School Housing. And our opposition, much like LA Unified's opposition, was based on the previous version of the bill. So we would also like to see how these work out and continue to work with the author. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Preston: laura ron preston, association of california school administrators. we concur with the prior statements, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eric Bach: there we go. eric laura bache, los angeles unified again. so the way the program is drafted today, as i read the bill, not with the amendments, it would require us to install filters regardless of testing. our protocols are you test first to determine where the problems are where the high volumes of lead are, we would look at the epa standard epa standard if you look at the lead and copper rule. it's 20 parts per billion. 15 parts for water providers at our school sites is the requirement. so we at a school district, already receiving water that's already at the 15 parts per billion. the bill says it has to be a one parts per billion, so that's one problem that we have with it in terms of cost. we're not sure exactly what we do as a school site. that's really more on the water provider to figure out how they have to lower their standard to get to one parts per billion. so that was a cost issue. not on me, but on the water providers. now on me, when i look at the fittings. pretty much everything, even in our homes, malls, parks, brass fittings are everywhere. 8% copper is considered lead free, i'm sorry, 8% lead in brass fittings is considered lead free. i'm not sure with that percentage you would still even reach the one part per billion, so we have concerns about that. then when you look at where are these fittings. they're in your pipes, in your walls, in your concrete, under your buildings. how do you get to that? so you're never really going to achieve the goals of the bill of one part per billion if you reasonably can't get to them to replace them. the problem is not just at the fountain or at the bubbler. it's inside the walls. it's under the buildings. so, there's an unknown cost. are we going to be continually held responsible to tear up our buildings, how do we afford that? that's really going to come out of our general fund. that's not capital expenditure. that's part of a bigger plan.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 29, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Seth Bramble : mr chair and members, sethhere on behalf of more than 325,000 members of the california teachers association. we now represent actually more than 7,000 charter school educators in the state of california, and we're proud to co sponsor this important proposal. charter schools are public schools that were established with a promise. we will give you the freedom to innovate and you will show us some results. like light houses they were placed, where maybe we can do something a little bit different. and we might learn something that we could apply across the entire system of public education. i was excited to hear several years ago from the division director at oakland unified about a system that he called knowledge transfer. this was their charter school's division where the principals in charter schools and the principals at traditional public schools would come together. and they would share best practices. that's what was intended here, lessons learned. but the people cannot learn from this innovation if the people's business is conducted in private. the establishment of charter schools was not us, the public, yielding control to the agencies that serve us. to the contrary, we insist on retaining control. and on staying informed. having secret and private meetings about how tax dollars are being spent is not innovation. it does not benefit the system and in fact, it has resulted in a number of horror stories which i'd be happy to share with you, if you want to hear some of the details. the bottom line here is what this bill is saying the charter schools is do what you want, but do it out in the open where everyone can see. truly what this bill is saying is dream big and think outside the box. but don't abuse the public trust and spend that money on our students, spend that money on our kids, we urge your support.
[]
Dolores Duran-Flores: good afternoon mr. chairman and members. i'm duran-flores with california school employees association. we are co-sponsors of this important bill as well. we believe that charters actually already must comply with these laws. however, we know that others disagree, and in the field there's a lot of confusion, so we see this bill as a way to remedy that. but even if the other side says that these laws don't apply to them, we think that they should going forward. we think that charter schools now are very different than they were when they were initially created, over 25 years ago, they were small. they also were free from some laws, but we don't say all of the laws. they were intended to be created by the community and teachers, as laboratories of education that could be shared with other schools. but today, charter schools are not little anymore, they are about 1,200 of them and more coming. they also have some for-profit charter schools now in our school system, they oversee over billions of dollars every year. and we think because of those circumstances, that they should be, if they are not already compelled to follow this same transparency and accountability laws that traditional schools already adhere to. and that, of course, is the brown act, which is the open meetings law, that allows the public to do what i'm doing now, to weigh in, to do so, in a publicly noticed hearing, also the public records act, which says that the public can find out what's happening with their business. they're paying for these charter schools as well as traditional schools, they should be able to have access to records on how that money's being managed. the political reform act as well, i mean all of you and many of your staff comply with the political reform act, as well as many local school districts. and essentially, it protects public officials from having to influencing just some of the decisions they make and having a financial interest. it protects people from doing that, it holds them accountable. and also, government code 1090, it prohibits decision makers from being on both sides of a contract specifically. so essentially, you can't own a company, and then also approve a contract allowing for that company to get a benefit from the charter school. we think that's a very important accountability, and we think that this bill does put the public first. i know that the charter schools will say that they are also compelled by law to adhere to the conflict of interest of the corporations code. but the corporations code, the thing i would leave with you with, is the corporation code protects corporations, government code and the political reform act protects the public. so we ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 45, 'end': 50, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Larry Hopper: i'm larry eric hopper, i'm from sutter middle school, i'm an eighth grade teacher, and i urge you to vote aye on this.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Allen Freemon: Hello, Allen Freemon, I teach 11th grade to US History students at Crescenta Valley High School in Glendale. I urge your support, thank you.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Charles Shannon: And I'm Charles Shannon, second grade teacher at Orinda Union School District, and I am in strong support of this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alberto Mojica: Alberto Mojica, I'm a math and science teacher at Orland Unified School District, and I urge your support in this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chantaine Fauntleroy: Chantaine Fauntleroy, I teach physical education in the Hayward Unified School District at Brad Hart Middle School, and I urge you to support this bill. Let's protect tax dollars.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Betsy Jarraz: hi, betsy, speech language pathologist, corona-norco unified school district. i urge your support with this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carlos Machado: machado with the california school board association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Liz Waterman: Liz Waterman, teach Tera Bella seventh grade, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 20, 'end': 30, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tia Nguyen: nguyen on behalf of public advocates, here in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sara Bachez: Sara Bachez with CASBO, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 17, 'end': 22, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ron Rapp: Ron Rapp on behalf of the California Federation of Teachers. We're co-sponsors of this bill and obviously in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathy Sher: Kathy Sher on behalf of the ACLU of California, in support
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eric Bakke: Eric Bakke with the Los Angeles Unified School, also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Rosenberger: Kimberly Rosenberger, Service Employees International Union, strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Young: Michael Young with the California Labor Federation, also here in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rand Martin : somebody else is pushing the button at the same time i'm trying to push it. mr. chair and members, rand larry martin on behalf of the california charter schools association. so there are three points i'd like to make this, is it evening yet? number one is there are four laws that we're talking about in this bill. three of which the california charter schools association supports. we support the brown act or bagley-keene, depending on your structure. we support the california public records act, we support the california political reform act and make no mistake that the political reform act is the central conflict of interest law in this state. the other laws that we talk about are not the core conflict of interest laws the pra is and we support it and we think it should apply to charter schools. the piece that we get stuck on is government code 1090. i want to point out something that the consultant wrote in the analysis today, which is really compelling, i think, to our argument. she talks about why government code 1090 was created. and says, mindful of the adage that no man can serve two masters. the section was enacted to ensure that public officials making official contracts not be distracted by personal financial gain from exercising absolute loyalty and undivided allegiance to the best interest of the entity which they serve. if you are a board member on a non-profit charter school board, and you're there to serve the best interests of that board. and part of serving that best interest is perhaps being able to arrange a low or no interest loan. or being able to lease a facility that you own for a dollar a year. that's serving the best interest of that entity. and to take that right away from them by imposing government code 1090 is a direct contrast to what 1090 was intended to create in the first place. yes, it works when you're talking about a city council member or a school district board member. the person on a city council should not be in any kind of financial relationship with a city on who's board they've been elected to. but when you're on a non-profit board, and many of you, i'm sure, have been on non-profit boards, you know what's required of you, expected of you. it's not just to go out and raise money, it's also to make sure that you do whatever you can as a board member to keep the doors of that facility open. when you, not you personally, but when the legislature and the governor deferred payments to schools and school districts during the worst of the recession. school districts were able to go out and get bridge loans at 2 and 3%. we were able to get bridge loans at 14 and 15 and 16%. if we were stuck with that as our only alternative, we would have been shutting doors right and left across the state. but we had board members who were willing to step up and do for that school what needed to be done. we should be applauding that. we should not be taking that right away from them. and that's exactly what 1090 does. the other three laws, absolutely let's put them in place, we agree, we like them we think they are appropriate. but let's not harm charter schools by taking away their ability of board members to do what they need to do. the last point i want to leave you with is a political one. as mr. jones-sawyer indicated, the governor has vetoed this bill. on three occasions, this bill has been vetoed, with 1090 in it. now i'm not going to say the governor's going to veto it again, but if past is prologue, there's probably a good chance that he would veto this bill. if you and we, and mr. jones- sawyer want to get this accomplished, let's get it accomplished with three of the laws that are the most important laws to protect the public interest, and the school's interest. so we encourage you to not move this bill forward with 1090. we do have another version, you'll hear, we expect eventually, coming from the senate that deals with exactly these issues. but does not take away the ability of our board members to serve the best interests and their loyalties to the charter schools. we urge your opposition to this bill today, thank you.
[{'start': 99, 'end': 116, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3278, 'end': 3290, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brendan Twohig: Mr. Chair and members, Brendan Twohig on behalf of Edvoice, we think the bill takes positive steps towards transparency and remediating conflicts of interest. However, we are opposed to the inclusion of Government Code 1090. And I will point out in addition to what Mr. Martin has said, is that the penalty for 1090 for these philanthropists who are trying to do good is a felony and a punishment, imprisonment in state prisons. So we're opposed, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 9, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 23, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 270, 'end': 276, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Karen Lang: Good afternoon Mr. Chair and members. Karen Lang on behalf of the California Association of County Treasurers and Tax Collectors. We're responsible for collecting these bonds through the tax collection process. And a lot of times, our folks are the ones that get the angry calls about why a swimming pool was built instead of a classroom. Or a football field for a school that doesn't have a football team. So we think that everything that this bill is doing is wonderful. It couldn't come soon enough. And we urge your aye vote today. Thank you.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sara Bachez: good afternoon, sara rand bachez with the california association of school business officials. we took a formal opposition to this bill and we have concerns with
[{'start': 16, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ian Padilla: Mr Chair, Ian Padilla with the Coalition for Adequate School Housing and we also must unfortunately oppose the bill. Bond oversight committees are tended to be, of course, oversight and not decision making entities. And we believe the existing statute, there's enough oversight and authority in the existing statute. So what we're creating here basically is a governing board above the governing board. And so, of course, before the amendments, we did have some concerns about the time capacity and expertise of some of these investigative body members and so. We definitely would like to work with the author and the staff to come up with an appropriate solution, thank you.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Cortez-Roth: melissa sara cortez-roth on behalf of the center for autism and related disorders in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sam Neustadt: good afternoon, my name's sam melissa neustadt, i'm here representing the state special education local plan administrator association. and we value the intent of this bill very much and have been pleased to provide technical assistance to the author and to the committee in the development of the bill so far. we want to thank the author for taking the amendments as proposed. we support empowering parents with information so that they can meaningfully participate in the development of their student's iep process. ideally, the assessment records that the gentleman just shared would come along with a psychologist to explain what all those numbers and graphs actually mean in terms of learning for the students before the iep meeting. unfortunately, these professionals that are in short supply also have a responsibility to provide direct services to students as well. and so the description of the documents and what they mean typically occur at the iep meeting. so, in the real world, federal law prohibits us from developing an iep without any participation on the part of the parent. it's illegal and it's called predetermination and i think that was captured in the analysis very nicely. and so if a parent were asked if they were interested in a copy of the iep in advance of the meeting the school district would be breaking the law by providing one because it wasn't developed with the participation of the parent. and so there won't be any iep available even if a parent requests it. in terms of all of the assessment information, there is a staffing problem in the state of california generally and in particular in special education. there's a shortage of psychologists, speech therapists, behavior specialists and so on. and all of them are working feverishly to get their work done in time for the 60 day requirement under the law as it is. if you ask them to do that in 50 days, calendar days, what you've done is just cut 10% of their effective work load. and that would require a back fill that would further exacerbate the teacher shortage and the cost associated with it. so for these reasons, unfortunately, we'll have to remain in opposition at this time.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Enrique Ruacho: Enrique Ruacho with the Los Angeles Unified School District. We've been in communication with the author's office in regards to our opposed and we appreciate the opportunity to discuss this issue. Our main opposition has to do with the conflict with IDA law as it was previously articulated with requiring us to have the parent as a part of that IEP before we can provide an IEP copy itself. As a district our goal is to work in partnership with parents to develop an IEP. And so that's really where our opposition's coming from, but we'll look at the amendments identified in the analysis and reevaluate our position and connect back with the author's office. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Betsy Jara: I'm Betsy Jara, I am a speech language pathologist. I'm in opposition to this bill.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Charles Shannon: charles sam shannon, second grade teacher speaking as an individual. i'm in opposition to this bill as well.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bob Morrison: thank you assemblyman chiu, mr chairman, and members of the committee. my name is bob and i am with the arts education data project and i'm here to speak in support of assembly bill 385. the california arts education data project is part of a national effort to consolidate arts education enrollment data so that we can measure access to and participation in the visual and performing arts for all students. california was the first of several states to release their data back in october, and when the data came out it was released in report format as well as interactive dashboards, which you have printed copies in front of you. the california release in october really provided a treasure trove of actionable information for districts across the state to determine who has access, who doesn't have access to these programs, and to develop plans within they're own schools and districts, and how to improve these opportunities for students. and we know that in other states, this data is available. several states have elementary arts education data available to them. several other states are actually including arts education metrics in their essa accountability plans. and many states are now including arts education data as part of their school report card. and we know that it's possible here in california because when we look at the california data from calpats, there was actually elementary data elements already in there. data elements on the visual and performing arts at the elementary level were included, and we even saw that 20% of the elementary schools in this state were already reporting it. so the opportunity is there but we also know from research in the state of new jersey where they released science education data in 2005 identified that there were about 100,000 students without access to programs because the release of data schools district were able to restore programs and within 5 years that number was reduced by 90%. so data has led to the restoration of programs in those schools. here in california, i've been personally astounded by the way this data has empowered individuals and i would welcome your support of this bill because it will transform the lives of the 3 million students currently not covered. i appreciate the assemblymen chu's support of this bill and i urge you to vote aye on 385.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 26, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 82, 'end': 85, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeanine Flores: Good afternoon. I'm Jeanine Flores and I'm the Visual and Performing Arts Coordinator at the Santa Clara Office of Education. Prior to that, I was in the classroom for 19 years at the elementary school and the middle school level. I'm also here as a parent. We live in Santa Clara. My daughter goes to Santa Clara High School, and Assembly Member Chu's district and in my current role, I can see how all the stakeholders can take advantage of the data that AB385 would provide. Parents, teachers, administrators, school leaders and coordinators can look at that data and make informed decisions. That would address equity and access to all the students for the arts. And what we collect as data and what we report as data is what we value. And if we value the arts we will collect data on the arts and report that out. I would also like to add, we can identify the gaps of service in the arts across our schools and we could make more informed decisions. If I had this tool as a teacher, or as a program developer, it would have been very helpful to speak to school boards, parent groups, and our superintendents of the schools. Thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 347, 'end': 350, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Joe Landon: Joe Landon, California Alliance for Arts Education, sponsor of the bill in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pat Wayne: Pat Wayne, California, the data is hosted on our website, and partnership with the California Department of Ed-
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lynn Fox: Good afternoon. I'm Lynn Fox representing the California Music Educators and the California Art Educators, and we are in strong support.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathy Lance: good afternoon, kathy charles lance representing the california alliance for arts education in strong support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Glenn Kawaguchi: Hello, my name is Dr. Glenn Kawaguchi. I'm a practicing optometrist in Ventura, California. I'm also a member of the California State Board of Optometry. One of the core responsibilities of the Board of Optometry is to protect all the consumers of our great state. It's the children, our youngest citizens of our great state, that hold the hope for our future. Yet the Board of Optometry has found that that vision can be a missing link in their success in school and life. This is why the Board of Optometry is a sponsor of the bill. Here's some background information and data points. As Assemblywoman Burke has already mentioned, according to the National Commission on Vision and Health in their report Building a Comprehensive Child Vision Care System, our current educational codes as it relates to vision screening are marginal, as approximately 33% of children that pass vision screenings have a significant vision, binocular, or eye health problem. Secondly, according to a study published in Ophthalmology, for those children that failed vision screening, approximately 40% did not receive follow-up care with a comprehensive exam. We need to bridge this gap that these children are in need of. They need comprehensive eye exams by an optometrist, ophthalmologist, or physician. The bill brought before you seeks to accomplish a few important things. It will help to raise parent awareness in the crucial role that comprehensive eye exams play in their child's health and education. To be clear, while this bill does not make a comprehensive exam mandatory, we believe that many parents will see it as an important part of the get ready for school process. Similar to the registration process related to oral health, it's not a mandate. However parents, once they have the awareness, we believe that they will make the best choices for their children. For parents who do not have their child's vision comprehensively evaluated, children will continue to be screened for vision issues through the school nurses and health clerks. Finally, as we expect that with the passage of this bill California will make progress to ensure that all children see well to thrive. As a parent, I believe that even one child getting through the crack is one too many. Each week in my small practice I see one to two children or even adults that have slipped through the cracks. They've had vision issues. They didn't realize their symptoms were related to a vision problem. It's heartbreaking to me. Thank you and please give your aye vote for AB 1110.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 604, 'end': 609, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Reena Patel: Good afternoon, my name is Dr. Reena Patel. I'm an optometrist, residency trained in pediatrics, and an assistant professor at the Southern California College of Optometry at Marshall B. Ketchum University. Quite a mouthful. I really enjoy seeing patients in our pediatrics clinic, but my heart goes out to the children I see who have an undetected vision disorder which may have impacted them academically. Perhaps causing difficulty with their reading, or their ability to pay attention in the classroom. When I explain my findings to the parents, they're often surprised to learn that their child's reading problem may actually be linked to a vision problem. Now unfortunately, parents, along with the general public, often believe that a vision screening is the same as an eye examination, but it is not. While vision screenings have their place and are often helpful, it is important to remember that they typically assess a single component of vision, such as eyesight. Think about if I were to have my blood pressure assessed at the pharmacy and I get a normal reading. Does that mean I have no health issues? Of course not, it only tells me about my blood pressure, it doesn't say anything about my blood sugar, cholesterol, or anything else. It's the same thing with vision screenings. The ability to read that chart in the distance provides us with one piece of information. Can that child see clearly in the distance? It does not assess eye focusing, eye teaming, eye pressure, eye health, and so much more. To give you some more information, a landmark study funded by the National Institutes of Health determined the prevalence of vision disorders in children here in Californiao one of them being farsightedness, which means the child has difficulty with their near vision and they need extra focusing effort in order to try and see clearly at near. And what they found is preschool age children of Hispanic and African American decent had a 10 to 13% prevalence of moderate farsightedness, and this is something that's often difficult to detect in a vision screening. Another NIH study found that pre-school and kindergarten aged children with moderate, uncorrected farsightedness had a significantly worse performance.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Valencia: good afternoon, mr. chairman and members. john kathy valencia for vsp vision care in support of ab 1110.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kara Corches: Kara Corches, on behalf of the California Optometric Association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Priscilla Fuentes: hi, i'm priscilla john fuentes with the california state board of optometry and a parent and i support this bill along with my shy son...
[{'start': 8, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Curt Child: Curt Child, Disability Rights California. We're in support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sam Rodriguez: Mr. Chairman, Sam Rodriguez on behalf of the United Food and Commercial Workers in support. But as a personal note, I want to thank my third grade, my Spanish speaking third grade teacher who told my mom that I needed glasses. It changed my life.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Gonzales: rebecca priscilla gonzales, national association of social workers california chapter, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lydia Bourne: Lydia Bourne representing American Academy of Pediatrics as well as the California School Nurses Organization. We certainly are aligned with the spirit of the bill, the assurance that children are in school and ready to learn. I want to thank the author for working with us as well as with your staff. However, we believe the requirements are in the bill are duplicative, as the Ed Code currently requires a physical exam, which would include vision screening prior to school entry. Additionally, we have in the Ed Code, we have a listing of the grades for which there are vision screening required; second, fifth, and eighth. Secondly, we believe it is disruptive to the medical home concept. As pediatricians, standard of care is for vision screening at every well child visit. If any abnormalities are noted, then that child is clearly referred. Additionally, with the list of tests that have to be done, the pediatricians do not have that type of equipment in their offices. Thirdly, this requirement is in conflict with the standards of care as well as the policy statements for the various ophthalmology groups. And then lastly, this is a bill that has been around for at least the last 15, maybe even 20 years. If I recall, one of the first issues I worked on related to this vision screening issue. The California school nurses, in an effort to address some of the issues, realized that the operating plan, essentially the standards of care for vision screening in the schools, the vision manual is dated 2005. We convened a task force that was comprised of not only ophthalmologists, but optometrists as well, as well as low vision screening teachers, and essentially updated the manual. It is now being approved by the Department of Education and we are hopeful that it would be posted on the website pretty soon. We actually submitted to them in September of 2016. And then lastly, we would like to say that we are willing to be working with the author in order to address these issues. In my letter, which I believe all of you received, we did offer a couple of solutions, one of which was to make sure that there is a comprehensive data collection system around vision screening. Unfortunately, it had been defunded and so we would suggest that it be refunded. And then secondly, I also submitted to all of the Members of the Committee a snapshot in time, April 2016, CSNO did a survey of our nurses to find out how much vision screening was going on. I think you have an Excel sheet that shows about 250,000 kids were screened and what the issue shows is that there tends to be a lack of follow up, not that the children are not being screened. And so, if we can come up with a plan to address what we call gaps in service, then hopefully we'll be able to address some of the issues that are attempted-
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Teresa Stark: Mr. Chair and members, Teresa Stark on behalf of Kaiser Permanente. Unfortunately, we're also in opposition to this bill. The eye health providers, particularly pediatric eye health providers at Kaiser Permanente are very concerned with this bill. We really believe it's important and sort of our mission and our philosophy at Kaiser is the right care in the right place at the right time. And unfortunately, this bill depart from that. None of the medical organizations, the physician medical organizations, recommend a comprehensive eye exam for all children. It's just not necessary to perform this extensive and somewhat invasive eye exam on asymptomatic children with normal vision. I don't know how many of you go to the eye doctor, but if you've had the eye drops, the dilating eye drops, in your eye, it dilates the pupil and it actually paralyzes the muscle in the eye, so that the doctor can look in the eye and better assess whether there's any pathology in the eye or any issues and that enables them to do the exam. That's not pleasant. I certainly dislike doing that. It makes your eyes very sensitive to light. It blurs your vision up to 24 hours. I can't imagine doing that on every 5-year-old when it's just not necessary and they go through the vision screening as it is. Our other concern is this really fragments care. It is really driving care out of the medical home. Children get this type of vision screening and their eye health assessed in their pediatrician's office, certainly through the school nurse. You, Mr. Chairman, you're a teacher. You've probably even identified children who seem to having issues with their vision and they can get referred for followup care and that's medically necessary and that test will be covered. So it's not an issue of coverage. It's an issue of medically inappropriate care for children who just don't need this level. And we're just really struggling with what the problem is. We certainly sympathize with what the author and sponsor have brought to you today, but we're having difficulty understanding what problem it is we're trying to solve. We look forward to continuing conversations. But really want to understand better what we're trying to accomplish. Thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stuart Thompson: Mr. Chair and members, Stuart Thompson on behalf of the California Medical Association. Our concern on this bill is it would require physicians who see a child who don't present any vision symptoms and the physician would not refer for an eye exam but for this law. Typically we do this with many other screening tests, is there's a screening test to see if a child presents problems. And if they do they refer it down to the next medical specialist. Our problem with this mandate is it will require every child to receive this test whether or not they were presenting symptoms. And within this system we would think would be kind of a misallocation of resources. So, those are our concerns and thank you for the Committee and the author for hearing those.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Alley : Jennifer Alley with the California Association of Health Plans.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alice Kessler: Alice Kessler representing the California Academy of Eye Physicians and Surgeons, also in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicole Rice: thank you. sorry. good afternoon, mr. chair and members. i'm nicole rebecca rice with the california manufacturers and technology association, and we are a co-sponsor here on ab 445, along with the state building trades, and together our organizations co-chair a cte coalition called get real, that worked on and supported the establishment of this career tech education incentive grant several years ago, and so we're happy to be here today to also ask for your support in extending a program. cmta has long supported sustainable funding for high quality cte programs that ensure a continuance of these programs that are aligned to industry needs and based on labor market data. and this cte incentive grant supports this type of programs. it asks applicants to adhere the quality standards such as industry participation groups and student leadership organizations and it also asks them to demonstrate a commitment with the matching grant, matching ratio requirement. the programs of this caliber are vital to introducing and preparing students for the next generation of careers, and providing individuals with livable wages, with less than a four year degree. our students can not compete for the 21st century jobs with 19th century skills and california manufacturers can't continue to innovate and be effective without a highly trained workforce. so for those reasons we're happy to be here to support and ask for your aye vote. thank you.
[{'start': 61, 'end': 80, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeremy Smith: Thank you Mr. Chair and Members, The Committee. I'm Jeremy Smith here on behalf of the State Building and Construction Trades Council. Also a proud member of the Get Real Coalition. We believe that there is another path for kids, especially kids that want to work with their hands, after high school. That path does not necessarily include a four year college education with the accompanying debt that comes with it. If you get into a CTE program that leaves you into the construction industry. You can after high school join a state approved apprenticeship program and you are automatically right then earning a living wage. With health care, sick time, vacation time, defined benefit pensions, and a living wage as a first year apprentice. You have begun your career. Instead of waiting until you're in your mid 20s, haven't finished college or finished college with a degree that does not get you into a job right away. Like the CTE courses that we all remember taking in High School do. So this is in our grant, goes a long way towards helping schools afford the programs. They are very expensive programs no matter the craft or no matter the industry. These are expensive programs that require much more than just books and pencils and pens. So school districts needs this incentive grant to continue. We agree and we are happy to co-sponsor this bill and urge your support. Thank you.
[{'start': 52, 'end': 64, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tristan Brown: thank you, mr. chair members, tristan nicole brown with the california federation teachers. also proud members of the get real coalition here in support, thank you.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ken De Vore: de vore, the national foundation of independent business, strong support.
[]
Karen Sarkissian: karen with the california chamber of commerce, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kara Bush: bush with the computing technology industry association, also a member of get real, in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Damon Conklin: Damon Conklin with the Sacramento Regional Builders Exchange, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Fred Jones: Fred Jones, California Business Education Association, which is also a founding member of Get Real, in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jim Ashborn: jim tristan ashborn, california agricultural teacher's association, here in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ed Dennis: ed with project lead the way, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 2, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nancy LaCost: nancy jim lacost representing 67 school districts and 16 rocp jpas, in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nick Romley: nick nancy romley on behalf of the association of career and college readiness, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 11, 'end': 17, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Henry Rodgers: henry nick rodgers on behalf of los angeles unified school district, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Moira Topp: Moira Topp on behalf of Orange County Business Council, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ronna Sheriff: Ronna Sheriff on behalf of the California EDGE Coalition, a coalition of business labor and social justice organizations, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Charlie Ray: Charlie Ray with California Construction and Industrial Materials Association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kenneth Kahn: good afternoon. i'm kenneth, chairman of the santa ynez band of chumash indians and i'm here to testify on behalf of ab 738 to establish a california native curriculum. native americans have inhabited what we know today as california for thousands of years. tribes endured european exploration, the spanish, mexican, and american periods. today, the federal government recognizes over 100 tribal nations within california. according to most recent census data, california is home to more people of native american, alaskan native heritage, than any other state in the country. at the time of our discovery by the spanish, the chumash had developed an advanced culture that included extensive trade networks, their own shell currency, and ocean-going paddle canoes called tomols. few, if any, students learn about this chumash history. students instead learn about the spanish missions. the missions and their accompanying presidio military garrisons were built to control chumash lands and subjugate its chumash people. after forcing the chumash people to relocate to missions, the spanish were forced to leave when mexico declared its independence, which left my ancestors homeless when the missions were sold or cyclorized. the santa ynez chumash were fortunate to find a sliver of open land on a river bed called sandra dakota creek. chumash settlement of the river bed can be documented back to before california statehood in 1835 but it took until 1906 for the indian agent and the catholic church to finally deed the land to the united states to create the santa ynez indian reservation in what is now santa barbara county. the remnants of ancient civilizations are prominent throughout california. today, native americans celebrate their heritage through language, customs and traditions. every tribe has its own story and ab 738 creates the vehicle to expand the story of california indians beyond just missions. we ask you for your support of ab 738. thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nikia Zavala: haku matuka, nikia. i am the cultural director for my tribe, the santa ynez band of chumash indians. as the culture director, i'm also in charge of the tribal language teacher program. the tribe began its samal language classes with a group of language apprentices, to create a core group of language teachers, to begin teaching classes for both children and adults. the legislature recognized the importance of the credential for the native american language teachers when it passed ab 544 in 2009. it is impossible to separate the teaching of language without teaching native american culture. therefore, we returned to the legislature to extend the credentialing of native american language teachers to also include native american culture in ab 163 that was passed in 2015. now, we ask this committee to support the creation of native american curriculum to tell the true story of california tribes. language is a core of who we are and what we do, it opens up every single door to our culture, our songs and our ceremonies. we ask for your support for ab 738 today...
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kathleen Marshall: ... Good afternoon, my name is Kathleen Marshall, and I'm an enrolled member of the Santa Ynez Band of Chumash Indians and I'm also the lead language instructor for my tribe's Samala Language Program. Across California, there are stories of young tribal members decades ago, being punished for speaking their native language. The children sometimes were sent away to boarding schools in efforts to distance them from their language and the rest of their culture. These youngsters grew into adults who were reluctant to share the language with their offspring, out of concern their children also would be beaten or sent away. This is part of the true history of California tribes. California tribes are trying to reverse this loss of language, culture and history with after school programs and on weekends, but this is not enough. The true history of California tribes needs to be taught as part of the school curriculum. I therefore request your support for AB 738. ... thank you for the opportunity to address this Committee.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrew Geterage: geterage on behalf of the los angeles unified school district in support.
[]
Melanie Cuevas: Melanie Cuevas, on behalf of the Viejas Band of Kumeyaay Indians also in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jordan Thierry: jordan henry thierry, alliance of boys and men of color. we strongly urge your support for this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Frank Molina: Frank Molina on behalf of the San Manuel Band of Mission Indians in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eric Crane: good afternoon, members of the committee on education. my name is eric jordan crane. i'm a senior researcher at wested, a nonpartisan, nonprofit research development and service agency headquartered in california, and committed to promoting excellence, achieving equity and improving learning for children, youth and adults. in my 23 years in education research policy and practice work, i've written about student assessment and school performance, with a focus on making best use of assessment data and other information. although it may be helpful to briefly discuss the different types of assessment practice, in the interest of time, i'll refer you to two pages that staff has included in your packet. these pages sketch out the difference among types of assessment. now, it needs to be mentioned that those summaries are what's typical. exceptions to these typical characteristics can be found. without speaking to the specifics of the smarter balanced assessment system, others on the agenda can do that more ably than i can, i will say that it was designed as a system with full awareness of how formative, interim and summative components work together to promote better teaching and learning. generally, it is formative assessment practice that supports continuous feedback to adjust ongoing teaching and learning. there is interest, and not just in the committee, in understanding the conditions under which interim assessment informs instruction, above and beyond the interim's primary function as student progress monitoring. essentially, three conditions need to be met. timing in receiving results, amount in grain size of information, and adequate teacher training, receiving results. assessment results to the classroom teacher need to be timely enough that the teacher can adjust instruction, amount in grain size of information, the number of items in the typical interim assessment can't reliably determine whether a student has mastered a particular standard unless the entire assessment is built around one or two standards. there is a real risk of overleveraging interim assessment information, drawing incorrect conclusions about student mastery from just one or two items. now, classroom summaries on a particular item can be informative and useful to the teacher. but that's a far cry from drawing a conclusion about a particular student's mastery of a particular standard. and that leads to the third condition, teacher training and assessment literacy. when teachers have been trained in assessment and understand how formative, interim and summative assessment activities can work together in a comprehensive system, they will be well positioned to draw defensible conclusions from assessment data. and that, in turn, will support world-class teaching and learning in california's schools. thank you.
[{'start': 66, 'end': 83, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cheri Bureau: Good afternoon Mr. Chair and members. Thank you for inviting me to share my perspective on the SBAC Interim Assessments. My name is this is Cheri Bureau, this is my 33rd year of teaching in California public schools. I have topped from 2nd to 7th grade, and am currently teaching 3rd grade in Davis elementary. This year I'd administered two of the SBAC Interim Assessments to my third graders in mathematics. In giving these assessments I was hoping for two outcomes, to give my students familiarity with the online testing process, as this is the first year they're taking the SBAC test. And more importantly, to generate data that I could use to inform my instruction. The experience of having my students take the SBAC Interim Assessment Test, was disappointing. Although my students now do have some experience with logging in and taking an online test, the resulting data that was generated is extremely vague. For example, the testing report merely states that a student is below standard, at/or near standard or above standard. No where in the testing results is there an opportunity for me to look a specific standards or the items used. In order for me to use these assessments to help inform my instruction, the following changes would be helpful. Rather than students being placed in a broadband of achievement, I would like to have specific data that lets me know where a student excels and where they struggle. For example, if a student achieves a low score on number sense, I need to know if there is a specific standard or type of question that is difficult for them. Having concrete data broken down by standard and question type is essential. I need to be able to see the actual questions and student responses, in order to make the interim testing experience valuable for me and my students. The SBAC Interim Assessments have the potential to be a valuable part of my instruction, but are not currently configured in a way that is useful to me as a teacher. Thank you for listening to my perspective on these assessments. I would be happy to answer any questions.
[{'start': 140, 'end': 152, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Aba Ngissah: Correct, thank you. Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and members. I appreciate you valuing classroom teachers voices, and thereby giving us the opportunity to share our observation with the SBAC Interim Assessments. My name is Aba Ngissah, and I have been fortunate to have been able to experience teaching grades 2 through 12, in my 22 years of teaching. For the past 10 plus years I have been a Math, Science teacher for 6th grade. I was an SBAC Teacher Ambassador. I do sit on the CTA's curriculum and instruction Committee for State Council, and I am a member of the CTA Stafford Instructional Leader core. The formative assessment process is an amazing process. It's a tool that if used properly, not only allows me to obtain a clear understanding of where my students are in their learning process, but it also provides timely feedback. And this enables myself and my students to adjust teaching and learning, so that they can reach their learning goals. As an SBAC Teacher Ambassador, I was so excited when we were starting to roll out the Interim Assessment. And I shared with teachers, that we're finally getting a tool that will be able to help our students with their learning. After years of just teach to the test, they finally heard us. And unfortunately when it was rolled out, it wasn't that way. In my opinion, it was a failure and if that's too harsh of a word, then it wasn't a success. The SBAC Interim Assessments must be improved. I need to know more than if my students are below, at, near or above standard. It must be able to tell me which students are struggling, which students are achieving in what areas and why. I'm working with 40 plus students every day. Each with different learning styles, different educational needs, different behaviors. And as such, in order for me to effectively address and support the needs of my students, I need a tool that's going to help me determine which instructional strategy will work best for each child, and on each item. The Interim Assessments were supposed to be a value to educators. Where are the raw scores? How will our students data be used? What were the items and the student responses? As an SBAC Teacher Ambassador, I really had expected a high quality Interim Assessment, and unfortunately it isn't what we have right now. Not in its present state. And that is the unfortunate truth. Thank you.
[{'start': 220, 'end': 231, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paula Heupel: yes, and you did. i'm quite impressed, it's not often that is pronounced correctly. so good afternoon chairman o'donnell and members. i am paula eric heupel, assistant superintendent of merced city school district. and on behalf of the teachers and administration of that district, as well as my colleagues in the county, we greatly appreciate this opportunity. over the course of my 28 year career in education, i have served as a teacher and coordinator, a director of curriculum instruction, and currently as in the position of assistant superintendent. in which i also serve as the district's casp, coordinator. our anticipation early on, and the availability of the end term assessments gave us great hope that we could replace assessments that were aligned to the california standards test. we also hoped from the many descriptions that they would provide individual student performance details, and strengths in areas of need align to the california state standards, now the common core or the aligned common core. and that they would also provide assessments to support teacher collaboration, we were hoping that. these assessments, but assess teachers and communicated with the parents, and additionally, provides students practice with the s back environment. it became clear from our pilot testing that the interim assessments still required significant improvements in order to inform instruction. and our district has then and many fellow districts in our county have allocated extensive resources to purchase third party systems to do just that. the information from the interim assessments for curriculum and instruction decisions are far too limited. our teachers need data to allow them to provide targeted follow-up instruction. this data needs to be reported by standard and skill, including student responses. test item and test question types are also important. school administrators as well need raw scores, or even scale scores that can be downloaded. so that we can integrate with other data systems, other local measures, to get a full picture of a student's performance, and where we need to go with our instructional resources. and finally, this opportunity should prepare the students for the sbac. for example, the interim comprehensive assessments need to be adaptive as they are not currently. and they need to continue to function as the sbac would with mirrored type of answers, or question types, excuse me. so we see the interim assessments helping to stretch our district resources that could enhance classroom needs to meet state standards, and the caaspp assessments, as well as enhancing home school communication. i do thank you for this opportunity, and for listening to practicing educators.
[{'start': 111, 'end': 120, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 139, 'end': 156, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carlon Myrick: good afternoon, ny name is carlon, i lead the team of networks california based team. nicole garner joins me as our organization's first director of school support here in northern california. and she'll introduce herself a bit more in a moment. before i get started, just wanted to note that equity is what operates at the center of our work. it's the why behind having actionable, user friendly data that allows teachers to improve their practice. it's about empowering every teacher to meet the needs of every one of our children here in california. our organization, the achievement network or anet, we know this. we're a national non-profit organization, who's mission is to empower high quality teaching in every classroom. we do this by combining exceptional tools such as our quarterly interim assessments, our instructional data platform which we'll look at it in just a moment. with extraordinary talent, our coaches who work alongside educators to help build strong instructional and data practices. our people are former educators, former school leaders, district leaders, with a record of success. our computer based interim assessment tools are offered in english and spanish. and we're proud to say that our ela and math assessments were just rated as tier one, which is the top status, by the only state among state departments of education, who conduct curriculum and assessment reviews, which is louisiana to my knowledge. so i've been asked to come and speak about the characteristics of great data reporting. great data allows educators to understand what students are and are not learning, in order to empower them to do their jobs better. that is to say, we believe teachers should be able to spend most of their time at the student and at the item level, and that a great data report facilitates this type of learning. so i'm going to sort of demonstrate as if i were the second grade teacher here and, i'm able to see performance by the standards, and maybe i'm a little intrigued by this first standard here, this measurement and data standard. because i taught it, i thought my kids knocked it out of the park and i want to investigate it closer. so first just to note, this standard requires students to represent whole numbers as lengths from 0 on a number line diagram with equally spaced points corresponding to the number 0, 1, 2. and represent whole number sums and differences within 100 on a number line diagram. now i really want to take a look first at this item here. i'll give you a moment to look at the question. maybe you can predict which each misconception may have been. we believe that for teachers to be able to make informed decisions using interim assessment data, they should have detailed information such as this about the questions, and potential reasons why students chose the wrong answer. this empowers them to make informed instructional shifts. we also believe that the data should allow teachers to pinpoint both whole class needs such as possibly this, but also individual student needs. so for example, i see that eric, byron, alejandro, and norma all chose distractor c. it seems, based on how i may have taught it that the students understand the commutative property of addition, but they falsely transcribed it to stand subtraction, which is to say, when we subtract we start with the whole. so to reiterate, student responses in work should be easily accessible to teachers to fully diagnosed misunderstanding. this allows teachers to prioritized targeted whole group versus smaller group of students for instruction, without this ability to drill down deep teachers feel that they just, we heard teacher say they're teaching for the sake, testing for the sake of testing. but not being in power to do anything differently
[{'start': 16, 'end': 23, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 27, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 86, 'end': 99, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3074, 'end': 3078, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3080, 'end': 3085, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3087, 'end': 3096, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3102, 'end': 3107, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nicole Garner: good afternoon. hello, my name is nicole. i work as a director of school support with achievement network. prior to this role, i taught in colorado and here in california. my school in colorado partnered with aned, which transform the way that i thought about and acted on data. a change which then allowed me to have the highest first grade growth with the kept first grade students that i worked with international network last year. i want to share a personal story that for me highlights the power of having actionable data that helps me directly influence what i'm doing with students. before using aned assessments, i saw data not as a tool to help me, but as a way to figure out whether or not i was teaching well. it influenced my own perception of myself as a teacher. i was teaching fourth grade in 2014 when my school began using the aned assessments. on the first interim assessments, my students performed within the 40th percentile, significantly lower data than i had ever received before. it was a rude awakening, because i had never had data that i could analyze past the high level overview. all i was able to take from the interim was that i was a failure. i knew that my students deserved better, so i blindly worked to help them by doing more of what i was already doing. i pulled more small groups, i graded more papers, i gave more assignments. the second interim results came back and nothing had changed. my extra, indirected, undirected efforts had not helped my students. to me it was undeniable proof that i simply was not meant to be a teacher. thankfully, the data said no such thing to my grade level partner. instead of staying focused on a high level performance overview. she taught me to push into the details of the questions and the standards. when the examined at this level, the data no longer demanded my resignation, but told me stories of why my students had struggles. and how we could help them do better. i had never before had access to data that could do that. i'd never been empowered by an assessment to help me in my instruction. strong data changed the way that we were able to collaborate. with my colleagues, we deduced misconceptions and tie them to what we had done in instruction. we found larger trends and adjusted our classroom routines and rituals to correct them. through this collaboration, i was able to construct lessons that matched both the needs of the standards and the needs of my individual students. this would not have been true if i had not had access to rich interim assessments and very usable data. every student deserves a teacher that knows how to support them. and every teachers deserves data that tells them how we can do that. thank you for your time here today.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Keric Ashley: thank you, good afternoon. i'm keric paula ashley, deputy superintendent at the california department of education. first i want to thank you for having this hearing and the opportunity to discuss california's direction in its assessment system. i appreciate the testimony and the comments that have been discussed today. many of which we have also heard as we speak to teachers throughout the state. and we're privileged to have with us today tony alpert who's the executive director of smarter balanced as well as michelle center, our state's assessment director. before tony speaks to some of the issues raised today, and the enhancements that are already planned for smarter balanced, i want to provide a few points of context for this discussion. as mentioned by chair o'donnell, in 2013 when ab 44 was passed, and signed by the governor, it signaled a major change for our assessment system. we eliminated many tests that were designed for accountability and the purpose to drive judgements at the end of the year. and moved us to a new era of designing assessments as ab 484 stated for the primary purpose of improving teaching and learning. we still use these assessments for accountability, but again its primary purpose is to improve teaching and learning. and that's why california elected to join smarter balance as its consortium, in order to have a comprehensive system of assessment. which starts with formative tools, interim assessments, and ends with the summit of assessment. you've heard some criticism today, and i would say mostly fair criticism of our current interim assessments, and the reporting of those results. which are not as helpful to teachers as we need them to be. that is why we've been working with smarter balanced to make improvements. some of which are planned to be released this fall, which tony albert can address. and to give you our commitment to the continuous improvement of the system, until it does meet the needs of our teachers. we knew when we implemented smarter balance, that the summit of assessment was going to be more advanced in readiness, than the interim assessments and the digital library. but it had to be that way. the initial priority had to be the successful implementation of the summit of assessment. we had to meet those federal obligations first, or we would lose the entire system. and we definitely were successful. california is now in its third year of testing 3.2 million students with computer adaptive tests. with embedded supports for all students, including our english learners, and our students with disabilities. only 900 students out of 3.2 million have had to take the test on paper and pencil. not all states had this type of success, and no one in the entire country has been as successful as we have here in california. so now we need to move to improve our formative tools and interim assessments, to match the success that we've had with the summit of assessments, and that's what our next step is. one of the great advantages that we have and the reason we joined smarter balance to begin with is that, california has considerable influence on the direction and the implementation of smarter balance. smarter balance is not just another test vendor, the entire organization is governed by its state members. it's the states that make up the members of the executive committee. in fact, i am the current chair of the executive committee for smarter balance. we also have a second california member on the executive committee who represents higher education. it's the states that establish the strategic plan, and it's the states that approve the budget for smarter balance. in addition to governments, smarter is designed for teachers and by teachers. california teachers have been included in every aspect of this system as its moved forward including test item review, setting performance levels and establishing resources for the digital library. as chair of the executive committee, i can sit here today and confirm that smarter at the direction of its state members, has been directing additional reasearch resources to improve the digital library, and the eternal assessments. so i'll turn this over now to tony who will discus these issues more specifically.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 444, 'end': 455, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 516, 'end': 531, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 573, 'end': 577, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 774, 'end': 783, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1833, 'end': 1844, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4203, 'end': 4207, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Darlene Anderson: hi, my name's darlene keric anderson and i think the importance of assessments when you're looking at students who are in the public school system and so the teacher can really know where the student is. i had a, i had a second grader who was in sdc class. and i pulled him out and put in a regular ed. and the special education specialist that worked with him, knew exactly where he was in the second grade and was able to get him to grade levels before the sixth grade. and i'm saying, as parent who's been involved in school side councils, what, who actually looked at the smarter balance in sacramento city unified school district. when they realized how much access i could put together in it, they eliminate the access for parents. i think it's critical that parents and community members have oversight, or have the ability to have a voice in the, the tool that's utilized to ensure that all students have an opportunity to learn. i see it difficult when the state is supporting our teachers or unions when really, there's no accountability at the state level. it has to do with where we expect our community to be. and how we expect to ensure oversight. i think we should use the best tool that we can utilize, when we're talking about ensuring that all kids have access. and i'm not sure about smarter balance, i've seen some things in the smarter balance.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susan Green: Hi, my name is Susan Green. I am the Director of assessment and accountability for San Juan Unified School District here in Sacramento. We have been using the interim assessment blocks since they started. And echo everything that the panels have said about the issues. I've also, I also currently am serving on the smarter balance practice and performance Subcommittee. And I have actually seen the enhancements that Tony has talked about. I've shared them with our teachers and met with our teachers. And the overwhelming response of my teachers in terms of the enhancement was this is exactly what we want. And they felt like the usability of the system. Will give them the actual data that they're looking for. Thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 417, 'end': 421, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bill Lucia: Mister Chairman, Bill Lucia with Edvoice. I wanted to point out some things that you've heard today, and just underline them and even recommend some of these conversations before it to the Budget Subcommittee, because I believe that there is that obfuscation in terms of some of the answers. And it's non-trivial in there, thy're not just in millions of dollars at stakes but, the thousands of lives at stake in terms of the issue of equity and the opportunities that were sold to the Legislature of moving away from just a summative high stakes end of year exam to looking at ways in which we could use assessment in a classroom to really help teachers help students in personalized instruction. And find, down to the standard level, where kids are struggling. And then, based on sets of standards, where the struggling can be assisted and then moved and scaffolded up to be ultimately able to reach grade level proficiency. And without preface, I would just like to say there was a comment made about RFP's. Seven months is really too sad, for California and all the teachers that have been giving tests that only now, presumably, and is it really the RFP that's going to answer the questions that you ask. Authorization was four years ago to do things as, that require and offer at no cost, and to make assessment results useful down to the standards level for the pupil in the classroom. And that's the pupil and the teacher. You heard from your panelists that that's not happening. You heard answers from the department and the SBAC folks that assessments are being made accessible, that's the front end. So, we figured out how to see kids in front of a computer, that's great. But, if the output is garbage and not useful by teachers then we probably better off not even having them, and spending the time with instructional time. We've gone backward 25 years and asked teachers up and down the state to create their own instruction material, their own quizzes, their own item banks when the promise of a new assessment program, to be the primary purpose to improve teaching and learning. And that happens at the individual pupil level in the classroom with the teacher, and not just with this year end, high stakes summative assessment. So it's, our assessment of this is it's not only a failed problem, but there's even a possibility that we've looked at legally as to whether there's a misappropriation of public funds. You heard the word digital library, four times in testimony. Digital library does not exist in the authorization for this program. That if you look at the education code digital library talks about the University of California in digital library materials for higher ed students. The, there's language that's been put in RFP's that's been approved through the budget process but not through the education code and this Committee, as to what are the requirements for this program? I, we appreciate your oversight, we think there continues to be oversight needed not only with this Committee, but the budget sub Committee and get to the bottom of why the tools that were promised to teachers, so they could be productive with kids and the data, not high stakes. But to actually help learning on a ongoing real time basis, why is that still not available for teachers four years later? Thank you.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Virginia Early: Alright, good morning, Mr. Chairs, members. Virginia Early with the Legislative Analyst's Office. Today, on this item, I'll provide a brief overview of the state's child care and preschool system as well as some information on recent trends. The sergeant just passed out a handout, and all of us will be starting on page 1. So on page 1 of this handout, we provide a brief description of California's child care and preschool programs. As you can see from the chart, we categorized these programs in three ways: childcare for families participating in the state's welfare to work program, CalWORKs, childcare for families not participating in CalWORKs and preschool programs, and the chart provides a brief description of each program as well as the number of slots associated with each program. And statewide, we have about 434,000 slots for childcare and preschool in 2016-17. Page 2 of the handout provides a brief overview of some key components of child care and preschool programs. All the programs on page 1 have eligibility criteria, but the criteria vary across the programs. So CalWORKs and most non-CalWORKs child care programs require families to have incomes below 70% of the state median income in 2007. This is about $42,000 for a family of 3. However, transitional kindergarten does not have an income requirement. Most programs also serve children based on their age. Most programs serve children birth to age 12, but state preschool serves 3 and 4-year-olds, and transitional kindergarten serves children based on their birth month, serving children born between September 2nd and December 2nd. Finally, the state has recently allowed school districts to serve children born outside of the transitional kindergarten birth window. Children between December 2nd and the end of the school year, if they turn five, but the school district doesn't received funding until they turn five. Finally, most programs require parents to be working or in school during the hours they receive care, but part-day state preschool and transitional kindergarten do not have work requirements. Access to the programs also varies; for CalWORKs and transitional kindergarten, the state typically funds care for all eligible and interested families. The other programs, the state budgets a certain number of slots, and families are prioritized based on income. The state provides care in four types of settings: licensed centers, which tend to be larger classroom-like settings; licensed family child care homes, where the child receives care in the provider's own home, and there're about 6 to 12 children total served; and license-exempt settings where families, friends, and neighbors care for children from one family at one time. And finally, school classrooms similar to those of kindergarten. CalWORKs and the alternative payment program can access care from both licensed centers, licensed family child care homes, and license-exempt providers. Other childcare programs and state preschool can only access care in licensed centers and licensed family childcare homes, and transitional kindergarten is served in school classrooms similar to that of kindergarten. The standards also very across programs. All programs have to meet certain health and safety standards, have to have certain staff qualifications and staff ratios, but specific standards vary across the programs. In addition, some programs are required to include developmentally appropriate activities. So for example, state preschool programs are required to include basic numeracy and literacy activities. On page 3 of the handout, we discussed program funding. The funding model varies across the programs. There are three main ways the state funds programs through child care vouchers, direct contracts, and school district allocations. In CalWORKs, for example, the families receive vouchers for childcare, which means families can choose a provider that meets their needs, and the state pays, reimburses the cost of that care. This reimbursement amount varies regionally based on regional market rate surveys the state conducts every couple of years. For other programs, the state contracts with specific providers for childcare and pays the same rate across the state. Finally, transitional kindergarten is funded through school district allocations through the Local Control Funding Formula. On page 4 of this handout, we cover some trends over the last decade. There's a chart you might be interested in. As you can see from this chart, a funding decrease by about $1 billion between 2007-8 and 2013-14 and has increased by 871 million since 13-14. During the recession, the Legislature held rates mostly flat but did reduce some rates for license-exempt care and for the amount the state provided to agencies administering the voucher programs. Starting in 2014-15, however, the state has provided three consecutive rate increases with spending on rates in 16-17 about 400 million higher than spending in 13-14. Slots were the main area where the cuts happened in the recession with substantial reductions and then increases during the recovery. But when we talk about slots, we really have to talk about CalWORKs slots and non-CalWORKs slots separately, because as I mentioned earlier, the state typically funds all eligible CalWORKs families and doesn't fund all eligible non-CalWORKs families. So between 2007-8 and 13-14, CalWORKS slots decreased by about 65,000. These reductions were primarily due to state actions that reduce the number of eligible families. So for example, during the recession, the state exempted certain families from the work requirement, allowing them to stay at home with their children while continuing to receive cash aid. Since 13-14, CalWORKs slots have increased by about $6,000 due to the net effect of re-engaging these families in the workforce and an overall decline in the caseload due to an improving economy. Between 2007-8 and 13-14 on the non-CalWORKs side of the house; state actions reduced these slots by about 44,000 slots due to across-the-board budget cuts. And since 13-14, increases in funding for slots have resulted in there being about 25,000 more slots available today than in 13-14. That concludes my overview presentation, I'm happy to answer any questions.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 33, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brianna Bruns: Good morning, Brianna Bruns, Department of Finance. The 2017-18 Governor's Budget balances spending for childcare and early learning with available resources, and provides a measured approach to increasing ongoing funding to these programs. This budget includes 3.7 billion for these programs, representing a 2% increase over the 2016 Budget Act allocation. These augmentations are attributable to full year implementation included in the 2016 Budget Act, as well as increases in CalWORKs cost of care. This budget proposes pausing additional augmentations associated with the 2016 Budget Act multiyear deal in order to better align expenditures with resources. This would extend the originally scheduled three-year augmentation plan to four years. Thank you for your time, happy to answer any questions.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debra Brown: good morning, debra jonah brown on behalf of state superintendent of public instruction, tom torlakson. i think the lao and the department of finance did a good overview and discussion of the governor's proposals. so i think i'll just provide a little bit more detail on some of the 2016-17 implementation issues that are referenced in your agenda. and so one of them, which the lao mentioned, which was on the standard reimbursement rate, so that was increasing the rate that the legislature approved a 10% increase midyear. so that was effective january 1st. and when we looked at implementing that, we ran into a few problems, namely that our system doesn't provide or doesn't allow us to do two rates within a single contract year. and so we looked at different options to doing that, including potentially having to do two contracts within a year, which we felt would be not only burdensome from the department, but also from the provider side to have to do two contracts. additionally, because of the way the earnings happen within contracts, it probably could have caused some more concerns in terms of when providers are earning most to their contracts, which varies from provider to provider. and so ultimately what we did in conversation with department of finance, lao and legislative staff is we had a blended rate. and so what that blended rate was, was essentially a 5% increase over at the '15-'16. and so that provided providers with a $40.20 increase, rather than the 10% starting in january 1st. and so that took effect july 1st, 2016. and so the couple other notes on the, i would say we've done an updated survey on the regional market rate and so we will have those results soon and the new ceilings will be posted when the legislature approves the increases to those ceiling rates. as ms. early mentioned, the preschool slots. so, as we've seen in the '15-'16 year, there were some challenges with uptakes, particularly on the lea side, on the increased preschool slots, and so in the '16-'17 budget year, the slots were only for leas and so we've been now done a third round. so we're in the middle of a third round of seeking applications. so what we found is we did a first round and we filled about 1300 of those slots with 40% for full day and 60% for part day. we then did a second round, which closed recently, and in that round we were able to get to about not quite 1600 slots. and again, around the same ratio with sort of the 40/60 split between part day and full day. and because of those two rounds, while we have nearly 2,900 slots, which was the increase provided, there is funding leftover, about $11 million or $11.5 million because so many of those were part day. and so we put out another round of requests for applications to try to utilize all that money to increase the slot. so, that closes later this month and so we are hopeful that will get some increased interest in that so that we can fully utilize the slots in dollars that were provided in the budget. i would reiterate, i don't think that this means that there's a lack of need for preschool slots for four year olds. i think the challenge is that ms. early identified, when the money is primarily focused or limited to lea's, becomes a little bit challenging because they're looking at different rules and requirements for state preschool versus tk. and so some of those issues are the reimbursement rate being lower as was mentioned. also with tk, the eligibility is around birth dates versus income eligibility. and then also facilities and the ability to expand facilities on school campuses. and so we think those are some of the concerns or some of the trade offs that districts have to look at when they're deciding to apply for those. so i wouldn't want the implications that we're having trouble getting enough applicants for those slots to be an indication that there isn't need. i think there's probably a misalignment or a disconnect between need and how the slots are provided. one other issue that's noted in the agenda item was around the alternative payment program cost. what we found is we were alerted to some potential issues late last year around some over-enrollment issues within the ap programs, and so we started having conversations with those providers that we were hearing from, trying to assess what the situation was. so they were on track to base to essentially over earn their contract without changes to it. and one of the concerns that we had was not only the over-enrollment but, as the contractors were trying to manage that, not wanting to dis-enroll families. and so we began working with those providers and having conversations and really what we needed to do was get a assessment of how big the challenge was. was this limited to a handful of contractors or was it larger than that? and so, in january, about the 20th, we received information from providers around their enrollment numbers through december 31st. and so, with that information, we were really able to determine that it was a significantly larger problem. and so we were looking at potentially just over $22 million in over-enrollment. and so we began having conversations with providers around what some of the rationale was for that. and also having conversations with department of finance, the lao, and legislative staff. i think we all had a shared objective around not wanting to dis-enroll families. and so we initiated a process where we notified providers who were over-earning their contract to essentially let them know we were looking at solutions for this. we directed them not to dis-enroll families, but also not to enroll any more families with the idea being that we could look at potential savings to backfill some of that, and then also hopefully have, perhaps, attrition would help correct that over the year. we have a better sense of the problem with each month, so we also ask for aps to report their enrollments monthly; some do quarterly. so we're trying to track this on a much closer basis and also working with the, i think, it's around 34 contractors who are over earning that contracts right now. so working with them to get a sense of it, but we did submit a request to have to use some available money we had from general childcare and calworks stage three that wasn't being utilized. and so we did submit a request to have that money transferred to fund this so, again, that these providers wouldn't have to dis-enroll families, if we could find a solution to that. and so that was approved on march 24th by the legislature. and so, again, we're continuing to analyze the monthly reports, working with contractors and trying to get a sense of what the solution is. we don't think there'll be any additional over-enrollment this year, but in that analysis, we need to be sure that we understand what the problem is to make sure that it is limited to one time. and, again, with each month we'll have more information. so, later this month we'll have march's enrollment numbers. and then again in may we'll have april's numbers. and so we'll report back as those numbers come in so that we have a better sense of the scope of the problem, and if by maintaining enrollments and not dis-enrolling and not re-enrolling new families if that will change the size of the problem. and then the only other comment i would have is, as the superintendent spoke at least to this subcommittee number one, we do support the maintenance of the commitment to increase rates and slots again in the budget year and not to have the pause that the governor's proposing. but as noted earlier, potentially looking at how do we make sure on the preschool slots that those are provided where there is need so potentially looking at beyond having that apply to lea's. thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 89, 'end': 102, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 116, 'end': 119, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 379, 'end': 382, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1276, 'end': 1279, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brianna Bruns: sorry, bruns, department of finance. the pause to the scheduled increases was due in large part to balancing expenditures with existing resources. so, it is the intention of the administration that these augmentations will occur, just in a longer than anticipated time frame. so extending the three year deal to be a four year deal.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debra Brown: yeah, brown on behalf of the state superintendent. i think the question is an important one around the income eligibility, and while i don't have an answer now, there is legislation moving through on the assembly side, ab 60, that addresses two of those points, one is increasing the state medium income and another is addressing that issue where families have to lose their eligibility within a year because their income goes up, and so i can get back to you with some more information because, at least from the department's perspective and to the extent we have the information, we don't have dollars on the enrollment, because as ms. early said, we don't know why for sure that families leave eligibility. we're looking at that now.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 638, 'end': 643, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jessica Holmes: yes. holmes, department of finance. i would note that, although you don't see a proposal in the governor's budget regarding smi, we are tracking it in regards to minimum wage. i echo miss early's comments regarding our ability to really drill down into exactly why families are leaving. however, we do have a measurement of total families who leave the programs. and that includes, as she mentioned, all of the reasons. and we would note that we have been looking at the data and attrition is the name that we give this number. attrition has not been increasing, in fact it's been going down a little bit in recent measurements. so we are keeping a close eye on that, that doesn't mean that may not change moving forward, but we are tracking it.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 124, 'end': 127, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Edgar Cabral: if i could just clarify, edgar debra cabral with the lao. this threshold is not the state median income, it's 70% of the state median income, as it was calculated in 2007. so a couple things that are different, one, it's 70% of that, and it's the state median household income. so within that data that we have, or what the median income is, there are families where there's one person working and then there are some where there are two working, or maybe more.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brianna Bruns: Brianna Bruns, Department of Finance. So I have a study from the National Women's Law Center from 2016, which brings California in the top 10 for family income eligibility, nationally.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debra Brown: debra edgar brown on behalf of state superintendent of public instruction tom torlakson. i don't have much more to add beyond what ms. bruns and ms. early have said except for to note that the superintendent's support for the proposal around aligning the definition of homelessness. we also support the proposal to allow childrenwith special needs exceeding to be served by csbp if all other eligible programs--students are served, just would note that this goes back to the conversation around misalignment based on region and location and so, we would think that within a program, all eligible students have been served than serving students with special needs exceeding the cap is a good idea. we also support the time removal of the restrictions around the tk in kindergarten and beyond that on the broader proposal we don't currently have a position but have been having conversations in looking at how the alignment would address issues for providers, and where there's some outstanding issues in that and have been having conversations with department of finance on that. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 74, 'end': 87, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 135, 'end': 140, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 149, 'end': 154, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Larry Drury: good morning, i'm larry debra drury. i'm the executive director of a non-profit community-based organization based out of gilroy serving monterey county, santa cruz, san benito county, and santa clara county. we've been doing this for over 40 years. we currently hold contracts with the department for stage two, stage three in san benito county, and throughout our whole four-county area we have a general child care contract, an alternative payment program, migrant child care, as well as state preschool, both full day and part day as a non-profit. i think there's some interesting things as we looked at what the pause does and the eligibility issues that we've been struggling with. i didn't come with prepared statements. i know what i have lived over the last number of years and how that has happened. and what we are seeing in particular is that when you look at the parent eligibility at the minimum wage for that family of three that doesn't qualify, even if you break it down and say okay, i've reduced my hours so now that i qualify. that runs about $42,000 for the family of three. that 42,000 is before taxes. then, additionally, on top of that, there are parent fees if you're doing a full day, regardless what contract it is. the parent fee for that just below what that is, is $345 a month. so, for a lot of families it's not a matter of whether you're eligible or not, it is can you afford the $345 a month with less than $42,000. so it is both. it's both the smi and the percentage of it as well as what those parent fees do to that. we have one child care center that sits on the property of a school district. we pay a rent for one building and then we own the other building. they also have a y program, a ymca program and they do tk there as well, transitional kindergarten. so trying to find families that will participate with us when they could walk across the lot and get free care in the y as well as the tk. it is an interesting conundrum all the way around. we do part day preschool there and also school age. so we do a lot around. we serve probably around 1,400 kids a day in nine child care centers across our area as well as contracting with about 135 licensed home providers as well. so we see it from all different angles and so i was talking about the issue with infants and toddlers. a lot of the infants and toddlers that we're seeing are being served at homes. there are very few in our four-county area where there are center-based infant programs. we have a small one out at a migrant camp in gilroy that we have kept open for years, basically because those families are pretty isolated there at the camp. we lose a little money on it every year but i still think it's the best thing that we can do. so we are serving those kids. i think the other thing, the fees will drive everything crazy in the process. i think the other thing that we fail to forget is in the middle of next fiscal year, that minimum wage is going to go up to $11 an hour in january. and i don't think i've heard that said as well. there's a process for the next four years that january 1, it's $11 and goes up til it hits 15. so this whole pressure about the minimum wage issue is huge. with the promise that was made last year, we raised salaries for our staff because we thought that was coming, that was a promise. we felt good about that. we raised salaries for our staff twice in 2016 because of the raises that we'd received. i raised the providers that we serve. we raised their rates by 6% over the year as well. 3% at the beginning of the fiscal year, 3% in january, knowing that come january we're going to get the other. no a week after we did that, that's when the pause was put on. i've also talked with a lot of other agencies. i know down in the fresno area, there are school districts that hired assistants in their preschool like four or five staff before the pause was put on, so they're struck with what do we do now? it is a major issue for us. in particular, when you look at high cost counties like santa clara county. we struggle. we have four, five, six, seven centers in santa clara county out of the nine that we have. and again, trying to find families that qualify, when we have a vacancy, and my enrollment unit sets out to bring in families, they can go through probably five or six intake eligibility determinations before they find one family that's eligible. so the time wasted going through this process, a lot of them, it's real clear when you see what the income is where it's at and what's going to happen to it. so it is difficult to manage these things from day to day to day, especially as a non-profit. i don't have resources behind me like some school districts may have. i think the other thing when you get down to the licensing issues, the governor's things on policy. i really appreciated miss early's explanation of what and why they're recommending not to do some of those things. i agree with her 100%. i'm concerned about degrading and dismantling a licensing system, and a set of standards that have been there, not just for the state of california, but also from accreditation standards, from national accreditation for children, services to children, which counsel our accreditation out of washington d.c., all talk about those ratios and what the pragmatic pieces will be. i'm afraid by allowing some of those things we're on the downward slide of doing something a little bit different that i don't think we want to go to. so i appreciate ms. early and the lao's office recommendations very clearly and i support them 100%. so i thank you for the opportunity, we all struggle with some of this and i know you've heard the issues today and you know them just as well as most of us do so thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 4856, 'end': 4861, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5514, 'end': 5519, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Debra Brown: Debra Brown with the state Superintendent, so I would add as we have these two different requirements. If we do get complaints, so in addition to the tri-annual review, if we do get complaints we do investigate those. So it's not as if complaints can happen and there is not a separate process for further investigation.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brianna Bruns: brianna larry bruns, department of finance, i'm not sure that i'm understanding you question. speaking directly to the governor's proposal?
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debra Brown: so that is, debra brianna brown with the state superintendent. that is certainly one of the questions that we've been talking with department of finance, about what that would look like and one of the challenges that we had, not only, if it were be a transfer of responsibility from one state agency to another.
[{'start': 12, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Virginia Early: thank you, mr. chair. virginia debra early, again, with the legislative analyst's office. so, we have a handout that's coming around right now on the quality improvement programs. i'll start on page one of the handout. so federal law requires the state to spend a certain amount of federal funds and the state matching funds that the state is required to spend, to improve the quality of childcare and preschool. so in 16-17 the state had to spend about 10% of these funds which equated to 78 million on these activities and this spending requirement will go up in the next few years, reaching 12% by 2021. if federal funding remains flat, we expect this to equate to about $95 million. so federal law allows us to count various types of activities towards meeting this requirement. for example, the state can develop early learning materials for childcare providers, use it to enforce licencing requirements and provide information about childcare options to parents. california currently uses these funds to support about 30 different quality improvement programs. we divide these program options into three categories. programs that are operating at the state level including licensing enforcement, developing those early learning resources and developing say specific trainings that operate the same state wide, and that are available to everyone. the state also has funding going to certain county level agencies that are involved in quality improvement work. resource and referral agencies are one of these and local planning councils are another. resource and referral agencies are responsible for helping parents find childcare in their areas and collecting data on childcare providers, while local planning councils are responsible for identifying areas in their county with unserved eligible children, and helping generally in the county coordinate childcare services. and the last category of quality spending is when the state provides funds for certain activities to these county level support entities for activities. so, for example, r&r agencies get funding to run specific types of training on top of their main responsibilities, local planning councils get funding to provide stipends to early educators on top of their other responsibilities. and some community colleges get some funds to support students' application fees for the child development teacher permit. in general, these 30 programs, cd has broad descretion over what they fund. in some cases, the legislature has a specific line item, for example r&r's in the state budget. on page three of the handout, we provide an overview of the quality rating and improvement system. as i mentioned earlier, this is a system that sort of rates the quality of childcare providers and provides resources to help these child care providers improve of those 30 programs i mentioned earlier the state counted $800,000 towards qris for migrant childcare programs but outside of that 30 programs, the state also provides an additional 75 million not counted toward the federal quality spending requirement. of this amount 50 million is proposition 98 funds for state preschool qris, and 25 million is provided by first five california for all types of providers. consortia have a small presence in many parts of this state. currently there are 48 consortia operating in all 58 counties, and the consortia members include resource and referral agencies, local planning councils, first five county commissions, community colleges as well as local educational agencies and childcare providers. these consortia rate providers based on the matrix i mentioned earlier, it includes things like child teacher interactions, staff standards, the use of certain development screenings, use of child assessments to inform curriculum and several other things. consortia have flexibility in how they use their funds to help providers improve quality. for example if a program gets a low rating because their teacher needs more training they might provide financial aid to improve the education level of the teachers. if they get a low rating because of something going on in the classroom environment they might provide a grant to help purchase supplies, so it really varies. so on page four of the hand out, we discuss cde's revised quality improvement expenditure plan. the 16-17 budget directed cde to take a look at the quality improvement of those 30 programs that they have. and the provisional language requested them to retain funding for r and rs, local planning councils, and licensing enforcement, while prioritizing the rest for this qris system i just mentioned. cde submitted the plan to the legislature in february. this plan shifts about 5.1 million from about nine programs, into one infant and toddler qris block grant. so under this, the qris members of the consortia could use the funds flexibly for the activities that they deem most important but the providers would be have to be those serving infants and toddlers. in addition cde is proposing, changing some rules to existing programs for example, certain state level trainings that those members would now have to be participating in qris to receive the training. our assessment is on page five of the handout. as we looked at the system, both broadly and cde specific proposal, we found that there are some activities that were important to supporting the subsidized childcare and preschool system. for example, helping parents find childcare, identifying areas with unmet need and collecting data on childcare providers. but we also, as we look at the system and talked to folks it seemed that quality improvement funding at the county level can lack coordination and be difficult to target to highest priorities. so for example, within each county we have these multiple support entities all involved in the activity of improving quality. but there's no over arching plan that they have to have to improve quality. and so there's qris, but that just applies to the small number of providers that are participating in qris. so without having such a plan there's no guarantee that the trainings are duplicative and there's no guarantee that the training is directed to the folks that need it most. additionally the detailed requirements of the various funding streams mean that these county level support entities have difficulty targeting funding to their highest priorities. additionally, we found that there's little information on the effectiveness of the state level programs i mentioned earlier. we don't have data, we have some data but not enough to determine whether the state is serving the providers that we'd like to be serving. and while the state has conducted some evaluations on the programs, we don't have evaluations that these evaluations don't address whether the programs are actually improving the quality of childcare. we also found that the funding disproportionally serves providers that already meet higher standards and so of the 28 million in cde's revised quality improvement budget for training activities, 28% is restricted to contract based providers and under their revised program rules, another 37% is restricted to providers participating in qris which tend to be again contract based providers. we're concerned about this focus on contract based providers because as i mentioned earlier nearly three quarters of the infant subsidized, infant toddler subsidized population is receiving care in these voucher settings that have lower standards. in terms of cde's overall plan, with think that shifting funds to qris a limit, we like that it increases the flexibility of these county level support entities to conduct the types of activities that they think are the most beneficial. but we are concerned that restricting it to only qris types of providers limits the providers that can benefit because state wide a small share of subsided providers are participating in qris. so on page seven of our handout we go through our recommendations. we recommend the legislature retain funding for essential activities like helping parents find childcare and collecting data on the childcare providers and identifying areas with unmet need. these activities are currently done by the resource and referral agencies and local planning councils. then we would recommend the legislator take the funding that's currently going to county level support entities for other activities and package it into one county level block grant of about $21 million distributed to counties based on each county's share of the subsidized population. we would recommend that the legislator require all the entities currently receiving these funds to get together and agree on how they would spend the funds under the new block grant, taking into account the providers and the subsidized population in their area. so these providers could choose to do the same activities that they're currently doing. i'm sorry, these support entities could continue to do the same activities they're currently doing or if they have other ideas for how they can meet their local priorities, they could do those. finally, we would recommend the state collect data from counties about how the funds are used. we'd also recommend that the state reject cde's proposal to limit access to certain state level programs to qris participants as we want to ensure that all providers have access to these programs. and finally for the remaining state level programs, we recommend that the state hire an independent evaluator to assess each program and whether it improves the quality of childcare over the next several years, starting with the largest ones first. so those are our key recommendations and happy to answer questions whenever you think it's appropriate.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 36, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Debra Brown: well debra virginia brown on behalf of state superintendent and public instruction tom torlakson and i can certainly go next because i think i build on- mike what i am planning and talking about builds upon what the lao is provided. so and i will try not to be repetitive to what the lao said because just to provide a good overview on the state's over all quality efforts. but then i'll provide some additional information on our development of the quality improvement plan under the federal childcare and development block grant. so i think just a little bit more background. so the department of education is the lead agency for the childcare development block grant commonly referred to as ccdbg. and so we manage the federal funds that are distributed through direct contracts for services and vouchers administered by alternate payment programs. beside the direct support for financial assistance for childcare services the block grant also requires states to spend a certain portion of funds along with matching funds on 10 quality improvement activities. and so those were discussed a little bit more. but training and professional development, supporting a quality rating improvement system, and improving the supply of quality programs for infants and toddlers. with the 2014 reauthorization of ccdbg, the quality set asides are increasing over the next few years. in the current year it's 7% increasing to 8% next year. for the 17-18 budget, there are currently no proposals to allocate new quality funds and so at this time our proposal provides just over $78 million, or proposes to provide just over $78 million which corresponds to the amount in the governor's budget proposal. in the development of the proposed plan, the department conducted stakeholder outreach last fall and so this was over two sessions last november. so the first session focused on the requirements of the of ccdbg act and the second session later in november focused on the qris and so as i was saying, commenters generally supported existing projects, many expressed the desire for additional funding to be used to make the sun setting infant toddler quality qris block grant ongoing, to maintain and build on the current investment for infants and toddlers. others recommended support for workforce registry, coaching and mentoring, leadership training and services for a full range of providers. so based on the feedback we received, and building up the funding provided in the current year, so 16-17 we first removed the one-time funding that was provided in 15-16 and the draft quality improvement plan that we're presenting represents the department's efforts to balance the need to maintain the infrastructure of quality improvement activities with local flexibility. and so in most instances the cde is proposing to keep the funding as established in the 16-17 plan, however again because some of the one-time funding went away, and there's no additional funding, the plan proposes reductions to 10 programs with additional funding for one program. so the two most significant changes in terms of dollar amounts are a proposed cut of almost $2.7 million to the childcare retention program, more commonly referred to as ab 212 and so this does represent one quarter of the reduction offset by child development contractors having access to the local qris block grants and then as was noted earlier we are proposing to provide $5.1 million for an infant toddler qris block grant which is about 40% of the current sun setting program. so a little bit more on those, so ab 212, the proposed reduction to this represents, again, a quarter of the reduction. this program provides funds to local planning councils to increase quality for programs serving infants and toddlers, through childcare staff retention activities, and is focused around retaining qualified staff who work directly with children in state-subsidized center based programs and promoting best practices that foster quality early education. and then we are planning on providing money to, essentially reestablish partially, an infant toddler block grant. so the $5.1 million proposed partially back fills 24 million that was provided over two years in one-time state funding. that goes away, so the local controller should use the infant toddler block grant to support local early learning programs to increase the number of low income children served in high quality programs by providing training, technical assistance, and other resources to the program. these are often the same recipients of the ab 212 funding, and both are focused on supporting providers meeting a higher tier of quality as determined by their local qris ratings system. and i would note in the future as federal quality percent spending increases, it would be our goal to increase the infant toddler qris block grant to restore the funding closer to the original amount provided. another comment about the proposal is that 11% of the funding is restricted to state contract providers and the rest are open to all or are prioritized to those providers participating in the local qris and this was really around following budget language so, set to focus on qris. the evaluation of quality improvement activities so the budget proposes to maintain about $570,000 to evaluate quality improvement activities. the intent of the activities is to measure the effectiveness of the programs, as well as look at how additional funding is being leveraged to conduct professional development. the evaluations focus on a selection of quality improvement activities in each contract cycle and so recently we've looked at the california preschool instructional network, the california collaborative for social emotional foundations of early learning, and currently we're looking at the local child care and developing planning councils in ab 212. and then we use the results of this reviews to make sure that there's alignment with the state's quality efforts and make funding adjustments. we would agree with the lao's recommendation that evaluations are important to best target the funds and the qris gives us a new lens through which programs are being reassessed in a thoughtful manner and we plan to continue to engage in outside evaluation of projects and initiatives in the future. and say further we intend to continue to hold open public input sessions in the fall to hear feedback on the effectiveness at the local level. so building upon state level evaluations, and then as we move from a state to local quality efforts we want to ensure that quality dollars are being used most effectively and information received from all sources will inform the development of future quality improvement budget proposals. thank you.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 83, 'end': 96, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 153, 'end': 157, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 216, 'end': 219, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 284, 'end': 287, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brandon Toug: mr chairman and members, brandon debra toug on behalf of the kidango, which is a large provider in the san fransisco bay area. we sincerely appreciate the comments today, the commitment that the legislature has made to the issue, especially with rate increases. we urge you to continue forward with that and we are opposed to the governor's delay in the budget. so thank you very much.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 38, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nina Buthee: Good morning. Nina Buthee, the Executive Director, California Child Development Administrator's Association. Agree with the former testifier, we are strongly opposed to the Governor's pause as you heard earlier today. Providers are not making enough as it is, 80% of all of the funds are going into subsidized programs go towards wage and benefits. So, by not acknowledging this, we are not actually paying our workers. Perhaps some of the well earned raises that they where see from the 10% last year. Additionally, in terms of the state media in income, we've really talked about that very, very supportive about increasing the state media income. Obviously, you will have no children to serve if you do not serve that. Because minimum wage earners will not be able to qualify for the program, additional comments about some of the state preschool slots and actually being able to expand and serve those children. One of the solutions would be as the LEA pointed out, offering those slots also to non ALA programmes in the communities they are ready, they have capacity, they want to serve those children. Additionally, we are in opposition to the ratio and licensing proposals from the Governor's proposal, we think they are a step backwards and then I have one other piece for you about the state preschool program, just a very technical change which will help to also fully pick up those slots which I'll give over to the sergeant at arms thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1423, 'end': 1443, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Valerie Dinero: good morning. my name is valerie brandon dinero, i'm the executive director for californians for quality early learning and i won't belabor the points that have already been made. sequel definitely supports the comments that are already made on increase and rates and we also disregard and do not support any realignment of teacher child ratios or moving anything into a tk structure. some additional points to make, that in the state of california there are 14,000 licensed, child care programs that are following title 22 standards. 80% of those programs are operated by center based non lea programs, so those are your faith based programs, your montessori schools, your non profits, and for profit programs, they are already in our communities. their classrooms are empty. they are ready and willing to accept the low income eligible children. there's already an infrastructure that exists in the state of california and a capacity to serve all of california's children to ensure that all children have the same equal access to quality education.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeff Flock: Thank you, Mr. Chair and Members. Jeff Flock, I represent the Riverside County Superintendent of Schools. Just very simply associate myself with the comments made by Miss Underwood. Support for the governor's proposals on alignment and flexibility. Thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 171, 'end': 180, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Hulsizer: Mr. Chair, Members. Michael Hulsizer here on behalf of the 47 school districts in Kern County. I'd like to speak specifically to issue number two in support of the staff recommendation to hold the side of them open. We think it's important note that since the June budget was adopted we've lost $5.8 billion of expected revenue, we're down another 250 million since then. Schools have lost about 1.5 billion LCFF estimated money since the June budget, and while we certainly hope we can fund everything that's being proposed here we'd like to see rates and slots in preschool restored. We think it's important to wait. We're going to see about 25% of all personal income tax revenue accounted for in the next three weeks. We'll have a much better idea at May revise as to what can be afforded, thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Josefina Ramirez Natsuna: josefina valerie ramirez natsuna with children now. we appreciate the very thoughtful discussion this morning. echo the sentiments of my colleagues, please reject the budget proposal, the pause. and we urge the committee to be bold, and to think a little bit about considering further investments because given the impact of the minimum wage and the huge unmet need, additional investments need to be considered like the smi and the 12-month eligibility. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 25, 'end': 32, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ignacio Cardenas: cardenas asked me, udw local 3930 to do a brief translation. so income eligibility for subsidized childcare has not been keeping up with inflation. as a result, she has lost some of her children because family has received a raise. so she urges the committee to update the state median income.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gabriella Castillano: My name is Gabriella Castillano. So I came from San Diego, California and I am a volunteer for UTW and I would like to be very specific in the reason that I'm here. I came from San Diego today and I think it's very, very important that you guys take into consideration about the budget for the family care support. I have myself experienced many, many childcare providers are losing the children because they cannot afford it. The results of this is some kids are in jail. Some others are dead, because one of my, I have this feeling so strong because one of my child that I was caring. He committed suicide because there was nobody who was taking care. And he died, he hung up himself in the door. It's very painful to know those things and I think this a time that we all together are here, not just because of the budget because, it is important but the life of the children are more important than anything. So I really want to mention that I reject the Governor proposed pause because in founding
[{'start': 11, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alicia Ramirez: Hi my name is Alicia Ramirez, I'm coming from Orange County, I'm child care provided and also I'm a part of a UTW. I came here for 12 months eligibility for families, low income families received in a subsidized care have to report within five days of any change in family income, family size, or child care need. I would like to seek a continued 12 months eligibility, so my families don't lose their child care, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Magdaleno: Hi good morning, my name is Jessica Magdaleno. I'm a child care provider from the City of Orange County and I'm also part of the UDW. And I'm here today because we need to continue increasing the endorsement rates for family tracker providers to provide quality care. This will help us continue providing the quality care the children need in different communities. This will also help me to hire an extra, child care assistant, I reject the governor's proposed pause impounded and I urge that we honor last year's Budget Committee, thank you.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susan Austin: Good morning, my name is Susan Austin I'm with UDW AFSCME. And I'm from Orange County, California. I'm a 19 years of being a family home daycare provider, and I was before that a teacher and Christian school, so I've kind of felt both sides of things. And I will say me too, me too, me too. And I just wanted to add that in Anaheim alone, there are 27% of the children, and Anaheim is the largest city in Orange County but there are 27% of the children in the poverty level, and many of those children cannot get on a program. And so I ask that the subjects that we've been talking about today, the thought of, in a very thoughtful way. I'm so sorry that Senator Jackson is not here. Because I echo every single thing she said, and each one of you has brought to the table some things that I feel that you're also feeling the same way that providers are feeling, thank you very much.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 663, 'end': 670, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Beverly Yu: Good morning, Beverly Yu with UDW AFSCME Local 3930. I will be brief, we appreciate all the comments today made towards rejecting the governor's proposed pause. We are in support of the Child Care Law Center's proposal to update a state median income and guarantee 12 month eligibility. And finally, we would like to make sure that the quality improvement expenditure plan. Includes family daycare providers who care for toddlers and infants, and that this funding isn't taken from existing quality training programs that directly benefit them, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amanda Dickie: amanda josefina dickie with the california county superintendents association. we appreciate the committee's comments with regards to the governor honoring the ece budget proposal from the last year, as well as the comments made with regards to the smi. those are really important issues that i would love to see the legislature lead the way in addressing, we'd also like to make comments with regards to the governor's proposed flexibilities. we think that these flexibilities absent additional funding will go a really long way towards creating alignment in a system and allowing us to provide services to not just more kids but also provide higher quality services, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gladys Soto: good morning, senators, i'm gladys amanda soto from san francisco parent voices. i hope that the governor or his staff is listening really, its not for you guys because you were great today by the way, i was on the waiting list twice. when my first daughter, giovanna, was born, i was put on the waiting list. and they called me when giovanna was in kindergarten, and i was already working and making too much money, so i didn't qualify. and i was going to get my master's degree, and i really needed the support. so the child care that i got at that time was the best i could afford. seven years later, my son william was born. again, put on the waiting list, when he's in kindergarten, i get the phone call, and i was making too much money to qualify, so i'm one of the parents who's always been on the waiting list. so due to the lack of early care and education, my son william, who's now 11 years old wasn't able to read until the end of second grade and now he's doing great, he just finished the harry potter series. and now he's fine but it took a lot of advocacy and a lot of emotional stress just to fight for my son and get his help.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 259, 'end': 267, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 334, 'end': 342, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 611, 'end': 618, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 874, 'end': 881, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Greppi: good afternoon, chair and members of the committee. my name is greppi and i'm with parent voices, california. we represent 15 chapters of parents from across the state and those chapters represent thousands of parents. on a daily basis my state wide colleague mary ignatius and i receive phone calls from our organizers and from the parents, telling us that unfortunately they're received a raise. or unfortunately they've gotten a promotion, or unfortunately the state minimum wage just went up these are conversations that should never have to happen. we are using 10 year old data to decide whether or not parents are eligible for services. parents could make $10,000 a year more and remain eligible. we want to create a system that incentives parents to make increases in their income to strive for better jobs and better wages. the system currently is not allowing parents to do that. and their children are suffering as a result.
[{'start': 63, 'end': 69, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 260, 'end': 273, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Martha Alvarez: good afternoon, martha gladys alvarez, acsa, the association of california school administrators. and in the interest of time, i'll leave a handout for you with the sergeant. i'll just mention something different than what has been mentioned by some of the recent speakers, which is we need to support the governor's flexibilities. we support each and every one of the flexibilities. the reason being is i don't want you to leave this hearing thinking having that impression that school districts do not have interest in preschool snacks. the issues that we have a lot of duplicative requirements and we believe that with the governor's flexibility is we'll be better able to align these programs with tk. another, sure is we provide for loan for kids in california. so we urge you that when it comes to the may revision that you consider supporting this proposal, thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ky Jackson: Ky Jackson, with San Diego Unified School District. We support the governor's proposal. Senator Pan, just to answer your questions on the impact of the pause for San Diego Unified, there is about a $ 1.2 million bogie on that next year potentially. Which means we either have to address that via our stress journal fund, or reduce teachers, or reduce access. And with respect to address the income eligibility. Over the last three years we've sent back approximately $15 million. Is that includes about 4 million potential for this year. So it has an impact on our district, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 96, 'end': 99, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Katerina Gregona: Katerina Gregona, on behalf of First 5 LA, the First 5 Association of. California. We support the LAO's proposal to allow community based preschool providers to access lots that their local LAO isn't able to open new classrooms. We also believe that budgetary bill proposals impact cornerstone elements of quality care. And finally, we believe SMI must be addressed this year, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Donna Sneeringer: donna martha sneeringer with the child care resource center and child care alliance of los angeles. me too, with my prior three speakers particularly i think dr. pan i would love to have a more in depth conversation about what the potential losses of health and safety might be by losing title 22. and my last note would be part of the reason this system is so complex, is because it's been starved for decades. so we really need investments and we thank for all your discussion today.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 162, 'end': 165, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Keisha Nzewi: keisha with the california child care resource and referral network. exactly what donna said, and erin said especially around the licensing and ratio requirements. and we super strongly support the smi and 12 month eligibility, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 82, 'end': 87, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 98, 'end': 102, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Patti Prunhuber: Patti Prunhuber from the Child Care Law Center. Yes, reject the pause. Yes, please do SMI and 12 month eligibility it's essential. And it will also solve some of the problems of slots going unused. And finally, on the title 22, complex discussion belongs in a policy Committee not in trailer bill language and we endorse the LAO comment, as well as the preceding comment to you Ferd, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 86, 'end': 89, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 325, 'end': 328, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lola Cornish: hi i am lola donna cornish with the california child care resource center for all network, and i just want to touch on, one of the recommendations from the, lao that's related to issue four, the quality improvement plan. we are opposed to the block granting to individual counties, for reasons of unintended consequences obviously, specifically around access with the child care initiative project which
[{'start': 8, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Denyne Micheletti: micheletti representing california alternative payment program association. a couple points to bring up, there's one issue that hasn't been discussed. there was a hold harmless provision put in the 16, 17 budget, that would drop the rates of roughly 10 to 15% of provider rates throughout the state. that needs to be addressed that will absolutely impact access for families, secondly we need to be clear what we're talking about. in the voucher program there are less than 33,000 total slots. so it's not only infant toddler, every part of the system is impacted we have a 1.5 million need. lastly, we have to open up the conversation of prop 98. this year $121 million is being returned that going to be your child care. if we get, if we think out of the box to use it last year $101 million in unspent child care money is were returned, thank you.
[]
Mike Herald: mr. chair, mike with the western center on law and poverty. a me too to everything the child care law center said.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Virginia Early: alright, good morning, mr. chairs, members. virginia jonah early with the legislative analyst's office. today, on this item, i'll provide a brief overview of the state's child care and preschool system as well as some information on recent trends. the sergeant just passed out a handout, and all of us will be starting on page 1. so on page 1 of this handout, we provide a brief description of california's child care and preschool programs. as you can see from the chart, we categorized these programs in three ways: childcare for families participating in the state's welfare to work program, calworks, childcare for families not participating in calworks and preschool programs, and the chart provides a brief description of each program as well as the number of slots associated with each program. and statewide, we have about 434,000 slots for childcare and preschool in 2016-17. page 2 of the handout provides a brief overview of some key components of child care and preschool programs. all the programs on page 1 have eligibility criteria, but the criteria vary across the programs. so calworks and most non-calworks child care programs require families to have incomes below 70% of the state median income in 2007. this is about $42,000 for a family of 3. however, transitional kindergarten does not have an income requirement. most programs also serve children based on their age. most programs serve children birth to age 12, but state preschool serves 3 and 4-year-olds, and transitional kindergarten serves children based on their birth month, serving children born between september 2nd and december 2nd. finally, the state has recently allowed school districts to serve children born outside of the transitional kindergarten birth window. children between december 2nd and the end of the school year, if they turn five, but the school district doesn't received funding until they turn five. finally, most programs require parents to be working or in school during the hours they receive care, but part-day state preschool and transitional kindergarten do not have work requirements. access to the programs also varies; for calworks and transitional kindergarten, the state typically funds care for all eligible and interested families. the other programs, the state budgets a certain number of slots, and families are prioritized based on income. the state provides care in four types of settings: licensed centers, which tend to be larger classroom-like settings; licensed family child care homes, where the child receives care in the provider's own home, and there're about 6 to 12 children total served; and license-exempt settings where families, friends, and neighbors care for children from one family at one time. and finally, school classrooms similar to those of kindergarten. calworks and the alternative payment program can access care from both licensed centers, licensed family child care homes, and license-exempt providers. other childcare programs and state preschool can only access care in licensed centers and licensed family childcare homes, and transitional kindergarten is served in school classrooms similar to that of kindergarten. the standards also very across programs. all programs have to meet certain health and safety standards, have to have certain staff qualifications and staff ratios, but specific standards vary across the programs. in addition, some programs are required to include developmentally appropriate activities. so for example, state preschool programs are required to include basic numeracy and literacy activities. on page 3 of the handout, we discussed program funding. the funding model varies across the programs. there are three main ways the state funds programs through child care vouchers, direct contracts, and school district allocations. in calworks, for example, the families receive vouchers for childcare, which means families can choose a provider that meets their needs, and the state pays, reimburses the cost of that care. this reimbursement amount varies regionally based on regional market rate surveys the state conducts every couple of years. for other programs, the state contracts with specific providers for childcare and pays the same rate across the state. finally, transitional kindergarten is funded through school district allocations through the local control funding formula. on page 4 of this handout, we cover some trends over the last decade. there's a chart you might be interested in. as you can see from this chart, a funding decrease by about $1 billion between 2007-8 and 2013-14 and has increased by 871 million since 13-14. during the recession, the legislature held rates mostly flat but did reduce some rates for license-exempt care and for the amount the state provided to agencies administering the voucher programs. starting in 2014-15, however, the state has provided three consecutive rate increases with spending on rates in 16-17 about 400 million higher than spending in 13-14. slots were the main area where the cuts happened in the recession with substantial reductions and then increases during the recovery. but when we talk about slots, we really have to talk about calworks slots and non-calworks slots separately, because as i mentioned earlier, the state typically funds all eligible calworks families and doesn't fund all eligible non-calworks families. so between 2007-8 and 13-14, calworks slots decreased by about 65,000. these reductions were primarily due to state actions that reduce the number of eligible families. so for example, during the recession, the state exempted certain families from the work requirement, allowing them to stay at home with their children while continuing to receive cash aid. since 13-14, calworks slots have increased by about $6,000 due to the net effect of re-engaging these families in the workforce and an overall decline in the caseload due to an improving economy. between 2007-8 and 13-14 on the non-calworks side of the house; state actions reduced these slots by about 44,000 slots due to across-the-board budget cuts. and since 13-14, increases in funding for slots have resulted in there being about 25,000 more slots available today than in 13-14. that concludes my overview presentation, i'm happy to answer any questions.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 33, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 44, 'end': 58, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brianna Bruns: good morning, brianna virginia bruns, department of finance. the 2017-18 governor's budget balances spending for childcare and early learning with available resources, and provides a measured approach to increasing ongoing funding to these programs. this budget includes 3.7 billion for these programs, representing a 2% increase over the 2016 budget act allocation. these augmentations are attributable to full year implementation included in the 2016 budget act, as well as increases in calworks cost of care. this budget proposes pausing additional augmentations associated with the 2016 budget act multiyear deal in order to better align expenditures with resources. this would extend the originally scheduled three-year augmentation plan to four years. thank you for your time, happy to answer any questions.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debra Brown: good morning, debra on behalf of state superintendent of public instruction, tom torlakson. i think the lao and the department of finance did a good overview and discussion of the governor's proposals. so i think i'll just provide a little bit more detail on some of the 2016-17 implementation issues that are referenced in your agenda. and so one of them, which the lao mentioned, which was on the standard reimbursement rate, so that was increasing the rate that the legislature approved a 10% increase midyear. so that was effective january 1st. and when we looked at implementing that, we ran into a few problems, namely that our system doesn't provide or doesn't allow us to do two rates within a single contract year. and so we looked at different options to doing that, including potentially having to do two contracts within a year, which we felt would be not only burdensome from the department, but also from the provider side to have to do two contracts. additionally, because of the way the earnings happen within contracts, it probably could have caused some more concerns in terms of when providers are earning most to their contracts, which varies from provider to provider. and so ultimately what we did in conversation with department of finance, lao and legislative staff is we had a blended rate. and so what that blended rate was, was essentially a 5% increase over at the '15-'16. and so that provided providers with a $40.20 increase, rather than the 10% starting in january 1st. and so that took effect july 1st, 2016. and so the couple other notes on the, i would say we've done an updated survey on the regional market rate and so we will have those results soon and the new ceilings will be posted when the legislature approves the increases to those ceiling rates. as ms. early mentioned, the preschool slots. so, as we've seen in the '15-'16 year, there were some challenges with uptakes, particularly on the lea side, on the increased preschool slots, and so in the '16-'17 budget year, the slots were only for leas and so we've been now done a third round. so we're in the middle of a third round of seeking applications. so what we found is we did a first round and we filled about 1300 of those slots with 40% for full day and 60% for part day. we then did a second round, which closed recently, and in that round we were able to get to about not quite 1600 slots. and again, around the same ratio with sort of the 40/60 split between part day and full day. and because of those two rounds, while we have nearly 2,900 slots, which was the increase provided, there is funding leftover, about $11 million or $11.5 million because so many of those were part day. and so we put out another round of requests for applications to try to utilize all that money to increase the slot. so, that closes later this month and so we are hopeful that will get some increased interest in that so that we can fully utilize the slots in dollars that were provided in the budget. i would reiterate, i don't think that this means that there's a lack of need for preschool slots for four year olds. i think the challenge is that ms. early identified, when the money is primarily focused or limited to lea's, becomes a little bit challenging because they're looking at different rules and requirements for state preschool versus tk. and so some of those issues are the reimbursement rate being lower as was mentioned. also with tk, the eligibility is around birth dates versus income eligibility. and then also facilities and the ability to expand facilities on school campuses. and so we think those are some of the concerns or some of the trade offs that districts have to look at when they're deciding to apply for those. so i wouldn't want the implications that we're having trouble getting enough applicants for those slots to be an indication that there isn't need. i think there's probably a misalignment or a disconnect between need and how the slots are provided. one other issue that's noted in the agenda item was around the alternative payment program cost. what we found is we were alerted to some potential issues late last year around some over-enrollment issues within the ap programs, and so we started having conversations with those providers that we were hearing from, trying to assess what the situation was. so they were on track to base to essentially over earn their contract without changes to it. and one of the concerns that we had was not only the over-enrollment but, as the contractors were trying to manage that, not wanting to dis-enroll families. and so we began working with those providers and having conversations and really what we needed to do was get a assessment of how big the challenge was. was this limited to a handful of contractors or was it larger than that? and so, in january, about the 20th, we received information from providers around their enrollment numbers through december 31st. and so, with that information, we were really able to determine that it was a significantly larger problem. and so we were looking at potentially just over $22 million in over-enrollment. and so we began having conversations with providers around what some of the rationale was for that. and also having conversations with department of finance, the lao, and legislative staff. i think we all had a shared objective around not wanting to dis-enroll families. and so we initiated a process where we notified providers who were over-earning their contract to essentially let them know we were looking at solutions for this. we directed them not to dis-enroll families, but also not to enroll any more families with the idea being that we could look at potential savings to backfill some of that, and then also hopefully have, perhaps, attrition would help correct that over the year. we have a better sense of the problem with each month, so we also ask for aps to report their enrollments monthly; some do quarterly. so we're trying to track this on a much closer basis and also working with the, i think, it's around 34 contractors who are over earning that contracts right now. so working with them to get a sense of it, but we did submit a request to have to use some available money we had from general childcare and calworks stage three that wasn't being utilized. and so we did submit a request to have that money transferred to fund this so, again, that these providers wouldn't have to dis-enroll families, if we could find a solution to that. and so that was approved on march 24th by the legislature. and so, again, we're continuing to analyze the monthly reports, working with contractors and trying to get a sense of what the solution is. we don't think there'll be any additional over-enrollment this year, but in that analysis, we need to be sure that we understand what the problem is to make sure that it is limited to one time. and, again, with each month we'll have more information. so, later this month we'll have march's enrollment numbers. and then again in may we'll have april's numbers. and so we'll report back as those numbers come in so that we have a better sense of the scope of the problem, and if by maintaining enrollments and not dis-enrolling and not re-enrolling new families if that will change the size of the problem. and then the only other comment i would have is, as the superintendent spoke at least to this subcommittee number one, we do support the maintenance of the commitment to increase rates and slots again in the budget year and not to have the pause that the governor's proposing. but as noted earlier, potentially looking at how do we make sure on the preschool slots that those are provided where there is need so potentially looking at beyond having that apply to lea's. thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 77, 'end': 90, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 104, 'end': 107, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 367, 'end': 370, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1799, 'end': 1804, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brianna Bruns: sorry, bruns, department of finance. the pause to the scheduled increases was due in large part to balancing expenditures with existing resources. so, it is the intention of the administration that these augmentations will occur, just in a longer than anticipated time frame. so extending the three year deal to be a four year deal.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debra Brown: yeah, brown on behalf of the state superintendent. i think the question is an important one around the income eligibility, and while i don't have an answer now, there is legislation moving through on the assembly side, ab 60, that addresses two of those points, one is increasing the state medium income and another is addressing that issue where families have to lose their eligibility within a year because their income goes up, and so i can get back to you with some more information because, at least from the department's perspective and to the extent we have the information, we don't have dollars on the enrollment, because as ms. early said, we don't know why for sure that families leave eligibility. we're looking at that now.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 638, 'end': 643, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jessica Holmes: Yes. Jessica Holmes, Department of Finance. I would note that, although you don't see a proposal in the Governor's Budget regarding SMI, we are tracking it in regards to minimum wage. I echo Miss Early's comments regarding our ability to really drill down into exactly why families are leaving. However, we do have a measurement of total families who leave the programs. And that includes, as she mentioned, all of the reasons. And we would note that we have been looking at the data and attrition is the name that we give this number. Attrition has not been increasing, in fact it's been going down a little bit in recent measurements. So we are keeping a close eye on that, that doesn't mean that may not change moving forward, but we are tracking it.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 132, 'end': 135, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Edgar Cabral: if i could just clarify, edgar with the lao. this threshold is not the state median income, it's 70% of the state median income, as it was calculated in 2007. so a couple things that are different, one, it's 70% of that, and it's the state median household income. so within that data that we have, or what the median income is, there are families where there's one person working and then there are some where there are two working, or maybe more.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brianna Bruns: Brianna Bruns, Department of Finance. So I have a study from the National Women's Law Center from 2016, which brings California in the top 10 for family income eligibility, nationally.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debra Brown: brown on behalf of state superintendent of public instruction tom torlakson. i don't have much more to add beyond what ms. bruns and ms. early have said except for to note that the superintendent's support for the proposal around aligning the definition of homelessness. we also support the proposal to allow childrenwith special needs exceeding to be served by csbp if all other eligible programs--students are served, just would note that this goes back to the conversation around misalignment based on region and location and so, we would think that within a program, all eligible students have been served than serving students with special needs exceeding the cap is a good idea. we also support the time removal of the restrictions around the tk in kindergarten and beyond that on the broader proposal we don't currently have a position but have been having conversations in looking at how the alignment would address issues for providers, and where there's some outstanding issues in that and have been having conversations with department of finance on that. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 62, 'end': 75, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 123, 'end': 128, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 137, 'end': 142, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Larry Drury: good morning, i'm larry. i'm the executive director of a non-profit community-based organization based out of gilroy serving monterey county, santa cruz, san benito county, and santa clara county. we've been doing this for over 40 years. we currently hold contracts with the department for stage two, stage three in san benito county, and throughout our whole four-county area we have a general child care contract, an alternative payment program, migrant child care, as well as state preschool, both full day and part day as a non-profit. i think there's some interesting things as we looked at what the pause does and the eligibility issues that we've been struggling with. i didn't come with prepared statements. i know what i have lived over the last number of years and how that has happened. and what we are seeing in particular is that when you look at the parent eligibility at the minimum wage for that family of three that doesn't qualify, even if you break it down and say okay, i've reduced my hours so now that i qualify. that runs about $42,000 for the family of three. that 42,000 is before taxes. then, additionally, on top of that, there are parent fees if you're doing a full day, regardless what contract it is. the parent fee for that just below what that is, is $345 a month. so, for a lot of families it's not a matter of whether you're eligible or not, it is can you afford the $345 a month with less than $42,000. so it is both. it's both the smi and the percentage of it as well as what those parent fees do to that. we have one child care center that sits on the property of a school district. we pay a rent for one building and then we own the other building. they also have a y program, a ymca program and they do tk there as well, transitional kindergarten. so trying to find families that will participate with us when they could walk across the lot and get free care in the y as well as the tk. it is an interesting conundrum all the way around. we do part day preschool there and also school age. so we do a lot around. we serve probably around 1,400 kids a day in nine child care centers across our area as well as contracting with about 135 licensed home providers as well. so we see it from all different angles and so i was talking about the issue with infants and toddlers. a lot of the infants and toddlers that we're seeing are being served at homes. there are very few in our four-county area where there are center-based infant programs. we have a small one out at a migrant camp in gilroy that we have kept open for years, basically because those families are pretty isolated there at the camp. we lose a little money on it every year but i still think it's the best thing that we can do. so we are serving those kids. i think the other thing, the fees will drive everything crazy in the process. i think the other thing that we fail to forget is in the middle of next fiscal year, that minimum wage is going to go up to $11 an hour in january. and i don't think i've heard that said as well. there's a process for the next four years that january 1, it's $11 and goes up til it hits 15. so this whole pressure about the minimum wage issue is huge. with the promise that was made last year, we raised salaries for our staff because we thought that was coming, that was a promise. we felt good about that. we raised salaries for our staff twice in 2016 because of the raises that we'd received. i raised the providers that we serve. we raised their rates by 6% over the year as well. 3% at the beginning of the fiscal year, 3% in january, knowing that come january we're going to get the other. no a week after we did that, that's when the pause was put on. i've also talked with a lot of other agencies. i know down in the fresno area, there are school districts that hired assistants in their preschool like four or five staff before the pause was put on, so they're struck with what do we do now? it is a major issue for us. in particular, when you look at high cost counties like santa clara county. we struggle. we have four, five, six, seven centers in santa clara county out of the nine that we have. and again, trying to find families that qualify, when we have a vacancy, and my enrollment unit sets out to bring in families, they can go through probably five or six intake eligibility determinations before they find one family that's eligible. so the time wasted going through this process, a lot of them, it's real clear when you see what the income is where it's at and what's going to happen to it. so it is difficult to manage these things from day to day to day, especially as a non-profit. i don't have resources behind me like some school districts may have. i think the other thing when you get down to the licensing issues, the governor's things on policy. i really appreciated miss early's explanation of what and why they're recommending not to do some of those things. i agree with her 100%. i'm concerned about degrading and dismantling a licensing system, and a set of standards that have been there, not just for the state of california, but also from accreditation standards, from national accreditation for children, services to children, which counsel our accreditation out of washington d.c., all talk about those ratios and what the pragmatic pieces will be. i'm afraid by allowing some of those things we're on the downward slide of doing something a little bit different that i don't think we want to go to. so i appreciate ms. early and the lao's office recommendations very clearly and i support them 100%. so i thank you for the opportunity, we all struggle with some of this and i know you've heard the issues today and you know them just as well as most of us do so thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 4844, 'end': 4849, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5502, 'end': 5507, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Debra Brown: debra brianna brown with the state superintendent, so i would add as we have these two different requirements. if we do get complaints, so in addition to the tri-annual review, if we do get complaints we do investigate those. so it's not as if complaints can happen and there is not a separate process for further investigation.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brianna Bruns: brianna debra bruns, department of finance, i'm not sure that i'm understanding you question. speaking directly to the governor's proposal?
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debra Brown: So that is, Debra Brown with the State Superintendent. That is certainly one of the questions that we've been talking with Department of Finance, about what that would look like and one of the challenges that we had, not only, if it were be a transfer of responsibility from one state agency to another.
[{'start': 12, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Virginia Early: thank you, mr. chair. virginia brianna early, again, with the legislative analyst's office. so, we have a handout that's coming around right now on the quality improvement programs. i'll start on page one of the handout. so federal law requires the state to spend a certain amount of federal funds and the state matching funds that the state is required to spend, to improve the quality of childcare and preschool. so in 16-17 the state had to spend about 10% of these funds which equated to 78 million on these activities and this spending requirement will go up in the next few years, reaching 12% by 2021. if federal funding remains flat, we expect this to equate to about $95 million. so federal law allows us to count various types of activities towards meeting this requirement. for example, the state can develop early learning materials for childcare providers, use it to enforce licencing requirements and provide information about childcare options to parents. california currently uses these funds to support about 30 different quality improvement programs. we divide these program options into three categories. programs that are operating at the state level including licensing enforcement, developing those early learning resources and developing say specific trainings that operate the same state wide, and that are available to everyone. the state also has funding going to certain county level agencies that are involved in quality improvement work. resource and referral agencies are one of these and local planning councils are another. resource and referral agencies are responsible for helping parents find childcare in their areas and collecting data on childcare providers, while local planning councils are responsible for identifying areas in their county with unserved eligible children, and helping generally in the county coordinate childcare services. and the last category of quality spending is when the state provides funds for certain activities to these county level support entities for activities. so, for example, r&r agencies get funding to run specific types of training on top of their main responsibilities, local planning councils get funding to provide stipends to early educators on top of their other responsibilities. and some community colleges get some funds to support students' application fees for the child development teacher permit. in general, these 30 programs, cd has broad descretion over what they fund. in some cases, the legislature has a specific line item, for example r&r's in the state budget. on page three of the handout, we provide an overview of the quality rating and improvement system. as i mentioned earlier, this is a system that sort of rates the quality of childcare providers and provides resources to help these child care providers improve of those 30 programs i mentioned earlier the state counted $800,000 towards qris for migrant childcare programs but outside of that 30 programs, the state also provides an additional 75 million not counted toward the federal quality spending requirement. of this amount 50 million is proposition 98 funds for state preschool qris, and 25 million is provided by first five california for all types of providers. consortia have a small presence in many parts of this state. currently there are 48 consortia operating in all 58 counties, and the consortia members include resource and referral agencies, local planning councils, first five county commissions, community colleges as well as local educational agencies and childcare providers. these consortia rate providers based on the matrix i mentioned earlier, it includes things like child teacher interactions, staff standards, the use of certain development screenings, use of child assessments to inform curriculum and several other things. consortia have flexibility in how they use their funds to help providers improve quality. for example if a program gets a low rating because their teacher needs more training they might provide financial aid to improve the education level of the teachers. if they get a low rating because of something going on in the classroom environment they might provide a grant to help purchase supplies, so it really varies. so on page four of the hand out, we discuss cde's revised quality improvement expenditure plan. the 16-17 budget directed cde to take a look at the quality improvement of those 30 programs that they have. and the provisional language requested them to retain funding for r and rs, local planning councils, and licensing enforcement, while prioritizing the rest for this qris system i just mentioned. cde submitted the plan to the legislature in february. this plan shifts about 5.1 million from about nine programs, into one infant and toddler qris block grant. so under this, the qris members of the consortia could use the funds flexibly for the activities that they deem most important but the providers would be have to be those serving infants and toddlers. in addition cde is proposing, changing some rules to existing programs for example, certain state level trainings that those members would now have to be participating in qris to receive the training. our assessment is on page five of the handout. as we looked at the system, both broadly and cde specific proposal, we found that there are some activities that were important to supporting the subsidized childcare and preschool system. for example, helping parents find childcare, identifying areas with unmet need and collecting data on childcare providers. but we also, as we look at the system and talked to folks it seemed that quality improvement funding at the county level can lack coordination and be difficult to target to highest priorities. so for example, within each county we have these multiple support entities all involved in the activity of improving quality. but there's no over arching plan that they have to have to improve quality. and so there's qris, but that just applies to the small number of providers that are participating in qris. so without having such a plan there's no guarantee that the trainings are duplicative and there's no guarantee that the training is directed to the folks that need it most. additionally the detailed requirements of the various funding streams mean that these county level support entities have difficulty targeting funding to their highest priorities. additionally, we found that there's little information on the effectiveness of the state level programs i mentioned earlier. we don't have data, we have some data but not enough to determine whether the state is serving the providers that we'd like to be serving. and while the state has conducted some evaluations on the programs, we don't have evaluations that these evaluations don't address whether the programs are actually improving the quality of childcare. we also found that the funding disproportionally serves providers that already meet higher standards and so of the 28 million in cde's revised quality improvement budget for training activities, 28% is restricted to contract based providers and under their revised program rules, another 37% is restricted to providers participating in qris which tend to be again contract based providers. we're concerned about this focus on contract based providers because as i mentioned earlier nearly three quarters of the infant subsidized, infant toddler subsidized population is receiving care in these voucher settings that have lower standards. in terms of cde's overall plan, with think that shifting funds to qris a limit, we like that it increases the flexibility of these county level support entities to conduct the types of activities that they think are the most beneficial. but we are concerned that restricting it to only qris types of providers limits the providers that can benefit because state wide a small share of subsided providers are participating in qris. so on page seven of our handout we go through our recommendations. we recommend the legislature retain funding for essential activities like helping parents find childcare and collecting data on the childcare providers and identifying areas with unmet need. these activities are currently done by the resource and referral agencies and local planning councils. then we would recommend the legislator take the funding that's currently going to county level support entities for other activities and package it into one county level block grant of about $21 million distributed to counties based on each county's share of the subsidized population. we would recommend that the legislator require all the entities currently receiving these funds to get together and agree on how they would spend the funds under the new block grant, taking into account the providers and the subsidized population in their area. so these providers could choose to do the same activities that they're currently doing. i'm sorry, these support entities could continue to do the same activities they're currently doing or if they have other ideas for how they can meet their local priorities, they could do those. finally, we would recommend the state collect data from counties about how the funds are used. we'd also recommend that the state reject cde's proposal to limit access to certain state level programs to qris participants as we want to ensure that all providers have access to these programs. and finally for the remaining state level programs, we recommend that the state hire an independent evaluator to assess each program and whether it improves the quality of childcare over the next several years, starting with the largest ones first. so those are our key recommendations and happy to answer questions whenever you think it's appropriate.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 38, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Debra Brown: Well Debra Brown on behalf of State Superintendent and Public Instruction Tom Torlakson and I can certainly go next because I think I build on- Mike what I am planning and talking about builds upon what the LAO is provided. So and I will try not to be repetitive to what the LAO said because just to provide a good overview on the state's over all quality efforts. But then I'll provide some additional information on our development of the quality improvement plan under the federal childcare and development block grant. So I think just a little bit more background. So the Department of Education is the lead agency for the childcare development block grant commonly referred to as CCDBG. And so we manage the federal funds that are distributed through direct contracts for services and vouchers administered by alternate payment programs. Beside the direct support for financial assistance for childcare services the block grant also requires states to spend a certain portion of funds along with matching funds on 10 quality improvement activities. And so those were discussed a little bit more. But training and professional development, supporting a quality rating improvement system, and improving the supply of quality programs for infants and toddlers. With the 2014 reauthorization of CCDBG, the quality set asides are increasing over the next few years. In the current year it's 7% increasing to 8% next year. For the 17-18 budget, there are currently no proposals to allocate new quality funds and so at this time our proposal provides just over $78 million, or proposes to provide just over $78 million which corresponds to the amount in the Governor's Budget proposal. In the development of the proposed plan, the department conducted stakeholder outreach last fall and so this was over two sessions last November. So the first session focused on the requirements of the of CCDBG act and the second session later in November focused on the QRIS and so as I was saying, commenters generally supported existing projects, many expressed the desire for additional funding to be used to make the sun setting infant toddler quality QRIS block grant ongoing, to maintain and build on the current investment for infants and toddlers. Others recommended support for workforce registry, coaching and mentoring, leadership training and services for a full range of providers. So based on the feedback we received, and building up the funding provided in the current year, so 16-17 we first removed the one-time funding that was provided in 15-16 and the draft quality improvement plan that we're presenting represents the department's efforts to balance the need to maintain the infrastructure of quality improvement activities with local flexibility. And so in most instances the CDE is proposing to keep the funding as established in the 16-17 plan, however again because some of the one-time funding went away, and there's no additional funding, the plan proposes reductions to 10 programs with additional funding for one program. So the two most significant changes in terms of dollar amounts are a proposed cut of almost $2.7 million to the childcare retention program, more commonly referred to as AB 212 and so this does represent one quarter of the reduction offset by child development contractors having access to the local QRIS block grants and then as was noted earlier we are proposing to provide $5.1 million for an infant toddler QRIS block grant which is about 40% of the current sun setting program. So a little bit more on those, so AB 212, the proposed reduction to this represents, again, a quarter of the reduction. This program provides funds to local planning councils to increase quality for programs serving infants and toddlers, through childcare staff retention activities, and is focused around retaining qualified staff who work directly with children in state-subsidized center based programs and promoting best practices that foster quality early education. And then we are planning on providing money to, essentially reestablish partially, an infant toddler block grant. So the $5.1 million proposed partially back fills 24 million that was provided over two years in one-time state funding. That goes away, so the local controller should use the infant toddler block grant to support local early learning programs to increase the number of low income children served in high quality programs by providing training, technical assistance, and other resources to the program. These are often the same recipients of the AB 212 funding, and both are focused on supporting providers meeting a higher tier of quality as determined by their local QRIS ratings system. And I would note in the future as federal quality percent spending increases, it would be our goal to increase the infant toddler QRIS block grant to restore the funding closer to the original amount provided. Another comment about the proposal is that 11% of the funding is restricted to state contract providers and the rest are open to all or are prioritized to those providers participating in the local QRIS and this was really around following budget language so, set to focus on QRIS. The evaluation of quality improvement activities so the budget proposes to maintain about $570,000 to evaluate quality improvement activities. The intent of the activities is to measure the effectiveness of the programs, as well as look at how additional funding is being leveraged to conduct professional development. The evaluations focus on a selection of quality improvement activities in each contract cycle and so recently we've looked at the California Preschool Instructional Network, the California Collaborative for Social Emotional Foundations of Early Learning, and currently we're looking at the local child care and developing planning councils in AB 212. And then we use the results of this reviews to make sure that there's alignment with the state's quality efforts and make funding adjustments. We would agree with the LAO's recommendation that evaluations are important to best target the funds and the QRIS gives us a new lens through which programs are being reassessed in a thoughtful manner and we plan to continue to engage in outside evaluation of projects and initiatives in the future. And say further we intend to continue to hold open public input sessions in the fall to hear feedback on the effectiveness at the local level. So building upon state level evaluations, and then as we move from a state to local quality efforts we want to ensure that quality dollars are being used most effectively and information received from all sources will inform the development of future quality improvement budget proposals. Thank you.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 74, 'end': 87, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 144, 'end': 148, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 207, 'end': 210, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 275, 'end': 278, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brandon Toug: mr chairman and members, toug on behalf of the kidango, which is a large provider in the san fransisco bay area. we sincerely appreciate the comments today, the commitment that the legislature has made to the issue, especially with rate increases. we urge you to continue forward with that and we are opposed to the governor's delay in the budget. so thank you very much.
[]
Nina Buthee: Good morning. Nina Buthee, the Executive Director, California Child Development Administrator's Association. Agree with the former testifier, we are strongly opposed to the Governor's pause as you heard earlier today. Providers are not making enough as it is, 80% of all of the funds are going into subsidized programs go towards wage and benefits. So, by not acknowledging this, we are not actually paying our workers. Perhaps some of the well earned raises that they where see from the 10% last year. Additionally, in terms of the state media in income, we've really talked about that very, very supportive about increasing the state media income. Obviously, you will have no children to serve if you do not serve that. Because minimum wage earners will not be able to qualify for the program, additional comments about some of the state preschool slots and actually being able to expand and serve those children. One of the solutions would be as the LEA pointed out, offering those slots also to non ALA programmes in the communities they are ready, they have capacity, they want to serve those children. Additionally, we are in opposition to the ratio and licensing proposals from the Governor's proposal, we think they are a step backwards and then I have one other piece for you about the state preschool program, just a very technical change which will help to also fully pick up those slots which I'll give over to the sergeant at arms thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1423, 'end': 1443, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Valerie Dinero: good morning. my name is valerie virginia dinero, i'm the executive director for californians for quality early learning and i won't belabor the points that have already been made. sequel definitely supports the comments that are already made on increase and rates and we also disregard and do not support any realignment of teacher child ratios or moving anything into a tk structure. some additional points to make, that in the state of california there are 14,000 licensed, child care programs that are following title 22 standards. 80% of those programs are operated by center based non lea programs, so those are your faith based programs, your montessori schools, your non profits, and for profit programs, they are already in our communities. their classrooms are empty. they are ready and willing to accept the low income eligible children. there's already an infrastructure that exists in the state of california and a capacity to serve all of california's children to ensure that all children have the same equal access to quality education.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeff Flock: Thank you, Mr. Chair and Members. Jeff Flock, I represent the Riverside County Superintendent of Schools. Just very simply associate myself with the comments made by Miss Underwood. Support for the governor's proposals on alignment and flexibility. Thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 171, 'end': 180, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Hulsizer: Mr. Chair, Members. Michael Hulsizer here on behalf of the 47 school districts in Kern County. I'd like to speak specifically to issue number two in support of the staff recommendation to hold the side of them open. We think it's important note that since the June budget was adopted we've lost $5.8 billion of expected revenue, we're down another 250 million since then. Schools have lost about 1.5 billion LCFF estimated money since the June budget, and while we certainly hope we can fund everything that's being proposed here we'd like to see rates and slots in preschool restored. We think it's important to wait. We're going to see about 25% of all personal income tax revenue accounted for in the next three weeks. We'll have a much better idea at May revise as to what can be afforded, thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Josefina Ramirez Natsuna: Josefina Ramirez Natsuna with Children Now. We appreciate the very thoughtful discussion this morning. Echo the sentiments of my colleagues, please reject the budget proposal, the pause. And we urge the Committee to be bold, and to think a little bit about considering further investments because given the impact of the minimum wage and the huge unmet need, additional investments need to be considered like the SMI and the 12-month eligibility. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Cardenas: ignacio asked me, udw local 3930 to do a brief translation. so income eligibility for subsidized childcare has not been keeping up with inflation. as a result, she has lost some of her children because family has received a raise. so she urges the committee to update the state median income.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gabriella Castillano: My name is Gabriella Castillano. So I came from San Diego, California and I am a volunteer for UTW and I would like to be very specific in the reason that I'm here. I came from San Diego today and I think it's very, very important that you guys take into consideration about the budget for the family care support. I have myself experienced many, many childcare providers are losing the children because they cannot afford it. The results of this is some kids are in jail. Some others are dead, because one of my, I have this feeling so strong because one of my child that I was caring. He committed suicide because there was nobody who was taking care. And he died, he hung up himself in the door. It's very painful to know those things and I think this a time that we all together are here, not just because of the budget because, it is important but the life of the children are more important than anything. So I really want to mention that I reject the Governor proposed pause because in founding
[{'start': 11, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alicia Ramirez: Hi my name is Alicia Ramirez, I'm coming from Orange County, I'm child care provided and also I'm a part of a UTW. I came here for 12 months eligibility for families, low income families received in a subsidized care have to report within five days of any change in family income, family size, or child care need. I would like to seek a continued 12 months eligibility, so my families don't lose their child care, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Magdaleno: Hi good morning, my name is Jessica Magdaleno. I'm a child care provider from the City of Orange County and I'm also part of the UDW. And I'm here today because we need to continue increasing the endorsement rates for family tracker providers to provide quality care. This will help us continue providing the quality care the children need in different communities. This will also help me to hire an extra, child care assistant, I reject the governor's proposed pause impounded and I urge that we honor last year's Budget Committee, thank you.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susan Austin: Good morning, my name is Susan Austin I'm with UDW AFSCME. And I'm from Orange County, California. I'm a 19 years of being a family home daycare provider, and I was before that a teacher and Christian school, so I've kind of felt both sides of things. And I will say me too, me too, me too. And I just wanted to add that in Anaheim alone, there are 27% of the children, and Anaheim is the largest city in Orange County but there are 27% of the children in the poverty level, and many of those children cannot get on a program. And so I ask that the subjects that we've been talking about today, the thought of, in a very thoughtful way. I'm so sorry that Senator Jackson is not here. Because I echo every single thing she said, and each one of you has brought to the table some things that I feel that you're also feeling the same way that providers are feeling, thank you very much.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 663, 'end': 670, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Beverly Yu: good morning, beverly valerie yu with udw afscme local 3930. i will be brief, we appreciate all the comments today made towards rejecting the governor's proposed pause. we are in support of the child care law center's proposal to update a state median income and guarantee 12 month eligibility. and finally, we would like to make sure that the quality improvement expenditure plan. includes family daycare providers who care for toddlers and infants, and that this funding isn't taken from existing quality training programs that directly benefit them, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amanda Dickie: amanda beverly dickie with the california county superintendents association. we appreciate the committee's comments with regards to the governor honoring the ece budget proposal from the last year, as well as the comments made with regards to the smi. those are really important issues that i would love to see the legislature lead the way in addressing, we'd also like to make comments with regards to the governor's proposed flexibilities. we think that these flexibilities absent additional funding will go a really long way towards creating alignment in a system and allowing us to provide services to not just more kids but also provide higher quality services, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gladys Soto: Good morning, Senators, I'm Gladys Soto from San Francisco Parent Voices. I hope that the Governor or his staff is listening really, its not for you guys because you were great today by the way, I was on the waiting list twice. When my first daughter, Giovanna, was born, I was put on the waiting list. And they called me when Giovanna was in kindergarten, and I was already working and making too much money, so I didn't qualify. And I was going to get my master's degree, and I really needed the support. So the child care that I got at that time was the best I could afford. Seven years later, my son William was born. Again, put on the waiting list, when he's in kindergarten, I get the phone call, and I was making too much money to qualify, so I'm one of the parents who's always been on the waiting list. So due to the lack of early care and education, my son William, who's now 11 years old wasn't able to read until the end of second grade and now he's doing great, he just finished the Harry Potter series. And now he's fine but it took a lot of advocacy and a lot of emotional stress just to fight for my son and get his help.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 252, 'end': 260, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 327, 'end': 335, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 604, 'end': 611, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 867, 'end': 874, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Greppi: good afternoon, chair and members of the committee. my name is jennifer amanda greppi and i'm with parent voices, california. we represent 15 chapters of parents from across the state and those chapters represent thousands of parents. on a daily basis my state wide colleague mary ignatius and i receive phone calls from our organizers and from the parents, telling us that unfortunately they're received a raise. or unfortunately they've gotten a promotion, or unfortunately the state minimum wage just went up these are conversations that should never have to happen. we are using 10 year old data to decide whether or not parents are eligible for services. parents could make $10,000 a year more and remain eligible. we want to create a system that incentives parents to make increases in their income to strive for better jobs and better wages. the system currently is not allowing parents to do that. and their children are suffering as a result.
[{'start': 63, 'end': 85, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 276, 'end': 289, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Martha Alvarez: Good afternoon, Martha Alvarez, ACSA, the Association of California School Administrators. And in the interest of time, I'll leave a handout for you with the sergeant. I'll just mention something different than what has been mentioned by some of the recent speakers, which is we need to support the governor's flexibilities. We support each and every one of the flexibilities. The reason being is I don't want you to leave this hearing thinking having that impression that school districts do not have interest in preschool snacks. The issues that we have a lot of duplicative requirements and we believe that with the governor's flexibility is we'll be better able to align these programs with TK. Another, sure is we provide for loan for kids in California. So we urge you that when it comes to the may revision that you consider supporting this proposal, thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ky Jackson: ky jennifer jackson, with san diego unified school district. we support the governor's proposal. senator pan, just to answer your questions on the impact of the pause for san diego unified, there is about a $ 1.2 million bogie on that next year potentially. which means we either have to address that via our stress journal fund, or reduce teachers, or reduce access. and with respect to address the income eligibility. over the last three years we've sent back approximately $15 million. is that includes about 4 million potential for this year. so it has an impact on our district, thank you.
[{'start': 3, 'end': 19, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 105, 'end': 108, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Katerina Gregona: Katerina Gregona, on behalf of First 5 LA, the First 5 Association of. California. We support the LAO's proposal to allow community based preschool providers to access lots that their local LAO isn't able to open new classrooms. We also believe that budgetary bill proposals impact cornerstone elements of quality care. And finally, we believe SMI must be addressed this year, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Donna Sneeringer: Donna Sneeringer with the Child Care Resource Center and Child Care Alliance of Los Angeles. Me too, with my prior three speakers particularly I think Dr. Pan I would love to have a more in depth conversation about what the potential losses of health and safety might be by losing title 22. And my last note would be part of the reason this system is so complex, is because it's been starved for decades. So we really need investments and we thank for all your discussion today.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 155, 'end': 158, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Keisha Nzewi: Keisha Nzewi with the California Child Care Resource and Referral Network. Exactly what Donna said, and Erin said especially around the licensing and ratio requirements. And we super strongly support the SMI and 12 month eligibility, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 88, 'end': 93, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 104, 'end': 108, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Patti Prunhuber: patti ky prunhuber from the child care law center. yes, reject the pause. yes, please do smi and 12 month eligibility it's essential. and it will also solve some of the problems of slots going unused. and finally, on the title 22, complex discussion belongs in a policy committee not in trailer bill language and we endorse the lao comment, as well as the preceding comment to you ferd, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 89, 'end': 92, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 328, 'end': 331, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 381, 'end': 385, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lola Cornish: hi i am cornish with the california child care resource center for all network, and i just want to touch on, one of the recommendations from the, lao that's related to issue four, the quality improvement plan. we are opposed to the block granting to individual counties, for reasons of unintended consequences obviously, specifically around access with the child care initiative project which
[]
Denyne Micheletti: Denyne Micheletti representing California Alternative Payment Program Association. A couple points to bring up, there's one issue that hasn't been discussed. There was a hold harmless provision put in the 16, 17 budget, that would drop the rates of roughly 10 to 15% of provider rates throughout the state. That needs to be addressed that will absolutely impact access for families, secondly we need to be clear what we're talking about. In the voucher program there are less than 33,000 total slots. So it's not only infant toddler, every part of the system is impacted we have a 1.5 million need. Lastly, we have to open up the conversation of Prop 98. This year $121 million is being returned that going to be your child care. If we get, if we think out of the box to use it last year $101 million in unspent child care money is were returned, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Herald: Mr. Chair, Mike Herald with the Western Center on Law and Poverty. A me too to everything the Child Care Law Center said.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Liz Helms: good afternoon, i'm liz with the california chronic care coalition. i'm also a success story because over my lifetime, i have had to take opioids at different intervals, especially in november when i hurt my back pretty bad. but because of the doctor-patient relationship that i've had, it prevented me from going further. the education piece of this is so critical. i never became addicted to any opioid i ever took. and the prevention and the information that can help others not become addicted to this is critical. so, we strongly support this initiative. assemblymember wood and assemblymember waldron, this is critical. we applaud you for coming forward and doing this, and the coalition is here to help you anyway we can. we have so many pain organizations, it crosses so many of us, and so we're here to help and support you. we hope that this initiative goes through, that you fund it.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 575, 'end': 579, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 599, 'end': 606, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Joan Werblin: Good afternoon, I'm Joan Werblin and I'm Vice Chair of the Board of Directors of the California Health Collaborative, and I'm President of the Board of Directors of the California Chronic Care Coalition. We support this piece of legislation. The California Health Collaborative, has multiple programs throughout the state, and we believe firmly in education as one of the best preventive medicines that we can use. We have programs throughout the state working with youth, particularly in staying in school. We have employees embedded in the schools. We've been very successful with smoking cessation and prevention of smoking. So, we believe that education is one of the strongest things we can do. By the time you get to the overdose prevention we're far along in the battle, so I congratulate you on this legislation.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Autumn Ogden: chairmembers, ogden-smith with the american cancer society cancer action network, and we strongly support the assemblywoman's proposal. opioids are very important in treating pain associated with cancer, but it's also important to have policies and education to get at the heart of addiction. so, thank you, we support this.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 25, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jerry Jeffe: jerry, i'm representing bill remak, who is chairman of the california hepatitis c task force. the reason bill asked me to testify on his behalf today is that, he's on a marin county opioid advisory group, and he says it has been a tremendous success. he works very closely with the marin county health officers and he sees direct results of how valuable this, and he said because of that, the marin county, he can see how this proposal and the hope proposal would work statewide. so, for those reasons he's very supportive of this proposal.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 24, 'end': 34, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 105, 'end': 109, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Derek Thomas: Good afternoon, Chair and members, Derek Thomas with Sloats Higgins Jensen on behalf of Gatekeeper Innovation, maker of safe locking devices for medications. We're in strong support of this additional funding and think it will go a long way to help address the growing Opioid epidemic in California. Thank you.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Gibbons: Michelle Gibbons of the County Health Executives Association of, California, and we are also in support of the Assemblymember's proposal put forth. Local health departments are working on the grounds to tackle and address the issues that are arising through this epidemic. And we are looking at this, as a public health epidemic as well, and so, we think that the funding would go a long way in terms of education at the local levels and to address this. We also want to thank the department for their collaboration in getting the funding and making it available to local health departments on the grounds for the use of this drug. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jonathan Peterson: hi my name's peterson, i'm from chico state university. i'm a student nurse there in the registered nurse program for the bsn, and i've been following the marin study, as well, and i totally agree with this. i agree that this is a public health epidemic. i work in the emergency room, first hand. i work with providers, and i see a lot of them not prioritizing mental health as it should be, just like any other disease. a lot of times, they just kind of refer to these patients as drug seekers, but this is an illness that we have to kind of step for and really advocate for these patients who can't really advocate for themselves right now. so i totally support this, and i just want to thank you guys for your time. thanks.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 155, 'end': 160, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ben Johnson: johnson from the lao. we take no issue with this budget request in light of the significant efforts that are underway to implement the waiver programs as well as the significant challenges that are lying ahead of us with regards to substance use disorder. we do think that the resources here are warranted.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anara Guard: Good afternoon, my name is Anara Guard. And thank you for this opportunity. I've worked in suicide prevention since 1999, both here in California and at the national level when I worked for the National Suicide Prevention Resource Center. The staff requested that I appear today to help address the questions that were in the agenda. In the interest of time, I'm not going to give you my bio, you can get it, if you want it, later. I do have handouts for the Committee that I'll leave with you, so let's get to it. In terms of the first question, which had to do with the most common methods of suicide used in California, let's first step back and talk about data in general. In the US and in California, suicide has been on the rise in terms of both rates and numbers. And in California, it's been on an increase fairly steadily from 2005. Suicide is the leading cause of injury death in our state, which means there are more suicides than are motor vehicle deaths or fall deaths or homicide or unintentional poisoning. The populations at greatest risk include Native American youth, LGBT youth, at least four attempts, it's less clear on the death data, older adults, and by older I mean older than all of us, 65 and greater, veterans, men, who die at much greater rates than women. And in particular, I want to draw your attention to the latest very troubling trend in the US and in California. It used to be when we looked at charts of ages and suicide rates across ages, you would see a spike among youth and then a decline throughout the middle years, and then a spike again over age 65. But in recent years, the 45 to 64 year old age group is seeing huge increases in mortality from alcohol and drug poisoning, from suicide, from liver disease. These are called deaths of despair because they are primarily among white men, and increasingly, white women who have a high school education or less, health problems and very poor employment prospects. There's a real concern of what's going to happen with this group. Mortality in other groups has decreased, but this population is dying in terrible numbers. They're now the second highest age grade group in California dying from suicide. So the most common, the numbers, the numbers, of course, are highest in those areas with larger populations. But the rates are highest in rural counties, especially in the Superior region. This has been true for years. The most common method of suicide matches that of other states, most other states, which is firearms. About 41% of all suicide deaths in California are by firearms. And the rates of firearm suicide are highest in rural counties, basically those same counties, primarily in the more rural counties in Superior region. I want to say, too, that in an analysis of 18 states recently, California was not part of it, firearms accounted for 70% of all veteran suicides. Your second question had to do with the effectiveness of bridge nets, and I know that Dr. Bernert will speak more to that. I do want to point out there's not a lot of literature on this. Most bridges that have been modified to prevent suicides do not have nets. Instead, they have barriers added to them. And in general, reducing access to lethal means is a very effective strategy. Whether we're talking about locking doors to rooftops, packaging medications in smaller quantities, waiting periods for firearm purchases, our new gun violence restraining order law, which I have high hopes for, or the physical barriers on bridges. Your third question asked about evidence in supporting the effectiveness of hotlines. Crisis lines or hotlines are a vital component of the continuum of suicide response, offering trained counseling not only to those people who feel suicidal, but to us, their family and friends, who are worried about them. Most hotlines already offer multiple means of communication, including online chat and text, not just on the phone. A new study that just came out last month asked 550 callers who had called in to six different crisis lines, almost 80% said that call stopped me from killing myself and 90% said the intervention of the call kept them safe. I think that's highly persuasive. And finally, you asked how would I recommend that California invest in suicide prevention? There are a multitude of effective prevention strategies in this field that really need to be matched to the individuals. They might be individual interventions, they could be laws and policies, they could be training, there's many of them, but key to success in adopting any intervention is having a comprehensive approach to suicide prevention, combining multiple, ongoing efforts, rather than hoping that one single program or intervention Is going to be sufficient. Suicide is far too complex a problem for any simple solution to turn the tide. Without infrastructure and robust leadership, which unfortunately we lack, our investments lack context. They're not measured or evaluated by a central content-knowledgeable body. California lags behind other states. Our suicide prevention plan is woefully outdated and moribund, and we lack the infrastructure to do anything about it. We need a plan that is updated, leading edge, data driven, endorsed and adopted by multiple stakeholders not limited to state agencies or the public sector, broadly implemented and then evaluated. Our plan should focus both upstream and also on improving the systems that offer access to responsive care at the earliest signs of crisis. We need leadership at the state level with engagement by many sectors, public and private, and it's my sincere wish that today's hearing will be the first step toward a new, robust and coordinated approach to suicide prevention in California. Thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2966, 'end': 2973, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rebecca Bernert: all right, hi, i'm bernert. thank you so much for your flexibility and for our moving the time around. thank you, mr. chairman, and committee members, for the opportunity to present. so i'm a suicidologist, i'm from stanford, and i was asked to present on emerging best practices in suicide prevention or the field that is focused on the science of suicide prevention, suicidology. so as other speakers and anara has emphasized, suicide is considered a preventable public health problem, accounting for nearly 1 million deaths annually or approximately one life lost every 40 seconds. in addition, the institute of medicine estimates that approximately 25 additional suicide attempts, or up to 204 youth, occur for every suicide death. so based on these numbers it is clear that everyone in this room, either directly or indirectly, has been touched by suicide, and often in profound ways. suicide is considered a leading cause of death in california, as you heard, and was recently declared a public health emergency by the cdc among our youth in santa clara county here in california. the prevention of suicide has been named a global imperative by the world health organization, who have suggested the following public health model of suicide prevention, which starts with surveillance of the problem to identify risk and protective factors and to develop and test interventions for implementation, as well as the scaling up of those programs and policies. unfortunately, there are inherent challenges, many of which are not necessarily obvious or intuitive, that really impede advancements across all four of these different areas. so this includes probability challenges first, insofar as suicide does occur rarely in the population to find prediction without large scale data capture. and this is really further challenged by increasing rates which vary, of course, significantly by age, gender, and other factors. ethical issues including confidentiality and liability concerns limit disclosure and accurate detection and the lack of uniform nomenclature for the way that we talk, even, or define suicidal behaviors, reduce comparability across different studies and research. and this is despite emphasis by the cdc as well as an fda mandate to assess suicide risk. given distinct methodological challenges to surveillance demands and infrastructural need that are substantial and extremely cost prohibitive, be it for epidemiology or clinical trials. to this end, very few indicated treatment currently exist specifically for suicidal behaviors worldwide. including not a single intervention to prevent repeat suicide attempts, for example, among our youth, despite over 20 years of intervention that's been committed to this cause. global prevention strategies have prioritized the study of evidence-based risk factors, as well as interventions to advance what is known as the field. and factors that are visible proximal to risk, modifiable, and that really stand alone to predict risk, and what i mean there is above and beyond the influence of depression, which we know is present in upwards of 90% of cases. it takes obvious precedence here. preventive frameworks, including primary interventions, secondary, selective, and universal frameworks, focused first on primary, generally focused on the prevention of suicide incidents that may increase risk for suicide, such as psychiatric or medical disorders, for example. secondary frameworks, which may occur at really any stage of risk, generally focus on early detection to improve intervention. examples here would be primary care based screenings for depression as well as gatekeeper training programs. selective interventions test the use of new treatments among those that are already at elevated risk for suicide in what are called high risk clinical trials, whereas universal frameworks use population-based strategies to reduce risk universally by promoting health access to care as well as other factors. so the emerging state of the science in suicide prevention centers on addressing critical problems and gaps in our existing scientific literature. so i'm going to just focus on, or briefly review, three different examples that are currently in our state and underway that point to where i believe the science is going, and what it could achieve with adequate leadership to enhance intervention opportunity and reduce suicide mortality. this includes lethal means restriction with the suicide deterrent system on the golden gate bridge, treatment innovation using novel treatment approaches such as sleep as a therapeutic target for suicide prevention, and cutting edge technologies that promise to meaningfully advance suicide prediction. so first for lethal means restriction. this is a universal strategy which limits access to lethal means for making a suicide attempt to prevent its occurrence in the general population. a large body of research indicates that this is among the most potent yet underutilized approaches in suicide prevention that also remains poorly understood as a public health strategy, excuse me. and it does encompass, really, a range of methods that include carbon monoxide emission control, automatic shut-offs, suicide barriers, as well as gun locks and safety protocols. so this research really comes from the observation of reduction to zero finding at numerous international suicide hotspots, particularly bridge sites, following implementation of a suicide deterrent system, whether its a net, more recently, or a suicide barrier of some kind. these effects are both large and immediate according to the research that exists, and in some cases at sites reporting as many as 95 suicides annually. examples here include memorial bridge in maine and the muenster terrace in switzerland. importantly, evidence does not support suicides occurring thereby at other locations, or something that's called method substitution or location substitution and a positive impact has been observed in overall suicides in some cases following lethal means restriction. but this is difficult research to do because it is oftentimes uncontrolled, for example. likewise, there is research showing that suicides increase upon barrier removal temporarily, when that's done, for example, for reconstruction. an example there is the grafton bridge in new zealand, which then again reduced to zero following reinstallation. as i mentioned before, very few indicated interventions exist worldwide that investigate a new drug or treatment for suicidal behaviors specifically. most concerning, we currently rely almost exclusively on what's called a treatment by proxy approach. so, in other words, we treat the depression or psychiatric disorder that's thought to underlie risk, and test whether it improives suicide risk downstream of the intervention. in addition, these treatments do remain alarmingly mismatched to the acute nature of a suicidal crisis, so taking weeks and months for therapeutic effect, and this is just by elevated need where half of those following a suicide attempt will refuse treatment, and of those who do pursue it, up to 75% will drop out within the year. so this really heightens the urgency to identify rapid action treatments for suicide indication using novel treatment approaches. i've included an example here from our program that involves two nih and dod-funded suicide prevention clinical trials testing the efficacy of a non-pharmacological insomnia treatment for suicidal behaviors among both high-risk civilians and military veterans. in this case, there is considerable rationale to test the use of a non-mental health intervention that's targeting a highly visible risk factor such as insomnia, for example, that's overrepresented among those at risk, based on the science that we have, yet highly treatable and non-stigmatizing by comparison to other risk factors. and this is based on the thinking that we all want to sleep well, and sleep better if we don't already sleep well, and we do know how to treat sleep disturbances and other factors similar to it very easily with large treatment effects observed in as few as one to four treatment sessions. next, the final example just includes new technologies for suicide prevention and risk detection, with facebook pioneering new ground here on a global scale. but just to step back for a moment, i thought it would be helpful to provide some context here. we do know that the majority of those who die by suicide do consult with their physician in the days and weeks prior to death, suggesting missed detection opportunities. and in the case of our young people, we also know that most confide in a friend or a trusted adult that they are thinking about suicide. despite hundreds, i mean, hundreds of risk factors for suicide, our recent studies suggest that less than 5% of those studies evaluated the days and weeks directly preceding risk. so again, not seeing proximity to risk, which is hard because it affects precision, and those risk factors in general show poor sensitivity and prediction as as a result. so this has lead to the recent emergence or focus on artificial intelligence, or what's called machine learning algorithms. so this is a statistical method that basically enables the computer to learn patterns to evaluate or improve accuracy of risk prediction and which performs really optimally and best actually with hundreds and hundreds of variables to inform pattern recognition. and importantly, this is a theoretical, so, meaning that it does search, allows for the computer to search for patterns to reveal risk factors that we may expect or we also might not expect. and many have likely seen facebook's press releases noting real time suicide prevention tools that are now available to all users. and this is world wide, as well as the use of ai to identify signs of risk with advanced options for connection to additional services. so here is an example in facebook live, as you can see in the upper right hand corner. so this enables the safe use of social media in suicide prevention, but also has the power to really critically impact prevention and risk prediction in particular. so a recent study shows using similar computer guided models that these models out performed clinical judgment in predicting a suicide attempt, for example, following ed admission when we know risk is highest and that was by three fold, in terms of an initial comparison. and this technology also recently revealed specific keywords in a crisis chatline that were more likely to be associated with emergency referral to law enforcement, so this is allowing kind of immediate use and prioritization of callers according to risk level, to then enhance and expedite triage. finally, an elegant study just recently reported in nature, showed that using only medical record information and medical tags alone across 76,000 patients, predicted new onset conditions of rare occurrence with relative or, excuse me, a remarkable accuracy in some cases over 90% accuracy of new onset occurrences. so this has really clear significance for the prediction of suicidal behaviors given their rare occurrence in our inability to predict suicide currently. so last, just to end, i believe these examples really show the way in which science could be combined with existing best practices to inform suicide prevention innovation in both risk prediction and, thus, prevention. due to the inherent challenges that i mentioned within suicide prevention, really, as a field, multidisciplinary collaborations are required to advance. as an economy, a community, and as a leader in technology innovation, among others, california is uniquely positioned to pioneer and advance understanding of suicide in ways that are unparallel to those previously. we do know that any singular approach at this point will be insufficient and unlikely to change current suicide rates in our state, which have remained intractable and have increased in recent years. so this really speaks to the need for a state-driven suicide prevention strategy outlining an action plan that promises to impact suicide on a broad scale. and i believe this is a tremendous opportunity in the history of suicide prevention, insofar as this could create a foundational road map to guide innovation in our state andd beyond to bridge best practices and research and intervention with technology while creating opportunity for, also, private and public partnerships to prevent loss of life. because although we have talked a lot about statistics already, in my presentation and in anara's, we also know that suicide is preventable but remains a silent killer, a global disease burden, and yet, even one suicide is too many if that person is our loved one, thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 7365, 'end': 7368, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Theresa Ly: hi everyone, my name it theresa jonah ly, i'm a program manager with the california mental health services authority, and thank you so much for allowing calmhsa to come today and speak about its statewide suicide prevention initiatives and give you all some context as to what's already happened, and is currently happening, in california regarding statewide suicide prevention efforts. to give you a little bit of background, calmhsa was created in 2009 as a joint powers authority, implementing programs on behalf of california county behavioral health agencies. the first project, and the biggest project, that calmhsa was task with launching was the statewide prevention and early intervention project that was funded by one-time set aside mhsa funds through the pei, the prevention and early intervention bucket. under the statewide pei project, there were three initiatives; a stigma reduction initiative, a suicide prevention initiative, and a student mental health initiative. the total budget for the suicide prevention initiative was $40 million initially. the stigma discrimination reduction initiative and the student mental health initiative both had budgets of $60 million, respectively. an evaluator was selected to evaluate the specific programs that were implemented under this larger project, as well as provide some surveillance and broad evaluation of how stigma was being reduced in california, as well as suicides. the primary goals of the statewide pei project, which still are currently under way, are mental health promotion and mental illness prevention for all californians. so, today i'm just going to be talking about the suicide prevention initiative that's implemented under the larger statewide pei project. this initiative was built upon a comprehensive stakeholder project as well as recommendations from the 2008 california strategic plan for suicide prevention. under this initiative, calmhsa launched a public health population-based strategy to address suicide prevention through programs, a multitude of different programs that are multi-faceted, including social marketing efforts, trainings, technical assistance to counties and cpos to improve their local capacity to respond to suicides, increasing regional and local networks for suicide prevention to get people talking about suicide, creating new best practices, and investing in the expanded reach and capacity of california's crisis hotlines, which lyn will be talking a little bit more about later on. however, since fiscal year '15-'16, calmhsa's statewide pei project has not benefited from the one time set aside funds of those mhsa statewide funds. in fact, the current implementation of the statewide pei project is implemented solely on the basis of voluntary county funds, so the funding for these projects has drastically increased since fiscal year '15-'16. because of this reduction in funding, calmhsa and its board of directors, which represent the california county behavioral health agency directors, we were all required to make a very difficult decision, but strategic decisions on where to invest those limited funds so as to have the greatest statewide impact, while also not kind of treading on what counties are already doing to address suicide prevention, so we really wanted to be complementary to local efforts, not kind of supplant what they're already doing. so, given that, calmhsa has only been able to continue implementing our statewide social marketing campaign called know the signs, as well as providing technical assistance and some other programs that i will mention later on. and just to let you know, there has also been a commensurate reduction in state wide activities with the stigma and discrimination reduction initiative as well as the student mental health initiative. so, since its inception six years ago, the statewide suicide prevention initiative has seen some positive results and i wanted to share some of those outcomes with you all. the statewide social marketing campaign, the suicide prevention social marketing campaign called know the signs, is projected to reach over 50% of california households. that was actually data from a few years ago, two years ago. so, i would imagine we have either reached that mark or have exceeded that exposure to california households. this campaign is unique in that it's engaging helpers of those at risk for suicide, so it's not speaking directly to the person who may be experiencing thoughts of suicide. it's really engaging helpers on how do you learn about the warning signs, what are the warning signs, how do you talk to someone effectively, if they are having thoughts of suicide? and then more importantly, how do you find local resources, local, regional, or national resources to help that person that you are concerned about or to help you along in your path of helping someone else? studies have shown that people who are exposed to this know the signs campaign have increased levels of confidence to intervene with someone at risk for suicide. so, if you take that step a little further you can imagine that more californians are actually equipped to support people at risk for suicide. furthermore, a panel of suicide prevention messaging experts deemed the know the signs campaign to be one of the best suicide prevention campaigns that are currently available and largely adhered to best practices in messaging on suicide prevention. to address youth suicide prevention specifically, calmhsa invested in the development of a novel program called directing change. you might be familiar with directing change. a few years ago, youth that participated in the directing change actually went around and did some committee presentations, that was a few years ago. directing change engages high school and higher education students to learn about suicide prevention and stigma reductions through the unique lens of film making, and a recent evaluation, a case control evaluation of directing change, demonstrated that students who participated in directing change had significantly positive, and more importantly, sustained changes in attitudes, knowledge, and behavior compared to students who were not exposed or participated in the directing change program. in the area of suicide prevention gatekeeper training, calmhsa investment in the growth of asist and safetalk, which gatekeeper trainings are trainings for people who are not mental health professionals, your mailman, your teacher, people who are in a position to maybe notice warning signs or changes in behavior. so, asist and safetalk are two large suicide prevention gatekeeper trainings that are available nationally, but the investment in the growth of asist and safetalk trainings in california have catapulted california, actually, to become the number one state in the country with the most number of trainers, so we have a large capacity to address the need for trainings in california. a return on investment analysis demonstrated that the california state government will gain $50 for each $1 invested in asist trainings through averted medical healthcare costs and increased state tax revenue. and more importantly, from that human perspective, every one year invested in asist programs is projected to prevent at least 140 deaths and 3600 suicide attempts. and as a final example, calmhsa's previous investment in crisis centers in the initial phase of the statewide suicide prevention initiative drastically increased knowledge and awareness of crisis services, as well as expanded the range of services that our crisis hotlines and crisis centers were able to provide. we actually also assisted some new centers and crisis services to become nationally certified and we also helped foster the coordination of activities across crisis lines, all of which resulted in increasing call volumes from all california counties. at the height of its funding and program implementation, calmhsa was able to serve as a centralizing entity, coordinating statewide suicide preventions and ensuring collaboration and information sharing across a broad swath of agencies. so, as you imagine, from the state level, regional, local, everyone's trying to do something in suicide prevention and we were able to at least try to coordinate some of that. however, with reduced funding to the statewide efforts, calmhsa has not been able to maintain the centralizing role and it's really had to scale back the scope of its activities and its reach. in the absence of an active statewide entity that also provides direction and leadership for statewide suicide prevention efforts, as well as the outdated, outmoded strategic plan that anara and dr. bernert mentioned, calmhsa, as well as other local agencies, really struggle to determine a collective and comprehensive path forward, one that is based on data, best practices, and the voices of stakeholders. so, based on this experience, calmhsa recommends that there be, and i think this really echoes what we've already heard so far, a centralized statewide suicide prevention effort that really should be long term, as these public health efforts really do require a long term sustained investment in order to really see your ultimate outcomes, continued support for our network of suicide prevention crisis hotlines, a new investment in an updated strategic plan for suicide prevention that does include a stakeholder body and allows that stakeholder body to continue to advise on the implementation of statewide programs. and then ultimately, additional funding to implement the new state plan with provisions to evaluate those efforts to inform future efforts as we kind of evolve our statewide efforts for suicide prevention. so, thank you.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2447, 'end': 2450, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8689, 'end': 8694, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8703, 'end': 8710, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lyn Morris: hi, thank you for this opportunity. my name is lyn, and i'm the senior vice president of clinical operations at didi hirsch mental health services, which is the home to the oldest suicide prevention center in the nation, as well as the largest in california. so, i want you to imagine just for a moment that somebody is having a heart attack. what do you do? you call 911, then you administer physical cpr. now imagine someone's in suicidal crisis. what do you do? you call the national suicide prevention lifeline and administer emotional cpr. a life threatening psychological crisis is as critical as a life threatening heart attack. the national suicide prevention lifeline is the equivalent of a 911 mental health line. therefore, statewide suicide prevention funding is critical, since residents in every county in california call the national suicide prevention lifeline number. it was launched by the substance abuse and mental health services administration in 2005, and then lifeline expanded considerably over the years. it now receives over 1.5 million calls annually. it provides 24/7 spanish coverage, a veteran's line, crisis chat, follow up services, and a disaster distress help line. all lifeline members are accredited and adhere to standards and best practices that are based on current research and advances in the field, but the lifeline is often thought to be funded federally. and it's not. all the lifeline member centers receive about $1,500 a year despite how many calls they receive on the crisis line. so, there is no stable suicide prevention funding that is statewide for california, yet there is widespread use and advertisement of the lifeline, which really does attest to its importance, and up and down the state, you'll see insurance companies, universities, hospitals, media, social marketing, state and county agencies directing the public to call the lifeline if they're in crisis. even siri, on your iphone, if you talk to her and say, i think i want to jump off a bridge, she will say, it sounds like you're thinking about suicide, would you like to call the national suicide prevention lifeline and press a button to connect you? in california, the demand has increased dramatically, the call volume has tripled in the last eight years, reaching over 130,000 calls. based on current trends, the lifeline calls answered in california will increase to over 200,000 in the next five years. our spanish calls have increased five fold in the last several years, and these calls represent men and women of all ages and all ethnicities. didi hirsch suicide prevention center answers approximately 50% of all the lifeline calls in california, and we're also the backup to the entire state, so when a call is directed to a crisis center, if they have too many calls coming in and they're not able to answer the call, it will roll over to us for us to answer so that those calls stay within california, and we're able to help our callers with local resources. many of california's lifeline centers have been providing life saving services for decades with minimal funding, but between 2011 and 2015, a coalition of counties agreed to pull mhsa funding for three statewide initiatives, which theresa spoke of, one of which was suicide prevention. didi hirsch was the lead on establishing california's statewide suicide prevention network, and with our crisis consortium, which includes all the other lifeline centers in california, we developed common metrics for collecting data on our callers, services in korean and vietnamese language, we increased our chat services, which reaches a high risk population, and we created five new programs that were accepted as best practices in suicide prevention. this doesn't even include all the other life saving work that crisis centers provide in regards to outreach, survivor's support groups, follow up and rescues. so since the funding for these statewide projects ended in 2015, our crisis center consortium of our lifeline centers has worked together to maintain their partnerships. however, services have been cut due to funding, and the suicide rate has not gone down, in fact, it's the highest it's been in 30 years, and we continue to try to work together to advocate for a stable statewide source of funding for suicide prevention. so on behalf of the 10 california lifeline crisis centers, we are respectfully asking for $4.3 million for the state budget fiscal year '17-'18. in the agenda, it said $4 million, but our calls have gone up dramatically, and we have to account for that as well in making sure that all residents of california get our life saving services, so we hope to have your support in that, and thank you for your time today.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 3222, 'end': 3229, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3277, 'end': 3288, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mary Ader: good afternoon, mary theresa ader with the county behavioral health directors and we're in support of the proposal to fund the suicide prevention hotline, thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kita Curry: Hello, I'm Dr. Kita Curry and I am the CEO of Didi Hirsch Mental Health Services, but I come to this issue with a passion, my family has a long history of mood disorders, bipolar, and depression, I've lost three family members to suicide, and it's an issue that I know personally. When I was on the State Strategic Planning Committee quite a few years ago, it was amazing, it was the best state Committee I've ever been on, because everybody was really unified in a common goal, they all wanted to save lives. And our vision was that our state would step up and say, this is a state issue, this isn't a county issue, big or small, our state has to come together and protect our people, and we really need to see that happen, I just want to give you an example. We created a program recently, someone mentioned that suicide attempters are really the most neglected people dealing with suicide in our society, and therapists are very poorly trained to deal with anyone with suicide and they're afraid to because of liability. So we started a group for people that had attempted suicide, and they actually helped teach us how to make it the best it could be, it became listed on the Suicide Prevention Resource Center's list of practices that were quality, we now are working with a researcher to make it a best practice. The State of New York brought us out to train some of its mental health professionals, it's now asked us to submit a proposal to state to train all the mental health professionals in the State of California. The State of Georgia has asked us out, when is California going to have a unified, integrated approach to suicide that's not dependent on the will and whims of 52 counties, 52 counties with equal votes, thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rusty Selix: thank you, rusty mary selix, california council of community behavioral health agencies, two issues are before you. the first was the request we made, which is to continue the funding for these lifelines, the hotline, without which we're at risk of losing that vital support, we thought that $4 million was the amount, we've since got the updated information, it's $4.3 million, and we support that request. in addition, i think you've heard from all the speakers is there's a need for more than that, and the next panel will get to that as well, and your staff recommendation of directing the oversight commission to look for a study of what do we need, in terms of comprehensive strategy, and a long term funding solution, we support that as well, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Kent: All right, we're doing rochambeau here. So again, Jennifer Kent, Department of Health Care Services. I will defer to Finance, obviously, on the question around the administrative funding. Our best history on why the Office of Suicide Prevention was disbanded when the Department of Mental Health was absorbed into the department, was it was voluntary funding and a voluntarily funded activity through MHSA funds. So obviously, as you heard from the previous panel, that voluntary funding has ceased, and so, the office itself also ceased to exist. But I would defer, obviously, to Mr. Ewing, if there's either additional historical data. And then, obviously, I think we would be certainly willing and able to have a conversation around a larger statewide leadership role in suicide prevention. Obviously, there's a lot of different departments and agencies that have either a component or a funding source, or a policy around that particular thing and we are obviously more than happy to have a conversation around it, but no other position at this time.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 33, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 50, 'end': 63, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 585, 'end': 590, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Toby Ewing: Thank you Mr. Chair and members Toby Ewing, I'm the Director of the Mental Health Services Oversight and Accountability Commission and I think there are a couple of issues on the table. One of them is sort of trying to unpack what happened to the Office of Suicide Prevention with the shift under the Governor's reorganization proposal that disbanded the Department of Mental Health, and as Director Kent points out, there are several state agencies that have a role in terms of either tracking the data or providing support or engaging, particularly if you think around the array of strategies that the panel that just presented talked about in terms of training for licensed workers, in terms of some of the more innovative strategies, such as partnering with the private sector. I think the point where the Commission is in thinking this through and working with your staff and talking with the Department and others, is that California does need to put together an integrated strategy that really taps the best of what we have been able to do historically, as well as what the opportunities that we have currently, that we have not yet pursued, such as the partnerships with the private sector, the comment about Facebook. We understand that there are a number of tech companies that are developing strategies to really do the machine learning to understand where there are risks and to identify strategies to identify these folks and then connect them with often peers, right, in ways that are appropriate for who those folks are. For many folks, the crisis hotlines are the right kind of strategy. For others, there maybe other modalities that are out there. We think the Mental Health Services Act creates a tremendous opportunity, both in terms of its heavy emphasis on prevention and earlier intervention but also its emphasis on innovation and that it's about time that the state actually brings folks together to figure out what their strategy looks like and then some of the other speakers said that we're not reliant on gathering everybody and sort of voluntarily pulling the dollars, but thinking strategically about how can we leverage the strengths of the Department of Health Care Services, the Department of Public Health, the Commission, our county partners, our community providers and others. And I think consistent with some of the comments that Assembymember Wood made earlier around the private sector, tremendous opportunities to partner with private sector in ways that we have not done in the past, and so I would like to think less about and what happened in the past and really put our energy towards what it would take for California to develop the most effective strategic initiative for identifying risks and intervening early and developing those prevention strategies so we can really address this issue. I was shocked to hear that this was the leading cause of death for youth in California, thank you.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 400, 'end': 404, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2368, 'end': 2386, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jessica Sankis: good afternoon, jessica rusty sankis, department of finance, i'll be addressing the first question that is here on the agenda regarding the 2016 budget act and the $4 million for suicide hotlines. as was noted previously, this $4 million is from the 5% administrative cap that is on the mental health services fund for a variety of programs. these funds were subject to availability of funds, so at this time as we examine the health of the fund and the state of the 5% administrative cap. we are expecting updated revenue and forecasting information for the fund between now and the may revisions. at that time, we'll be using the updated data and information about the state of the fund to determine how much money is in the cap and if any will be available, so as soon as that information is available, i can make it available to you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Suzanne Edis: My name is Suzanne Edis and I'm a mental health advocate in the area and I lost my brother to suicide 35 years ago. My parents worked really closely with Dede Hersch over the years and with Toby and worked on the initial suicide prevention strategy for California in the 2000s. I think it's really important, the work that's getting done is terrific across all of the counties. And the Mental Health Services Act has been just a powerful resource for our state. And I also agree that we really do need to take some funds and work on this at a larger level, a more systemic level. That work that gets done down in the counties wonderful but we need a strategy and a better system how to use the money that we have to create even more powerful care for people that need it. Because not only do we see the evidence of people who lose their lives but it's also the people who are left behind afterwards and those ripple effects are really tremendous. So thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 154, 'end': 165, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 190, 'end': 194, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Karen Baylor: hi, good afternoon. i'm baylor. i'm deputy director for mental health substance use disorders for the department of healthcare services. and we're here to talk about reversion. so, the mental health services act had a provision in it where counties had three years to spend the funding. and if the funding was not spent within that three years, the former department of mental health could come in and sweep those funds back into the mental health services account and then redistribute it out to counties. the former department of mental health stopped doing that in 2008. there is no one left from the management of the former department of mental health that we can ask as far as why they decided in 2008 not to do that. i have a guess but there's no one left at the department to ask. and so, in moving forward, when the former department of mental health came over to the department of healthcare services, we took a look at the reversion and decided that we needed regulations in order to effectively and procedurally have a good solid reversion policy. and so that is what we are working on now. in regards to ab 1618, which was one of the questions on the agenda on requiring dhcs to post the three year program and expenditure plans. we do have a web page now dedicated to this. we do receive a majority of, or we have received a majority of the most current three year program and expenditure plans. and we have to review each plan to make sure that there's no personal health information and that it is ada compliant. these plans can be over 100 pages long, and so our staff are currently going through all of these plans to make sure that they're compliant. but we plan to have them all posted by the end of this fiscal year. and then the next is questions for the commission.
[]
Kirsten Barlow: good afternoon, barlow, i'm with the county behavioral health directors association. first, thank you to the mental health services oversight and accountability commission for calling attention to a very long standing issue. as you've heard, it's been many years since this has not been resolved. we have taken a look at some of the draft recommendations that they've made. one in particular, that i would probably say at this point we have really strong opposition to is the last item, which would be to pool the reverted funds for statewide purposes that really would take the authority away from how those dollars get spent from the local community. i think one of the most important things, in addition to being a new funding source for mental health, that proposition 63 did was really give voice to the consumers, family members, providers, educators, healthcare at the local level around how this large investment is being made. they're no longer really at the sidelines, they're really at the table. and so from our standpoint, the dollars really need to go back to local communities for use to fund the priorities that are obvious to local state cultures in counties throughout california. thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susan Rajlal: good afternoon. i'm susan jessica rajlal from los angeles county department of mental health, and we concur with the remarks from executive director barlow, but i would like to say also that we would oppose the reversion policy to allow small counties five years, but all other counties three years. we believe that many of the counties, no matter what their size is, have issues with development of projects and placing them, sighting them, making them operable. so we belive all of the counties should have a five year deadline. and also we are very adamant about opposing anything that erodes local control. we have a very solid stakeholder planning process in our county, and we want to honor that process. we think that is really what prop 63 was about, so we would not want to see any erosion of our local control, thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 149, 'end': 155, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Chuck Helget: good afternoon mr. chair, members of the committee. i'm chuck susan helget and i'm the executive director of the california association of veteran service agencies, and we clearly also have a suicide crisis in the veteran community. today 18% of all suicides nationally are attributed to veterans. women veterans, 2.5 times greater probability of suicide than their civilian counterparts. so given this data, and the data that you've heard from the previous panels put together, there's clearly a need, a very great need. such a great need that we shouldn't leave resources sitting around, we need to utilize them. so therefore, we respectfully concur with the commission's recommendations on reversion. and i'd also add, while i didn't stand up earlier, but support the suicide prevention strategy as well.
[{'start': 56, 'end': 74, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Sankis: Thank you, Jessica Sankis, Department of Finance. So 
Finance, well, the Department of Health Care Services is the fund administrator, our role is to sort of like the chicken and the egg. Where do I start in trying not to get too far down in the weeds with this situation? The State Controller's office has a methodology for distributing the mental health service funds to all of the counties. Once the counties have that money though, once they have their mental health service funds, they report back to us with the monthly expenditure.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kris Cook: Yeah, Kris Cook, Department of Finance. I think when we, as Jessica mentioned, we at Department of Finance are responsible for providing the Controller the schedule for distributing the funds to the counties. So from the Department of Finance's perspective, we know how much money is being allocated to the counties on a monthly basis and an annual basis by county. As to how much is actually being spent, we are not aware until we actually get those reports, as Mr. Ewing alluded to, so. And we know how much money is going out but we don't know what's actually being expended until those expenditure reports are being provided back to the state.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 60, 'end': 67, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 467, 'end': 472, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Kent: so maybe, this is jennifer, i'll take the first crack and then karen can certainly help. so, again, recall that when the former department of mental health stopped doing reversions in 2008, they were still a department until 2013. so they came to our department in 2013. at the time, when we absorbed the department of mental health and those functions, i think first and foremost the funds are audited by the counties themselves, right? the funds are sent by the department of finance. the counties, each of them, goes through their own auditing process, and so i think there's never, in our mind, been a question that, you know, the funds are appropriately accounted for on either an approved basis because they have a plan, or that there's subsequent audits that come. i think what we have been working on, and, again, it was one of those long list of both priorities and things that needed to be improved on when we inherited it, was some of these questions that toby alluded to, when does the fiscal year start? when are the funds accounted for? i think we have been working in close partnership with the counties because they can't be left out of this conversation, right? we have 58 counties that do things in a slightly different way and so we have been working to both develop a more accurate tool by which they can report their expenditures to us. but then, as karen said, when we post these plans and expenditures reports on our website, they are not one page reports. they are hundreds of pages, and they're incredibly detailed, and i will also just take a pause to remind this committee that counties don't just use mhsa funds in isolation of themselves. they are braiding, as i like to say, they are braiding this money with medicaid dollars, they are braiding it with county general assistance funds, they're braiding it with realignment funds, and they're braiding it with sapt block grant funds. and so it is not as easy as someone could say well, why didn't you just treat your mhsa funds separate and uniquely? these are funds that are being used to either support expenditures that can't be supported through medicaid dollars or being used to support populations that are otherwise not eligible for medicaid. in some cases they've been used to offset disallowances that counties have had for medicaid expenditures. and so all of that takes time from an auditing perspective and a financing perspective. and so these are really both important and critical details. i think to ms. rubio's comment about these counties have been given these funds. sometimes they are harder to expend than we sitting in sacramento can appreciate. they require local input, they require local planning, they require approval from either the commission. and so it is not to say that we just have, like, literally no idea where these funds are but it is a very both complex financing process from a state and a local perspective and we want to get it right. the reversion policy, which is the topic for today's hearing, is important to us but also mindful of the fact that there are several issues that have been raised as to, do you do a retroactive reversion and kind of penalize counties for monies that they have either been holding onto or using with no clear guidance? and the onus is clearly on us to get that policy both clearly enunciated, and in a way in which the counties can count on it either from a retrospective basis, or from a going forward basis. and so that's something that we've been actively working on. but i think it is not just as simple as saying it's a singular form. and so i don't want to have the committee feel that the counties are just kind of sitting on the funds and that we're doing nothing. i think it has been an act of issue we've been working on, but again taken with the other priorities of this department and the counties have been doing along a lot of other important initiatives.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 63, 'end': 68, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 967, 'end': 971, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1371, 'end': 1376, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2499, 'end': 2504, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ben Johnson: I might note, Ben Johnson from the LAO. Our understanding is that, at least in certain circumstances, let me just say, the act does allow holding of county funds in certain instances of non-compliance. Whether or not we have the regulatory tools to operationalize that requirement, I think, is uncertain, and that's something that the Department of Health Care Services has stated that they're working on through the regulatory development process but it is my understanding that the intent of the MHSA is to allow for the withholding of funds when counties are not compliant with the requirements of the Act.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Martha Maldonado: good evening. i'm martha. i'm the operations manager for the california health facilities financing authority. the authority's executive director sends her apologies. she was unable to make it today due to scheduling conflicts. i'll just go straight into the cuts. if the funding level for either the community infrastructure grants or the children's mental health crisis services grants is changed, the statute will need to be amended. for example, in the kids' crisis program, their investment goals are 200 net new beds and a 125 net new mobile crisis teams in the statute. regarding the sb 82 reversion on page 30 of the sub-committee's report, we would like to clarify that the deadline to award sb 82 fund grants was june 30 of 2016. but after being awarded, the counties have two years to complete their projects and request disbursement from the authority. all sb 82 funded projects need to be completed operationalized by may 30 of 2018. this allows the authority one month to complete all disbursements and make any balance of unused sb 82 funds available for the kids' crisis program on july 1 of 2018.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Noah Johnson: yes. good afternoon, mr. chair and members of the committee. noah chuck johnson with the department of finance. the 17-18 governor's budget proposes to eliminate the authority to spend $67.5 million general fund for the community infrastructure grant program. these grants were intended to increase the number of treatment facilities and diversion programs. and the funding would be used for facility acquisition or renovation, the purchase of land, equipment, and other program startup or expansion costs. additional the governor's budget proposes to eliminate the authority to spend $17 million general fund for the children's mental health crisis grant program, intended to increase the number of facilities providing crisis services to children and youth under the age of 21. approximately $11 million in mental health services act funding remains for this program. additionally, the administration is proposing trailer bill language necessary to effectuate these changes. given the lower than expected revenue picture, the governor's budget proposes to pull back one time spending commitments rather than make reductions to existing and ongoing programs to bring the state's finances back into balance. chafa was in the initial stages of program development for both of these grant programs, and the funding remains uncommitted. the governor's budget also assumes a $1 million forfeiture of grant funding from an sb 82 project. the 2016 budget act reappropriated the balances of the sb 82 appropriation for the purposes of children's crisis services and extended the expenditure period until june 30, 2019. these forfeited funds would have been reappropriated per the 2016 budget act. additionally, the administration does not have a position on the request to extend the encumbrance period for sb 82 funds at this time. however, the administration will evaluate this further, and we can provide technical assistance to your staff as necessary.
[{'start': 61, 'end': 79, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1208, 'end': 1213, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ben Johnson: yes, ben noah johnson, lao. we'd just note that the budget picture in may could look different than what it looked like in january. the lao had different projections, but what ultimately comes in could be higher or lower than the governor's inital estimates. and this would impact the extent to which we can fund many of the health and human services programs including these two. even if the revenue picture were not to improve, though, come may, we'd just note that the budget is is a piece of legislation that reflects legislative priorities. and so, while the governor has laid a budget, a proposal of his priorities, the legislature, it's perfectly at its leisure to adopt its own. and so, we would just note that if we were to prioritize this, there might have to be offsetting reductions in other areas, or say lower discretionary reserves that are placed into that fund. but ultimately, that'll become clear as the may budget numbers come through. and we would just here offer our technical assistance, if there's any help we can be of in identifying legislative priorities and how legislature wishes to prioritize its resources this budget cycle.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 23, 'end': 26, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Elizabeth Espinosa: Good evening, Elizabeth Espinosa here on behalf of the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors. We are responding to the proposed elimination of the 67.5 in community infrastructure grants. The LA County Board of Supervisors is opposed to that reversion. As you are aware, counties have assumed a great swath of new responsibilities in the criminal justice system. LA County, like many counties around the state, has responded with energy and innovation to try to develop a more expansive reentry and diversion practices and programs and was eyeing the 67.5 as a good opportunity to develop the capacity in the community to address some of these issues that often lead to criminality. And we viewed this as an opportunity to reverse the cycle of recidivism. Appreciate the staff recommendation to reject these reversions today and would urge the Committee to consider that, thank you very much.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Ader: good evening, mary ben ader with the county behavioral health directors. we also oppose the community infrastructure grant elimination. we heard earlier in testimony about the opioid crisis, and this funding is very important to promote public safety diversion programs and increase the sighting of treatment facilities. we are also opposed to the elimination of children's crisis service grants. we believe that the legislative investment last summer is really important to increasing the quality of care and continuity of coverage for children in mental health crisis. and finally, we support the extension of the chafa sb82 expenditure authority. we want to emphasize that it's not new funding but simply allowing a greater time period for those funds to be expended. thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susan Washlaw: Good afternoon, Susan Washlaw from Los Angeles County Department of Mental Health. We were very excited about the approval of FB82 and the ability to expand crisis services throughout California and Particularly in LA County, we have such burgeoning needs from hospital over crowding and from criminal justice diversion and from working with the huge population that we have of homeless people on the street with mental illness. So we look forward to opening 560 new crisis stabilization beds with this money and also three urgent care centers. And the total of facilities that we would be building would be 24 all together. Now, we appreciate that there have to be regulations to every program, and we've really tried to comply. But the reality is, according to our Regional Planning Department at LA County, the time that it takes from inception to building and opening an apartment complex would be 4 years. So if you look at that and you look at the complexity of what you have to do to cite these facilities to obtain CUP and then to build out the facilities, then to take one year for the licensing and certification. And it is not realistic to think that we could do it within that timeline. We're trying very, very hard and the need is at a crisis point, not to use a pun. But we would like to see that deadline extended to 2021 to give the counties adequate time to build these facilities and deal with all the spending planning problems that we have. So we really sincerely hope that you consider that, thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Tannehill: Jennifer Tannehill with the Aaron Reid and Associates, on behalf of the California Children's Hospitals Association. CCHA opposes the proposal to revert the 17 million in support of the children's crisis capacity infrastructure grants. California's free standing children's hospitals work with their local counties and other community partners to provide a continuum of mental health services for children and youth. But a great deal of work remains to be done as funding helps more children and adolescents get the care they need early, before their mental health issues develop into life long problems. So please oppose the proposal to revert the funding. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dr. Lynn Thull: good evening, my name is dr. lynn mary thull. i'm representing the california alliance of child and family services. i agree with the comments of the speaker before me. we also oppose the governor's proposal to decrease the $17 million in funds. so instead of repeating that, i'll give you two quick stories. there was a 12 year old youth in emergency department in alameda county recently, who could not get the crisis services he needed, so he was there for 30 days. an emergency department is nowhere to get mental health crisis services for youth. and then there is a recent case in sacramento county, the 16 year old who was in an emergency department for 45 days. so those are just two stories recently of what is a continuing problem and we need to get these services to youth. thank you.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 44, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rusty Selix: Thank you, Dr. Arambula, Rusty Selix, California Council of Community Behavorial Health agencies. And I'm humbled to be able to present on this issue to an emergency room physician, who must understand this issue far better than any of us could possibly. The fact of the matter is, the jails and emergency rooms are where people of mental health and substance abuse go in crisis simply because we have not invested in these kinds of alternatives. I don't need to say anything more to that. I want to quote your staff comment, it really says it all when it says to finance, it seems more than likely that both of the purposes for which  fundings being eliminated result in long term savings for the state. Thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 23, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 25, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicole Wordelman: nicole dr. lynn wordelman on behalf of the san bernardino county board of supervisors, in support of extending the expenditure authority for the sb 82 programs in san bernardino county. we are in the process of building two residential support facilities as well as two stabilization units. and although they're well underway, we would really appreciate an extension in the case of unforeseen circumstances.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Toby Ewing: Hello, Mr. Chair and members, Toby Ewing with Executive Director of the Mental Health Services Oversight Accountability Commission. So as you saw in the earlier discussion, we are a state oversight agency. We are an independent entity within the executive branch. And do want to kind of want to respond to the general comment about providing an overview about the work that we do and then address the specific issues. So, the commission's a 16 member Commission, 12 appointees of the Governor, and then 4 sitting members, include a Senator, Assembly Member, two constitutional officers, the Attorney General, and the state Superintendent of construction. And we have a variety of roles, there are some broad general roles including research and evaluation work. And in that work we have two sides. One side is very traditional, almost academic data analysis and in that work what we're really trying to do is two fold. One is some classic evaluation work where we contract, usually with University researchers to look at specific aspects of mental health services act dollars and how they're funded. But more broadly, at how the counties are using the broad resources that are available to them to address outcomes. And so we have work underway to better understand what are called full service partnerships, which are our highest level of care that we provide in California, designed to be whatever it takes approaches, we don't have the tools yet, as sort of a community of practitioners to truly understand what those are. And so, the first stages of the work that we're doing now are really to understand how to define what a full service partnership, so we can compare across different approaches that counties are taking. The real challenge we have in California is that our mental health system is better described as a mosaic of services rather than a discrete system, right? No two counties are alike, no two strategies are alike. Our research budget is about $2.7 million, and so we make very high use of that. But it's not enough money to do this state level analysis of all services. So we really try to strategically allocate those dollars to really understand the foundational pieces like what is a full service partnership, so that we can move towards how effective are those services and for whom? There's other work that we're doing that is specific to what we call policy research projects. So, reversion is an example where the Commission identifies a challenge and directs the staff to roll up our sleeves and do the homework. And actually come up with an action agenda to try to improve that practice. We have work under way on what's called the issue resolution process, which is a grievance process that was established by the Department of Mental Health. We see some fundamental challenges there in terms of how that process is working. It's supposed to be designed as a strategy for a consumer or a family member to raise a concern about the quality of their care or the access to services that they have or have not received. And then use that process at the county level and then escalate it to the state level to try to find some relief. We've got a project on school mental health, so we're looking at strategies to improve educational outcomes. One of the explicit goals in Mental Health Services Act is to reduce school failure. We're trying to understand what does that mean? What does that look like? What are model programs? What's in place today? Where are their gaps? We have another project on reducing criminal justice involvement. That's actually an explicit goal in the act. And so we've spent the last year or so looking at strategies that are in place today in California, strategies around the country identifying gaps. When we do this work, we do Advisory Committee meetings, we do site visits, we do community forums, focus groups. For the criminal justice work, we co-hosted with the White House a forum on data driven justice. We led a delegation of California officials, counties, and state level officials to see model programs in other states. The feds funded our two state site visit for about 10 of us to go visit these model programs. All of that work is designed to come back to the Legislature and the Governor with a set of recommendations with the hope that it would result in change in policy or practice or budget or strategy, whatever the problem happens to be, right. I mentioned the school mental health and the criminal justice and mental health projects specifically because in addition to those issues, the act also identifies reducing unemployment, reducing homelessness, reducing out of home placements in foster care, a number of other explicit goals for mental health services dollars. We're working with our other state agencies to link data, mental health data and criminal justice data, for example, to see if we can map criminal justice involvement rates by county, so that we can begin to use that information to shape policy and programmatic decisions. We have legislation moving through the process right now to give us access to quarterly wage data for purposes of actually mapping unemployment rates. We're working with the Department of Education to look at school failure rates or what school success would look like. All of that is designed, part of our broad research strategy to understand what's in place, what's working, and how we can use information to guide decisions moving forward, mostly around what can we learn about what works and for whom? It's rare that an intervention always works for all people. It's more likely that we need to tailor our strategies around unique needs of individuals and their families. And what we really want is to build out the mental health system as a learning system, right, where there's the continuous improvement across the counties, among the counties with the state playing a facilitating role to support that learning over time. So in addition, that research takes up probably half of what we do. We have some other functions. We allocate grant dollars to counties through a program called triage that was created through SB 82 a few years ago. These are dollars that we allocate for reducing involvement with jails and emergency rooms. Quite often, what counties do with those funds is hire outreach workers or peer navigators who help people access services so they're not getting stuck in an emergency room or in a jail, rather than accessing services. We have stakeholder contracts. We provide funds through the budget process that you provide to us to make sure that consumers and family members and others, veterans, people working on disparities, the LGBTQ population, consumers, parents with children, parents of adults, have funds to be able to advocate effectively at the state level and locally. As somebody commented, the community consultation process is embedded in the act. And it's important that people with the experience can guide decisions, and so we provide resources to help them do that. Lastly, I would say that the next sort of largest program is innovation funds. There's about $100 million a year for innovation funds under the law as it's set up today. Counties have those funds in their bank account. They can't spend the dollars unless the Commission gives them authority, and so we review county plans. We're actually working with the counties, with the innovation sector in California to really think differently about innovation. What does it look like, what does it mean? How do we scale innovation back to that learning community strategy? The goal of these dollars is really promote transformational change. And we're just beginning to really engage our private sector partners about how to think about innovation. How can the public sector be more innovative and how do we do that in ways that shapes decisions over time? Kind of my broad overview with some discussion of the master plan. The master plan really was sort of a guide, as opposed to sort of explicit recipes of do this, do A, then B, then C, then D. It's more of a framework. We use that to sort of frame out the decisions that the Commission makes about how we allocate resource dollars. It was a five year master plan. We're starting to transition away from that broad framework, in part, because we're starting the link the data research with the policy research. In part, because we think it would be more productive to give you guidance not just on what's happening, but how to change the direction of those practices over time. And so, we want to link the analysis of the data with the policy and programmatic analysis. So we're just not telling you what's broken, but giving you a game plan for how to improve that. And so we actually think that we'll phase out some of the traditional master plan as we focus more on individual topics like crisis services and other parts I neglected to mention or reversion. And so that we can really use our ability to do the homework and put that before you and the administration but also the public to really shape the decisions that people are making around mental health. One last thing, I did mention the fiscal transparency tool. There are two other components to that that we're working on. The second one is to map services. And the third one is to map outcomes, and it's that data linking that allow us to map outcomes. And the goal is to actually empower the public to be informed about what's happening in California around mental health and to come to those community meetings and engage their county leaders with much more accessible information on what's in place today, what's working, what's not working, and to have the tools that they need to be effective advocates for transformational change. Happy to answer any questions you might have.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rusty Selix: selix, california council of community behavioral agencies. just indicating support for the need for the oversight and accountability commission to have additional staff to work on the prevention, early intervention program. there's a lot of work to be done.
[]
Rusty Selix: rusty, california council of community behavioral health agencies, just reiterating in more detail. when we wrote the mental health services act in 2004, we really didn't know what were going to be the best interventions and prevention, early intervention. 12 years later, we know a lot more now. and we think it's really appropriate for the commission to work with the counties and other stakeholders and develop a more strategic approach because we really haven't had that state wide. we may in a few counties, but we certainly don't have it consistently. and we applaud the commission for taking this on and hope that you'll support the funding request.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marty Giffin: Assembly Members, I'm still Dr. Marty Giffin like I was a couple minutes ago. California Mental Health Advocates applauds the OAC's recent announcement to the intent to award stakeholder advocacy contracts as a result of competitive bidding process. Several of these projects will directly or indirectly increase the voice of individuals who have lived experience in children's mental health needs. The OAC was given oversight responsibility for $3 million to support grant funding for children's crisis programs. With the increased expectations and oversight in association with these projects, it is essential that the OAC be allocated sufficient staff to provide adequate oversight and technical assistance to the projects that have been or will be funded. California Mental Health Advocates for Children and Youth sees the success of these projects as an enormous opportunity to increase awareness of the unique mental health needs of children, youth and their families, which will lead to improved services and supports. Success will be much more likely to occur if sufficient resources are given to the oversight and coordination of these projects. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stacie Walker: good evening chairman arambula and subcommittee members. my name is stacie nicole walker, i'm the deputy director of the healthcare workforce development division at the office of statewide health planning and development. the mental health services act provided nearly $445 million over 10 years to support mental health workforce and education training programs, or wet programs. $210 million of those funds went directly to the counties for county-administered programs. oshpd has no oversight over the county programs. the remaining $234.5 million went to support two state-administered wet five-year plans. the first five-year plan ran between 2008 and 2013. it received an allocation of $120 million and was administered through the department of mental health care. oshpd was not involved in the administration of that program. the second five year plan is running between 2014 and will end in 2019. it received an allocation of $115 million and oshpd is administering that five year plan. my comments today are limited to the state programs administered by oshpd. the second five-year plan was developed through input from stakeholders as well as a comprehensive needs assessment of the public mental health system. the plan includes programs that incentivize recruitment and retention of mental healthcare workers into the public mental health system. it expands the training and education capacity within the public mental health system and it supports regional collaboration on strategies to address local issues. funding for oshpd wet programs will end in fiscal year 2017-18. however, our contracts will continue until the end of fiscal year '18-'19. therefore, the outcome information i'm going to present you with today about our programs is incomplete. thus far, our programs have encouraged individuals to pursue careers as mental health professionals, exposing more than 15,000 students to mental health careers and providing 90 students with internships in the public mental health system. we've supported more than 6,700 mental health professionals by providing up to $10,000 in loan repayment in exchange for working up to 12 months in the public mental health system. we've also provided more than 620 stipends of up to $21,000 to mental health professionals in exchange for working in the public health system for 12 months. oshpd does not track the individuals past their 12 month service requirement. we've also increased the number of residency and training slots, providing rotations in the public mental health system, training at least an additional 64 clinical psychiatrists and 68 psychiatric nurse practitioners. our programs have supported the training and job placement of more then 800 individuals with lived experienced in the public mental health system and we've supported regional coordination of strategic initiatives designed to increase the capacity of the public mental health system. oshpd does not evaluate the mental health workforce in total. therefore, we have no projections of what the future workforce might look like. we do, however, collect self-reported data about our programs. while we have data for the majority of our participants, about two-thirds of them, we do not have information for all of them. of those who reported race or ethnicity, approximately 67% were from under-represented minority groups, and approximately 53% speak a language other than english. oshpd will conduct a program review after all funds are expended and it should be available after july 2019. the review may prove valuable to future policy discussions about the public mental health workforce. beyond the mental health services act funding for wet, oshpd has several programs that provides support to mental health providers. however, they do not exclusively target providers in the public mental health system. so this concludes my overview of the state-administered wet programs.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 30, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 68, 'end': 88, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rusty Selix: Yes, thank you. Rusty Selix, California Council of Community Behavioral Health Agencies, and also relevant in this context, one of the prime authors of Proposition 63, the Mental Health Services Act. So at the time, as we were writing the Act in 2003, we're very much cognizant of the fact that there was an enormous shortage of people qualified to do this work and, therefore, directed that money be set aside over the first four years a significant amount to provide a 10 year plan. That money is Is largely gone. What we also wrote in the Act, though was that thereafter, and really from the beginning, it was going to be an expectation the counties in their spending plans, both the three year plan and the annual updates, would address the issue of workforce. If anything, the workforce problem is bigger now than it was when we wrote the Act 14 years ago. It's not just bigger because the problems have gotten bigger, it's bigger because in the commercial market there is tremendous demand for mental health services and promotes pressure to enforce state and federal mental health parity laws. The State Department of Managed Health Care imposed a record fine on Kaiser and by no means is Kaiser alone in not having an adequate network. And the result of which is that they are paying more and it creates an even greater shortage. The bottom line is we all need to work together, we all need to find a solution to how we're going to have the people to do the work in this area, and so we put this on the agenda, we would asked that this be put on the agenda. At the very least, we think that there's a need for the state to come up with guidelines for what the county should be doing, and so that all 58 counties who are addressing this, whether some of the money should go back to the state, and continue these programs and whether that should be up to each county or decided statewide. These are the questions that need to be addressed. I note that our request had this responsibility to develop the regulations with the Department of Health Care Services. Your staff report suggests that perhaps the Office of Statewide Health Plan Development, or OSHPD, is a more logical place because they've been doing the work. We don't have a position on that one way or the other except to note the Act gives the responsibility to Department of Health Care Services, so you'd have to amend the Mental Health Services Act to have the Office of Statewide Health Planning and Development do the work. I think from our standpoint the main thing is that the work get done, that some funding may be provided to, perhaps, both state agencies to do this work and that we address this problem, which, if anything, is bigger now than it was when we wrote the Act.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sergio Aguilar: chairmember, sergio stacie aguilar with the department of finance. so to answer your questions nine and 11 in the agenda, so consistent with the mental health services act, the statewide funding is available until june 30 of 2018 and given the timeline specified in statute, the budget does not propose to continue the statewide program beyond that june 30, 2018 deadline. and as noted by stacie, oshpd has other workforce development programs that the public mental health workforce maybe able to apply to if eligible.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 389, 'end': 395, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Kent: Jennifer Kent, Department of Health Care Services. We are on the receiving end of the workforce. So we contract with providers, we contract with plans, who in turn contract with providers. I think that workforce, obviously, is deeply important to us as an end user from the standpoint that we need those providers to take care of our beneficiaries. Traditionally, we have worked closely with OSHPD because they are the kind of strategic leadership department within our Health and Human Services Agency for point on workforce issues, per se, they have a lot of programs underneath them obviously and can speak to some of that, but there is a collective partnership between the agency departments as well as the education, so several years ago when nursing was at such a crisis, it wasn't a lead on one particular department, at the time it was a cooperation with the community colleges and CSU as well as OSHPD and other workforce types of entities because everyone had to both build the pipeline as well as create some of the opportunities. Hospitals had to be a partner in that and so from a policy basis we don't set workforce policy, but we certainly work with other sister departments to highlight the need for certain providers. I think there's been a lot of interest around mental health obviously, child psychiatry being just a critical specialty, that not only in Medi-Cal is it difficult to find a child psychiatrist even on the commercial side, to Rusty's point, and so we certainly are more able to speak to the to the needs and the shortages as opposed to the what should be done about it type of department perspective.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1459, 'end': 1464, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Meagan Subers: thank you, mr. chair and members. subers here on behalf of the california health plus advocates, which is the advocacy arm of the california primary care association. i just first want to say that i appreciate the director's comments about the delayed implementation of ab 1863, which we worked on for the last several years, and dr. wood was our champion on that issue. i think we could probably debate how many clinics might take advantage of adding an mft as a billable provider. as our health centers would say, in layman terms, to open up a rate, and to change their scope to their rate is a big deal. so we would probably argue that it wouldn't be as many clinics, it wouldn't be a thousand for sure. but again, we appreciate, we do hear those concerns. we still are opposed to the delayed implementation of ab 1863, the need is out there. the initial implementation date in ab 1863 was january 1, 2017. so unfortunately, we do have clinics in a position where they, in anticipation of that implementation date, have went out and hired mfts and now, they're kind of stuck. we can also argue about whether or not that was the right thing for them to do. but they see the need, they have the patient population that need those services, so they've gone out and done that. so all that being said, we also recognize that the department is trying to play a balancing game here. they have a, you know, a tough task, so we would, at this time, urge that this body adopt the staff recommendation to adopt the modified trailer bill language to make clear that it is a no sooner and no later than date, not just a no sooner than date, which we believe, as currently drafted, is open ended. so we appreciate this committee and the staff's time on this issue. it's an important issue for our members. thank you.
[{'start': 334, 'end': 338, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dr. Lynn Thull: Good evening, Dr. Lynn Thull from California Alliance of Child and Family Services again. We do oppose the delay in the implementation of regulations for AB 1299. As sponsor on that bill, this is something that's really important to us. Youth that are in the foster care system have been much less likely to get the needed, especially, mental health services, if they move to a county other than the county when they were brought into care, so this bill was designed to fix that. The guidance is due out in July of 2017, so we think the two years that's already in the law to come up with regulations is more than enough time. Until the regulations are written, there will be guidance to tell the counties to go ahead and do it but without the details, it's really difficult for them to implement this huge change in how they do services to these youth. Thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 28, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Leah Barros: good afternoon, leah sergio barros on behalf of the 32,000 members of the california association of marriage and family therapists. we would like to express our appreciation and support of staff's recommendation to implement ab 1863 no later than july 1st, 2018. this action will allow implementation to proceed as the legislature and governor originally intended and increase access to mental health services for communities that need it most, thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Larry Doyle: good morning, mr. chair and members, larry jonah doyle on behalf of the conference of california bar associations, one of the sponsors of the bill. really, temporary lodging facilities, are documented as one of the most frequent, and frequently exploited venues for human trafficking. according to the national human trafficking hotline organization. the name escapes me, but they are right up at the top of the list. and so, while we understand some of the concerns, that have been raised about this. the fact of the matter is, that is a place where human trafficking takes place. it's a place where you can reach out, and touch the victims, and give them the information, the tools they need to get out of this horrific situation. and therefore we think it's essential that some notice be provided within that part of the industry, so that we can protect these victims. and we appreciate everything else that is being done, efforts being made to instruct hotel employees about how this works, and that all should be done. it's really, really important that we get to the victims of human trafficking. and so we ask the committee for its aye vote.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Caldwell: hello, caldwell on behalf of california hotel and lodging association. we're not going to oppose. we have some concerns with the bill, concerns we've shared with the staff and the sponsor. but first, members, just a little background regarding what's been said. human trafficking's a worldwide problem and the hotel industry has been taking an active role in fighting it for years. in 2015 bradley myles, he's the ceo of polaris, a group the committee analysis identifies as a leading anti human trafficking organization, wrote about the proactive steps to confront human trafficking that the hotel industry is taking on. wyndham hotel group, which is days inn, super 8, howard johnson, quote "deepened it's partnership with polaris in 2014". over 10 years ago, early 2000s carlson, which is radisson, country inn suites, lead the industry as one of the first major hospitality companies to speak out against modern slavery and the sexual exploitation of children. miles continues, polaris developed a training curricula for hyatt hotels and now training 45,000 employees across the globe on human trafficking. hilton which is embassy suites, hampton inns, and starwood and sheraton and weston are all tackling the issue. and in 2014, the american hotel&lodging association educational institute partnered with end child prostitution and trafficking, ecpat, to develop an online training program for hotel employees. it's a 30-minute course that provides hotel and staff and managers with the information they need to identify and respond to the crimes of human trafficking and commercial sexual exploitation of children. the training is free to all the members of the california hotel and lodging association. last year, miss garcia authored a bill to require a mandatory training for hotel employees. we were working with her when the bill got held up on suspense. earlier this year we were contacted by senator toni atkins about her interest in ms. garcia's mandatory training of hotel employees. we've been working with her, the result is sb270 which we strongly support as does leading anti human trafficking group polaris. and we believe we've worked out some of the fiscal problems that resulted in ms. garcia's bill being held up in suspense. so our concern with this bill is that, while the sign that's being put up here, we think the sign, it'll do little to combat human trafficking. it causes a great reputational risk for hotels, motels, bed and breakfast. i mean this is a notice that was designed. this according to the statutes. this was a notice that was designed for adult bookstores, bus stations, truck stops, massage parlors. the notice, it's at the bottom of page two on your bill, it's obviously aimed at victims of human trafficking. but in the context of a hotel lobby, what it conveys is that there is human trafficking going on at this hotel. that's a devastating message for our customers. we're told that we can just say the state made us do it. the state made you put up the sign. in other words, our argument is the state is now saying that human trafficking is going on in this hotel. that's hardly reassuring. then there's the argument that every hotel will have it so no one hotel will look bad. but that assumes people go to a lot of hotels. kind of, our clients would like that, people go to a lot of hotels but that's not necessarily the case and people from out of state will see the hotel they booked online. so we've talked to the author and sponsor about our concerns and we would prefer not to oppose efforts to fight human trafficking. it's important to us. so we've suggested different approaches, that the sign be at the back of the house, aimed at employees and subcontractors. then we suggested that it be aimed at transient locations that do not have employees. but we're willing to work with it, but as you can see, the industry is very involved in this. and we think the best approach, as does polaris, the best approach is the training of employees. we're going for a mandatory bill on that. we're supporting a mandatory bill on that. and we believe this sign, it's not in any of the recommendations of the groups, and it will just cause reputational risks for our clients.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 390, 'end': 403, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 671, 'end': 685, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1727, 'end': 1733, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1914, 'end': 1925, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1952, 'end': 1958, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2210, 'end': 2216, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ryan Kingston: Thank you. Excuse me. Mr. Stone, members of the community, Ryan Kingston representing four regional apartment associations, the Apartment Association of Orange County, Southern Cities, East Bay, and North Valley. 10 years ago, we successfully sponsored the enabling legislation that Mr. Calderon is now expanding on, so we don't have any demands of any state agency for the production, the distribution, collection of immigration status should there be any of any of our tenant or tenant applicants. What we didn't know at the time in 2007, 10 years ago, is that the information could be collected by other agencies of our government. This is what this bill does. It is complementary to what the existing law is and we ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 31, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 59, 'end': 72, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 287, 'end': 295, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sean Baker: Sean Baker from California Apartment Association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Larry Doyle: Good morning, Mr. Chair and members. Larry Doyle on behalf of the Conference of California Bar Associations. Mr. Chau's opening statement pretty much covers all the bases. This is a bill about judicial efficiency or proper use of court resources, trying to provide a framework for the quick and effective resolution of discovery, disputes without going through motions to compel which drain court resources and the resources of the litigants. It also protects all the litigants to me, to ensure that they downstream or not deprive of any abilities through the use of the IDC process. So it's a win-win on all parts. And with that I'd like to request Committee's aye vote and make myself available for any questions.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 113, 'end': 117, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Saveena Takhar: good morning, saveena larry takhar with consumer attorneys of california.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Saveena Takhar: Good morning, Saveena Takhar with the Consumer Attorneys of California. We support the bill in concept, we've been working with the author, the sponsor and Committee and we'll continue to work with them. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matt Davis: Thank you, Mr. Chair and Members of the Committee. I'm Matt Davis, Director of Government Affairs for the Oakland International Airport. Today airport authorities use a wide variety of financing tools to pay for essential passenger and ground transportation operations for the benefit of the public that uses our facilities. We believe this bill protects our existing funding streams and also introduces additional consumer protection elements to ensure that we have the capabilities to deliver reliable transportation. Customer service needs for the users of our airport. In our case, our ability to continue to impose this CFC enables us to provide the maximum level of services for the benefit of the users of the airport rental car facilities without requiring that a portion of these fees unnecessarily go towards debt payment. So we want to make sure that we maximize the use of everything that we collect. We appreciate the careful consideration of Committee and staff and the recommended improvements that will allow for future opportunities for oversight. Further protect consumers from being charged additional CFC's that aren't currently allowed by the law, but we want to make sure that's highlighted, and then we'll also allow for the fee to be set at level that most appropriate for each airport's need. So I appreciate your consideration this measure and ask your support.
[{'start': 55, 'end': 65, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jim Rights: jim saveena rights on behalf of the california airport council we represent the 32 commercial airports in state. we wanted to thank the committee for the very thoughtful amendments that give all airports financing flexibility for these facilities, with reasonable accountability measures, we're in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Gene Urban: Gene Urban representing Enterprise...
[]
Daniel Torres: thank you for having me. my name is daniel jim torres. i was born in mexico and came to united states as a minor. i enlisted at the age of 21 in the united states armed forces in the marine corps. i served with first battalion submarine arrangement and i'm an iraq vet. after my service it came to light that i was not an american citizen and for all intents and purposes i was undocumented because my visa as a minor had already expired. so unable to legalize my status, unable to go to school, get a job or do anything, i self deported to mexico, to shaquana where i started to go to law school and will be finishing this year. at first, i thought i was the only person who had ever served in the united states military and was unable to return. for five years, i was unable to come to the place where i call home to see my family, my friends, my battle buddies, until i met others like me, and i learned that since the vietnam era, the united states has been deporting military veterans to all parts of the world. we don't know exactly how many veterans have been deported, because they don't take into account that you are a veteran. you ask ice, immigration services, border patrol, department of defense, department of state, and they simply don't know, because they don't have the numbers. we know, that in the tijuana rosario area, there's around 50 deported veterans. we know there's close to 300 in mexico, but we don't know the exact number. i was lucky enough, that my case was picked up by the aclu, and they represented me, and i was able to get my citizenship last year, on april 21st. while my case was successful, i'm one of many, many deported veterans, who have served this country, who called united states their home, and i believe it is unjust and it is un-american to deport someone who fought for this country, who in many cases killed for this country. they were willing to serve, even though it was not their duty. we didn't get to choose where we were born, but we did choose who we were loyal to and we are loyal to the united states. we still are even though some of us they cannot come back. so i'm here to ask you to know stand for our veterans, to pass this bill which is the first step in bringing back all of our troops, thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christine Smith: my name is smith. i"m with the california partnership to end domestic violence. thank you for hearing my testimony today on ab 326. we're pleased to be supporting this important bill. the partnership is a statewide domestic violence coalition representing over 200 organizations serving domestic violence survivors, their families, and communities all across california. this is bill is designed to educate salon professionals about the signs of physical and sexual abuse, aa well as how to support and connect to their clients with the resources for help. in california, approximately 40% of women will experience intimate partner physical violence in their lifetime. each year, domestic violence programs in california provide essential, life-saving services for victims and their children fleeing violence. on just one day in 2015, 5,100 victims and their children received services of domestic violence programs throughout the state. many cases of domestic violence go unreported. survivors are often scared or reluctant to reach out for help. when you're in a relationship, you may not see the signs and may not seek help or even know how to access it. talking to a third party outside of your relationship can be extremely clarifying. when that person knows of resources and can connect clients to resources, we can get survivors the help they need. passing ab 326 is a step forward in ending domestic violence and sexual assault and will provide victims with additional information and avenues to access services. we respectfully request that you vote aye on this important bill, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Emily Pappas: Good morning, Committee Members. Emily Pappas, with Niemela Pappas & Associates, here today on behalf of John Deere in support of the bill. We were able to have an internal expert from John Deere today. So I will turn the testimony over to him.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 52, 'end': 68, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ryan Kruger: Good morning, honorable members. Thank you for your time and consideration of AB 290. My name's Ryan Kruger, and I am here representing John Deere. I am the current manager of our US Collections & Recovery team based in Johnston, Iowa. Today we are here in support of lifting the soon to expire sunset clause. And maintain the law's exemption as we believe it's the right thing to do for our customers. Who are linked to the land in agriculture, construction, and forestry. As well as our landscape industrial customers right here in California. This will allow our dealers to take back product in repossession situations where our customers are in default and are unable to make payments. To date, our dealers have had no problems or complaints since the statute took effect five years ago. This exemption, with your support, will continue to provide our dealers the choice during repossession situations to preserve many long-standing relationships with our customers versus using a repossession agent. Prior to this stature becoming law five years ago, California was the only state in the country that required our dealers to be licensed repossession agents. Clearly, this is not our dealer's full-time job or a large part of their business. But having to recover products happens on relatively rare occasions. For example, for John Deere in California since 2012, we've had 117 instances. Of which 56 of these have been dealer-assisted without any complaints. In my 12 years with John Deere, it is very clear that our business is as much customer-relationship-driven as it is about our hard-iron products, including tractors, combines, and bulldozers. Our equipment dealer and customer relationships are very different than one you might think as a vehicle transaction. These are primarily business to business transactions which occur primarily in small communities where everyone knows and relies on each other. To enhance customer loyalty and purchases of our equipment, it is our chief interest to establish and maintain positive customer relationships through our financial products. And this bill is very important to our dealers, who want to maintain those relationships with our customers. Our dealers have the expertise and the equipment to handle the product with care. And in many cases, we're talking about machinery that's hundreds of thousands of dollars and tens of thousands of pounds. And so it is specialized equipment. This bill is equally important to all of our customers, including our farmers, what we're talking about. They would rather have, and time and time again as we've worked through with our customers, they've talked and said they would rather have their dealer they know involved in the repossession rather than face the embarrassment of having a repossession agent take away their tractor or combine. This exemption saves both the customer or consumer, as well as the dealer, money by not having to hire a repossession agent. In summary, this exemption will preserve our customer relationships. It minimizes or eliminates repossession-related costs that will be passed on to the dealer and/or customer. And it protects our customers from the stigma and embarrassment that may accompany a repossession. For John Deere this comes down to doing the right thing, focused on our customers. Lenders and manufacturers like John Deere have no interest in becoming repossession agents. And have no other motives beyond focusing on our relationships. Thank you for your consideration and support of this simple bill as it will continue to allow a common sense approach supporting our customers. Thank you.
[{'start': 96, 'end': 107, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 3356, 'end': 3366, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Paul Gladfelty: Mr Chair and members, Paul Gladfelty on behalf of Caterpillar Inc and its dealers. Our dealers are in the business of selling equipment. However, there are economic downturns, as we all know. They have good customer relations, want to continue those customer relations. And sometimes, there are occasions when they have to take back equipment. These are all friendly take backs, as a practical matter. It's only a handful that they do take back. And as the gentleman from Mr. Deere said, they're actually saving money by doing that. And it's done in a friendly manner. So with that, we have not seen any type of issues over the last four years with the current law. And would suggest that we continue it without the sunset. So thank you very much.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 476, 'end': 481, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tricia Geringer: Good morning, Tricia Geringer with Agricultural Council of California. Representing over 15,000 farmer-owned businesses from throughout the state, also in support with AB 290. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Louie Brown: Mr. Chair and Members of the Committee, Louie Brown on behalf of the Far West Equipment Dealers, the agricultural dealers throughout the state, representing these clients. We are in support, thank you.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matthew Allen: good morning, mr. chair and members. matthew with western growers association, and we're pleased to support the bill.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christopher Sanchez : Thank you, Mr. Chair and members. Christopher Sanchez with CHIRLA, The Coalition for Humane Immigrant Rights, in strong support and proud to sponsor this legislation. We do know that California immigrants come from very diverse backgrounds, and they come with different experiences and also education. We do know that 2 million immigrants have Bachelor's degrees, professional degrees, or PhDs and of that 2 million, 48% were educated outside the United States. We have seen that some barriers have been in place when it comes particularly to the accreditation process, the evaluation process of the degrees. We would like to see a more transparent process and we believe that this taskforce would be able to bring all stakeholders together to try to figure that out as well. So thank you, Mr. Chair and members, for having us today.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 53, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kim Madison: I'm Kim Madison, executive officer for the Board of Behavioral Sciences. And we would like to thank our author, Assemblymember Medina, for Carrying this bill for us. This is the last of a final overhaul that we have done in our programs. And we truly believe that this bill will really strengthen the requirements of supervision
[{'start': 4, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 127, 'end': 133, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Gordon Dowdy: Good morning, Gordon Dowdy with the American Foundation for Suicide Prevention and we are in support of this bill, and have worked with the board of psychology for a better part of a year and a half, in getting to this point. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : my jonah name jonah is jonah craig jonah lomax.
[{'start': 3, 'end': 8, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 14, 'end': 19, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 23, 'end': 46, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Amanda Levy: good morning, chair and members. amanda on behalf of the california psychological association. we are in strong opposition to this bill. we represent over 4,000 psychologists and graduate students in training. i'm going to cede my time to our ceo, dr. jo linder-crow of the california psychological association. thank you.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 252, 'end': 266, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Russ Henly: Thank you, good morning Mr. Chairman, members. Russ Henly from Natural Resources Agency, Assistant Secretary for Forest Resources Management. I'm joined here today by Ken Pimlott he's the Chief of CAL FIRE and State Forester. Mary Calleja from the Natural Resources Agency IT program and Paul Hand, who is the section chief at the State Water Board's Watershed and Wetlands.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 167, 'end': 178, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 226, 'end': 238, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 288, 'end': 297, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ashley Ames: yes, thank you. good morning mr. chair, members of the committee. ashley jonah ames with the lao. we haven't raised concerns with any of the specific proposed activities. we just noted that, as is the case with many special funds in the state, the resources for this fund in particular are limited and so, we've recommended the legislature identify which specific program activities and grants you would prioritize and base your funding decisions on that. we do know that the january proposal projects that expenditures from this fund would exceed revenue by about $15 million and we do acknowledge that since the release of the budget, the administration has revised their estimates, and now are projecting higher revenues. we also know that many of the proposed activities would be limited term and might not reflect ongoing expenditures. but on the other hand, we would acknowledge that there's a separate cal fire proposal that you'll be hearing later today, that would also require some ongoing funding from this special fund. and we also note that as mr. henly discussed, the revenue for this fund comes from an assessment on lumber sales that's mostly driven by new housing starts and the housing market can be a particularly volatile area of the economy and so revenue into this fund could potentially fluctuate more than maybe some other funds. so therefore, we just recommend that you ensure whatever you do approve aligns with your priorities and when you're thinking about those priorities, you might wish to consider- firstly, the extent to the degree, which you are satisfied with the timber harvest plan review process. the timing of that and the comprehensiveness of those reviews. to the extent that you're satisfied with that, then in considering these other activities, there's just one thing about how you prioritize these program components. for example, these local assistance grants have been supported by the legislature in the past and if you want to consider those in the future, you might wish to reduce some of the ongoing funding or potentially reject it. on the other hand, if you prioritize the ongoing funding, then you might wish to approve it. you might also wish to ask the department if there are any other funding sources or partnership opportunities available to meet some of these goals or perform some of these activities. and finally, you might wish to ask them what sort of activities would be the most effective at combating the tree mortality issue. which i think you're also going to be hearing about later today.
[{'start': 66, 'end': 83, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1061, 'end': 1066, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Robert McConnell: good morning, all the members of the assembly. my name is robert ashley mcconnell. i am a ... tribal member and i come to you from the klamath river in northern california. the need for fire prevention in california is near crisis situation and i'm here to tell you that i support funding of any program that can put good fire on the ground in an effort to ensure against catastrophic wildfire in the future. this past summer we had an incident on our reservation that cost $13 million. an expenditure of 1% of that would likely have nearly eliminated that $13 million expenditure. we have forest conditions that, past land management practices, have left us with forests that are densely populated with regeneration and we need monies to alleviate that, and eliminate the prospect of what happened a couple years ago in the midtown and the valley fires that you're well aware of, that cost people lives and millions and millions of dollars in damage to their homes. this is not just specific to our reservation, it is the whole of california. i think you're aware that california is a hot spot for fires, and that's not a pun, that's just a fact. and with this past winter, we got a lot of rain, we got a good snow pack. but what that is going to equate to this summer is a lot of growth of flashy fuels. and flashy fuels are what can spread a wildfire very quickly. so i urge you, to keep those funds in this budget. and i understand that there's a priority list. i'm sorry to hear that grant funding is the third priority, but it's still a lot better than what it was a hundred years ago. a hundred years ago, a gentleman by the name of klamath jack wrote a letter to what was then the state fish and game commission and he urged the state fish and game commission at that time to put fire on the ground. and i think we all know that that didn't happen and we're now in a situation where it is nearly a crisis situation. so i thank you for your time, and i hope you folks can see
[{'start': 58, 'end': 81, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1640, 'end': 1652, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ken Pimlott: Good morning Chair Bloom, Members of the Committee, Ken Pimlott, Director of CAL FIRE and thank you again for the opportunity today to speak before you, talking about not only our accomplishments this last year, but the challenges and issues going forward into the next fiscal year.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 24, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 52, 'end': 63, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lia Moore: Lia Moore, Department of Finance, I have comments on this first item if you're ready for that. On the first item for this hearing today nevermind.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Mason: morning, chairman bloom, members of the committee, paul robert mason, with the pacific forest trust. i circulated this letter earlier this week to the committee following up on the excellent hearing that assemblymember garcia held in conjunction with the senate on forest health and prescribed fire. and to oversimplify a long and thoughtful hearing that the director and others testified at, we have an enormous deficit of fire on our landscape. california has always been a fire adapted ecosystem across most of the state, and having been very effective at suppression for so many decades, we've really got this deficit of fire. and so the question becomes how do we get more fire back on the landscape? and to his credit, the director has been great at really advancing that conversation and the idea that there is good fire. and this needs to be part of the solution, because, frankly, we can't just drive around and get to every tree and every piece of ground to thin it mechanically. fire is the only way to get to many places, and it's the ecologically appropriate way to get to many places. so i'm really thrilled at the conversation that the committee has been having here today and particularly, noting that even though it's rained a lot over the last several months, that doesn't alleviate these drought impacts. and, frankly, the fact that everything is so saturated is going to make the springtime a really valuable time to be doing some of this prescribed fire that, for example, last summer, when everything was so dry would have been very, very difficult. so i would urge the state to continue to make a significant augmentation for these drought response and focus a lot of it on fire. because i think we do have a real opportunity here. it's an opportunity across much of the state whether you're in lake county, where burning of many of those grassy areas would have reduced the fire behavior that we saw that was so destructive there over the last few years. or over in the sierra where we have these areas with large portions of dead trees. that it's infeasible to get in there and remove all those trees. they're going to be there. the best thing that we can do would be to burn the understory, reduce those fuels now before those big trees fall down. so we do have a time consideration here. it's not something we can chip away at for the next 20 years. the next two or three years are going to be critical. and my final thought here is that this is not just an enormous technical challenge, it's also a social challenge. a big part of this is getting the public to be comfortable with fire. smoking bear and bambie has done us no favors in this public discussion because it has made people knee-jerk reaction to think the fire is bad. so i think it's very valuable for the legislature to be engaged in this conversation and really highlighting that there is good fire. and we need to change our relationship with fire, so that we're allowing it to burn when it is beneficial rather than putting out the beneficial time fires and only having big fires under the most extreme circumstances. so thank you for this discussion.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 23, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 51, 'end': 68, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 219, 'end': 225, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Stacy Heaton: see if we can get the microphone to stay up for me. good morning, chair bloom and members of the committee. stacy paul heaton, rural county representatives of california. rcrc represents 35 rural counties statewide and many of our member counties are forested counties, including 8 of the 10 high hazard counties for tree mortality and many of our counties are seeing high levels of mortality already from this disaster. i wanted to commend calfire, particularly chief pimlott on the work that they've done on this already in organizing the task force and working with our member counties on the tree mortality mitigation efforts. this is an urgent issue and our counties, what i hear from them all the time is they feel like there's maybe not the sense of urgency around this as far as investment. and since this is a budget committee, we'll talk about investment as far as investment goes from the state and from this legislative body that needs to really be directed towards this disaster. they feel there needs to be more funding and i know that a significant amount has gone into this, the california disaster assistance act account, but that's hard for counties to access, because of the match, the 25% match. many of our counties are socioeconomically challenged that are dealing with the tree mortality disaster right now. and so, it's really hard for them to put up those match funds and it really doesn't need to be re-looked at more of an investment. this is urgent not just from a public health and safety perspective, but also from an air quality perspective, from a climate change perspective. uc berkeley's already said, we've lost 9% of our live vegetation carbon storage to this disaster for the entire state. this is also watershed health issue. i like to say that this is not just a rural or a forested county issue, this is a statewide issue. this is where all of your water comes from. 60% of california's developed water supply comes from central and southern sierras. so we support calfire's activities. we support the work of the tree mortality task force. we're active members on it and we would hope going forward to see a more significant investment in the activities of calfire, and the task force to work on this, and work towards better management of the forest to help mitigate this disaster in the near future. thank you.
[{'start': 72, 'end': 77, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 108, 'end': 125, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 441, 'end': 448, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 469, 'end': 476, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Matt Diaz: Good morning, Chair and Members of the Committee. Matt Diaz, Executive Officer with the State Board of Forestry and Fire Protection. I do have a brief introduction, the Board of Forestry and Fire Protection is responsible for the development, promulgation, if you will, maintenance of a comprehensive system of regulations as it pertains to commercial template and management in the State of California. Amongst other things, we deal with grant programs under the SRA. Policy level documentation, working collaboratively with the department on fire prevention and suppression issues. The BCP that I have or that's before you today for consideration really is two pronged. The primary and greatest proportion of the request focuses on a full-time legal representation for the board. The board's been operating in its entire lifespan under the support, under the AG's office part-time, legal representation to the tune of approximately 10% of one Deputy Attorney General and that legal representation has been outpaced by the issues that face the board legally over the course of the last several years. In addition to that, the second prong of the funding request is looking at retention and recruitment of board staff. So, that's my brief introduction and I'm here to answer any question that you may have.
[{'start': 50, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Steve Vense: Steve Vense from the Department of Finance. I could address that a little bit. I think what's primarily unusual about what you're seeing here is the way the information is being presented to the Legislature. You're right that this information typically does not come in a BCP like this. The process that the information typically comes is In the sub four those general government type of things. The 9800 item exists from employee compensation type of adjustments. And it would be normal for this type of adjustment to be a part of the 9800 adjustments that go before that Subcommittee for discussion each year. And it was really an oversight in our part that it didn't get channeled and that venue was supposed to be presented in this BCP. Something that we've been having some ongoing conversations about to see if we can adjust that at this time. But the actual adjustment itself isn't particularly unusual CalPERS, CalHR, sorry. Has statutory authority to make adjustments to salaries for retention and hiring and things like that. That's not really unusual, what's unusual here is that it came to you in a BCP to this subcommittee as opposed to through the 9800 item that is the way it would normally be handled.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dave Teter: Good morning. Again for the record, Dave Teter, Deputy Director, chief of fire protection. Just to add to the chief's comments, first some examples for you sir. The State of California EMS authority has been promulgating regulatory changes on EMS training standards requirements for paramedics, emergency medical technicians, and first responders. Those have been in response to recent bills that have been passed into law requiring first responders to assist people with the delivery of the epinephrine pen, the use of narcan and opioid overdoses, etc. Also with the continuous response to curriculum changes for tactical EMS, for active shooter incidence. There are a number of the national standards that change on regular basis and as the chief alluded to Cal/OSHA Title 8 regulatory requirements that require annual mandatory updates for all of first responders in areas of hazardous materials, blood borne, airborne pathogens, etc.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gary Fredrickson: yes, gary stacy fredrickson, the fire chief, the yocha dehe wintun nation. i'm also the oes fire coordinator for yolo county. first, the yocha dehe wintun nation supports this. this bridge, they would support it, and they do have some sites in that area, but they do support it. second is as chief pimlott so eloquently said earlier in his testimony, fires, if you can keep them to 10 acres, that's our goal on these wild land fires. we can't keep these fires in this area within 10 minutes because of the response of calling lake, napa county and to respond with us. it extends our resources within yolo county, extremely, so we would support it, we would support this bridge. thank you. thank you.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 298, 'end': 305, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Stacy Heaton: Stacy Heaton, RCRC, and we'd also like to lend our support for this request. Yolo Lake and Napa Counties are among our RCRC's membership and this is a significant public safety issue, obviously, for counties that experience significant wildfire every single year. And we're here to support this request today. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Ball: Thank you Chairman Bloom. It's an honor to be here and thank you esteemed Members of the Committee. And Director Pimlott it's an honor to sit next to you sir and see all your people who are my buddies in the audience too. I've worked with CAL FIRE considerably over the last 17 years with my company. I'm here to speak to you today about the important topic of application of existing intelligence technology to wild land fire fighting. We all know that the suppression costs to the average Californian runs between $7 and $10 per year. But the total economic cost is more like $2 to $4 billion to the state. And that makes the average cost that the citizen pays something in the range of $50 to $100 a year. As the Chairman said, I'm Dr. Tim Ball and I am the President of the Fireball Companies. I represent team FUEGO which is a group of award winning technologist and scientist who are interested in applying existing technology, not really developing new technology. The technology I'm going to talk about is existent. Also in our group are a number of retired fire and military officers. Those people provide an important component of the group, because they have Learned important lessons about the use of technology for intelligence. FUEGO was initially organized by my friend Carl Pennypacker from UC Berkley who's here with me today. Carl is a-
[{'start': 19, 'end': 24, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 113, 'end': 120, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 739, 'end': 747, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1285, 'end': 1301, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1307, 'end': 1317, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1344, 'end': 1348, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Carl Pennypacker: i'm pennypacker.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carl Pennypacker: sure, my name's carl gary pennypacker, i'm from the uc's and one of the organizers of team fuego. i thought this letter here from brigadier general grundhauser in support, who's a member of our advisory board, summarizes things better than i can. he says, dear dr. pennypacker, as you and i have discussed the us military has taken advantage of the rapid advances in sensor technology, data networking, computational technology, and modeling and simulation to transform the american way of war. his quotes, as a former vice-director for intelligence for the joint chiefs of staff, i can personally attest to the fact that the us military's ability to fight at the speed of war is paced by whether it can gain and maintain information dominance. that dominance has enabled us by a symbiotic force of sensors, platforms, networks, advanced analytics driven to the tactical edge. similarly, wildfire instant commanders and forces that have the need to attack and defeat wildfires that now consume american lives and property with a ferocity of a heinous human enemy. the key enabling technologies to do so are already mature, affordable, and available for civilian use. now is the time to revolutionize firefighting wildfires with combat tested technologies and methods that can easily be adapted to fighting the scourge of large uncontrolled wildfires. to that end, i wholeheartedly support your vision of an integrated fuego architecture of sensors, airborne, and overhead platforms, and intelligence and communication workflows to rapidly provide wildfire detection characterizations and simulations to the incident commanders and other stakeholders. an investment in such a system or systems will yield immediate dividends in lives and property saved that easily runs into hundreds of million of dollars annually. very respectfully, larry k grundhauser, brigadier general, us air force retired. i don't think i could say it better. but again we're not r&d, we're deployed deployed innovations exist. i think it's important to emphasize.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 148, 'end': 159, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 265, 'end': 276, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1834, 'end': 1853, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brian Cash: Hi, Brian Cash from the natural resources here agency. I'm here with representatives from the Tahoe Conservancy. This is a $250 million request in the reimbursement authority from the federal government. Sorry $250,000 I wish it was here, the other, that would help a lot.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Mertens: Sure, my name is Chris Mertens from the California Tahoe Conservancy. Yeah, it's actually slightly more than $1 million a mile trail. The average cost of a bike trail of this sort in Tahoe is just over about $3 million a mile. That's just how-
[{'start': 17, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Mertens: Sure. So the short answer, this is Chris Mertens again with the Tahoe Conservancy. The short answer is that, this trail includes a boardwalk, a bridge and causeway to span over two very environmentally sensitive areas. A river called Trout Creek and a meadow called Visio Meadow. And those design elements are not optional they are required for bike trails in Tahoe that expand these sensitive areas and those regulations are put in place so that, so the lake is protected, the tourism economy is protected and basically allows us to make this direct connection to a number of important community and recreational centers right in the middle of South Lake Tahoe. In order to make those connections you have to cross the Visio Meadow and Trout Creek. Which are two sensitive areas with a boardwalk, and bridge, and causeway design.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jen Eckerle: good morning, chair bloom and members of the committee, my name's jen carl eckerle, i'm the deputy director of the ocean protection council with the natural resources agency, and i'm joined today by deputy assistant secretary of administration and finance, brian cash. this proposal will transfer $5.4 million of the mitigation fees from the state water resources control boards interim mitigation program for once through cooling to the ocean protection trust fund. the proposal will also appropriate funds to the ocean protection council of the natural resources agency to mitigate the harm to marine protective areas caused by entrainment and infringement of marine life as result of once through cooling operations. the money will be used to fund priority projects identified within the marine protected area management program that are currently unfunded. i'm happy to answer any questions you may have.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 25, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 66, 'end': 82, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 257, 'end': 267, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Russ Henley: Thank you. Good morning Mr. Chairman, members. Russ Henley, Natural Resources Agency, assistant secretary for forest resources management. I'm joined here today by Ken Pemlot. He's the chief of Cal Fire and State Forester. Mary Calleja from the Natural Resources Agency IT program and Paul Hand who is the section chief at the state Water Boards watersheds and wetlands.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 164, 'end': 174, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 223, 'end': 235, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 285, 'end': 294, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ashley Ames: yes, thank you. good morning, mr. chair, members of the committee. ashley jen ames with the lao. we haven't raised concerns with any of the specific proposed activities. we just noted that as is the case with many special funds in the state, the resources for this fund in particular are limited, and so we recommend that the legislature identify which specific program activities and grants you would prioritize and base your funding decisions on that. we do note that the january proposals projects that expenditures from this fund would exceed revenue by about $15 million. and we do acknowledge that since the release of the budget, the administration has revised their estimates. and now they're projecting higher revenues. but also know that many of the proposed activities would be limited term, it might not reflect ongoing expenditures.  but on the other hand, we would acknowledge that there's a separate calfire proposal that you'll be hearing later today that would also require some ongoing funding from this special fund. and we also note that as mr. henley discussed, the revenue for this fund, comes from an assessment on lumber sales. that's mostly driven by new housing starts and the housing market can be a particularly volatile area of the economy and so revenue into this fund could potentially fluctuate more than maybe some other funds. so therefore, we just recommend that you ensure whatever you do approve, aligns with your priorities. and when you're thinking about those priorities you might wish to consider firstly the extent to the degree which you're satisfied with the timber harvest plan review process, the timing of that, and the comprehensiveness of those reviews. to the extent you're satisfied with that then considering these other activities, you'll just want to think about how you prioritize these program components for example these local  system grants have been supported by the legislation in the past and if you want to consider those in the future, you might wish to reduce some of the ongoing funding, or potentially reject it. on the other hand, if you prioritize the ongoing funding, then you might wish to approve it. you might also wish to ask the department if there are any other funding sources or partnership opportunities available to meet some of these goals and perform some of these activities. and finally, you might wish to ask them what sort of activities would be the most effective at combating the tree mortality issue which i think you're also hearing about later today.
[{'start': 67, 'end': 82, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1064, 'end': 1070, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Robert McConnell: good morning, honored members of the assembly. my name is robert ashley mcconnell, i am a yurok tribal member and i come to you from the klamath river in northern california. the need for fire prevention in california is near crisis situation. and i'm here to tell you that i support funding of any program that can put good fire on the ground in an effort to ensure against catastrophic wildfire in the future. this past summer we had an incident on our reservation that cost $13 million. an expenditure of 1% of that would likely have nearly eliminated that $13 million expenditure. we have forest conditions that past land management practices have left us with forests that are densely populated with regeneration and we need moneys to alleviate that and eliminate the prospect of what happened a couple of years ago in the midtown and the valley fires that you're well aware of, that cost people lives and millions and millions of dollars in damage to their homes. this is not just specific to our reservation, it is the whole of california. i think you're aware that california is a hotspot for fires. and that's not upon us, it's a fact. and with this past winter we got a lot of rain, we got a good snow pack, but what that is going to equate to this summer is a lot of growth flashy fields, and flashy fields are what can spread a wild fire very quickly, so i urge you to keep those funds in this budget. and i understand that there's a priority list, i'm sorry to hear that grant funding is the third priority but it's still a lot better than what it was a 100 years ago. 100 years ago, a gentleman by the name of klamath jack, wrote a letter to what was then the state fish and game commission. and he urged the state fish and game commission at that time, to put fire on the ground. and i think we all know that, that didn't happen. and we're now in a situation where it is nearly a crisis situation. so, i thank you for your time and i hope you folks can see fit to keep that money. didn't meet you before, ken, but i will in the near future. thank you.
[{'start': 58, 'end': 81, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1624, 'end': 1636, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2020, 'end': 2023, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: thank you mr. chair, members. ignacio on behalf of the california court reporter association. i thank the author's office for engaging in discussions with us over the last week. two things, we do have concerns. we're trying to identify what the problems are. our understanding is that court recordersare used in many proceedings to create an official record. we've had discussions with the department to get some clarification on that. and that was what was conveyed to us. so we're trying to identify what in fact the problem is. if they need assistance in identifying court reporters in certain areas. the state was certainly be happy to help them with that. the other issue we raised with them is that there can be additional problems with audio. we have found in court rooms when audio is used, that it doesn't capture adequately when two people are talking over each other, or someone's talking too fast. we found that some voices just aren't captured by audio equipment. and even though they're very expensive in court, we found a judge here in sacramento county, because her voice was a little higher-pitched, it wasn't captured. so our goal in talking with the author is to identify how we can ensure that court reporters are actually in those proceedings. an actual record that can be used in court in case there is an appeal beyond the abc. and i want to thank the author for working with us.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Camellia Rosenberg: camellia jonah rosenberg with service employees international union. i echo the sentiments of my colleagues, and again i apologize. we have no formal position because we are working through the issues and looking at it holistically. to make sure that we can come to an agreement on it and address the electronic recording versus having a person and just any other issues that might arise. again, it was a last minute notice, otherwise we would do it formally. we appreciate your time.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Miiller: good afternoon and thank you, chair and members, michael camellia miiller with the california association of winegrape growers, we're in support of this common sense approach, thank you.
[{'start': 49, 'end': 73, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dennis Loper: Dennis Loper with the Commerce of Casino, we're in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Megan Subers: Thank you, Mr. Chair and Members, Megan Subers on behalf of the California Professional Firefighters. We are pleased to be one of the sponsors of this bill. This program proposed by this bill will model our current existing program through the Cal-JAC that monitors and oversees our current apprenticeship program in California. We think this is a good bill and we respectfully ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 39, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Russell Novak: Thank you Mr. Chair and members, Russell Novak on behalf of the California Fire Chiefs Association and the Fire Districts Associations of California in support of the bill also. Here to answer any questions that you might have, thank you.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gavin McHugh: Gavin McHugh on behalf of the Distilled Spirits Council, we support the bill, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Margo Parks: Margo Parks on behalf of the Family Wine Makers, apologize did not get a letter in, but support the bill, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Judy Darnell: thank you. thank you, welcome. good morning madam chairman and members of the committee. i'm judy jonah darnell with the united ways of california. we're the state association for local united ways across the state. it's difficult for many californians to find jobs that pay enough to support their families. this is not due to a lack of jobs but rather the result of a skills gap we have in california workforce. giving californians the tools and opportunities they need to obtain high paying middle class jobs is the best way to help them out of poverty. by giving californians education and training for higher pay jobs, ab316 will help close that skills gap. bring many more people into the workforce and provide better career opportunities for all californians. therefore we ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 93, 'end': 111, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Carothers: Madam Chair and distinguished members, thank you for having me today. My name is Bill Carothers, I'm with Dell Computer Corporation. We've been a supporter of this bill since its inception.  And I'd like to point out that 70% of my business gets channeled through small disadvantaged businesses. The entrepreneur and residence bill will allow for the free flow of information between the Legislature and small businesses, and businesses like Dell to provide a medium for discussion, to promote better business decisions, both for small businesses and large businesses, as well as Legislature to facilitate the ability to grow businesses in the State of California. And I encourage an aye vote. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 81, 'end': 95, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Thomas Heines: thomas judy heines, i'm a high tech entrepreneur in southern california. madam chairman, thank you for allowing me to testify.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jarrell Cook: Thank you, Jarrell Cook with the California Manufacturers and Technology Association in support of the bill. We believe that any bill that increases public participation and engagement from stakeholders is a great bill for California. We support the spirit of the bill to add expertise from the people that have actually done it and close the knowledge gap between government and business.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ken DeVore: Thank you, Chair and Members, Ken Devore with the National Federation of Independent Business and tomorrow's our legislative day at the capital, and our 22,000 members are really excited about a lot of the bills like this they're seeing this year. We really appreciate the author bringing this bill forward. There are a lot of compliance efforts, enforcement efforts going on around the state right now, and we're finding a lot of businesses, and one is going to speak here in just a second. A lot businesses are being fined in a heavy handed manner for the most minor of infractions and the purpose of these efforts are to get businesses to comply, then being fined immediately out of the gate is a problem. And also, I've sat in meetings where chief enforcement officers from agencies were asked by a business after receiving a hefty fine, what can we do to comply? And the enforcement officer right in front of me said, it's not my job to help you comply. It's my job to make sure you do and when we have that kind of mindset in California, we want our businesses to succeed. We want them to create jobs and to create wealth and tax revenues for the state and for agencies, it should be in their job description to assist small businesses and tell them, if they're going to pass rules, they should at least tell them how to comply with the rules. So we appreciate this approach and we have a Jeanne Whitehouse with us who is a business owner in Vacaville.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1393, 'end': 1412, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Marty Fisher: thank you. hi, marty thomas fisher with the california chamber of commerce and we're also here in support. we've identified this as a job creator for the specific situation that we just heard about. minimal violations that employers, especially small businesses, need to have the opportunity to address those. the regulations that we have in california are very complex and challenging and there's an enormous number of them for employers to comply with and this bill simply creates the opportunity to mitigate the circumstances of those penalties and fines where it's reasonable to do so. for example, of what we just heard, inadvertent action on non-threatening situations. we should be able to create a friendlier employment environment, business environment in california, so we can grow these small businesses and contribute to the viability of our economy. thank you, we urge your support.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robyn Black: Good morning, Madam Chair and members. Robyn Black, Eclipse Government Affairs on behalf of the California Small Business Association. We are also in very strong support of this measure. I'm struck by something in the analysis that says it would require a state agency to assist a small business during an enforcement action. That seems like what government ought to be doing. I also applaud the work of the Committee, the author for bringing this bill forward, but the work of the Committee to put forth amendments that will make sure that you protect employees in the workforce as well as protecting small business. I ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jarrell Cook: Jarrell Cook with the California Manufacturers and Technology Association in support of the bill. We support his bill because half of all of the manufacturers in California are small businesses and half of all of the manufacturing employees in the state are employed by small manufacturers. This bill hits three of our key points for growing manufacturing. It provides a high degree of certainty for manufacturers to make investments. It lowers barriers to entry for small manufacturers by providing them with the assistance they need to ensure entrepreneurship. And it secures compliance through coordination with government agencies. A recent study calculated that the cost of compliance for all manufacturers and we found that small venue manufacturers disproportionately bear the burden of the cost of compliance and regulations and that's due to scale of efficiency that large manufacturers have, that small manufacturers don't. The cost of compliance for small manufactures is more than double what it is for manufacturers with employees numbering 100 or more. So small manufacturers are expected to, with less money, do more and with less resources. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lumony Menchaca: Good morning, chair and members. Lumony Menchaca with the California Nurses Association, respectfully opposing AB 912 as it undermines important health and safety protections. What I mean by protections is regulations. We appreciate the author's office and the Committee's efforts to address our concerns, but we just remain philosophically opposed to the legislation. It would allow small businesses reductions or outright exemptions from civil penalties that result from violations in regards to health, safety, and the environment. This would create an exemption from abiding by the law, which would decentivize compliance with regulations or protections. We respectfully urge your opposition to this legislation. Thank you for your time.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Young: madam chair and members, michael on behalf of the california labor federation. we're also opposed to the bill along similar lines of cna. about 6.5 million workers in california work for small businesses, and that's about half of the private workforce. industries like construction, janitorial, and ag are considered small businesses. however, these industries are among some of the highest violators. these workers depend on state agencies to enforce the law, but these state agencies are pretty stretched thin. they don't have the resource or the capacity to go out and monitor or inspect every single employer in the state of california. so most violations go unreported or go un-inspected and are unknown. one of the only deterrents we have, one of the most efficient deterrents we have in the state of california is responsive penalties for employers who violate the law. however, this bill seeks to create exemption or reduce penalties for lawyers that have violated health, safety, or environmental laws in the state of california. this disincentives good employers from following that law. they know that if they're found guilty or they are found to be non compliant with certain violations, that there are no recourses for you. so we remain opposed to the bill. the amendments proposed through the committee process, we feel don't go far enough and simply just ignore the overall premise that small businesses don't need to have a special exemption that deters them from following the law. so again the california labor federation remains opposed to the bill, thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeremy Smith: Yes, thank you Madam Chair, Members of the Committee. Jeremy Smith here on behalf of the State Building&Construction Trades Council. I would like to start first of all very briefly and apologize to you, to staff, to Mr. Obernolte. We did not get our letter in on time, I'm very sorry about that. We do oppose the bill for similar reasons as the CNA stated and Labor Federation. I need to make one point, I came from another Committee, so maybe it was discussed, but what I haven't heard discussed is the underground economy. The reason that the labor movement and other work worker advocacy organizations do regulations, do legislation is not for the good employers. It's for the bad employers. And 1 in 6 construction workers, according to current data, come out of the underground economy in California. These are people paid with cash, they do not have workers comp coverage, these are bad employers, and they aren't here today, obviously, because they don't care about things like this, they just want to skirt the law, but that's why we do the regulations we do. So having regulations in place has a deterrent effect. A look back can be talked about, but if we do away with regulations and laws, you're going to hurt not only the workers that work for these bad employers. But you're going to hurt good employers, who do follow the law, and have to compete on an uneven playing field as it is now with bad employers who just ignore the law and regulations. So for those reasons, we are in support, and I do apologize again Mr. Obernolte for not getting a letter in sooner.
[{'start': 54, 'end': 66, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 220, 'end': 229, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1532, 'end': 1541, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jerry Birche: Good morning, my name is Jerry Bircher. I'm a small business owner in Rancho Cordova. My wife and I started the business in 1983. We currently employ 12 employees. Six of which are because we were able to sell to the state. We have been able to double our revenue by selling to the state and in actual double our number employees. I want to let you know we really support this bill that small business is important and that we continue to grow this state's economy. Thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 38, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ken DeVore: good morning, chair and members. ken with the national federation of independent business. apologize for the late support, but we are strongly in support of this measure, appreciate it.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sharon Quirk-Silva: We're going to call our meeting to order. And I want to welcome you to our Jobs Committee and hearing. And I am Assemblymember Sharon Quirk-Silva, and welcome. We have some exciting bills to review today. So, we are going to move to our first item, and that is bill number AB 632, Assemblymember Acosta. Before we begin, we're going to begin as a Subcommittee. As we know, typically, we would have more members, but we're going to go ahead and honor your time. Thank you so much.
[{'start': 127, 'end': 145, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 296, 'end': 302, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brigg Goodwin: Good morning, Madam Chair and members of the committee. My name is Brigg Goodwin. I'm an owner of Granite Based Solutions. We're a California certified disabled veteran's business enterprise, also referred to as a DVBE. As an 8-year Ranger qualified Army platoon sergeant, I never ever get tired of seeing the greatest government in action, and I want to thank all of you guys for your service. More importantly, I'd like to thank and give special gratitude to Mr. Acosta for his support of veterans in business by offering AB 632. But more importantly, for your ultimate sacrifices [INAUDIBLE]. I've been in business since 2000 and contracting as a certified DVBE since 2000-
[{'start': 67, 'end': 80, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 465, 'end': 471, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Crystal Blanton: greetings, my name is crystal, and i want to speak about my strong support of assembly bill 456. i am the program manager for an intensive home based services program at lincoln families. at lincoln, our mission is to disrupt the cycle of poverty and trauma, empowering children and families to build strong futures, i believe it's important to support and uplift dedicated and qualified social workers in the delivery of services to the families by providing opportunities for growth and licensure. lincoln is a cosponsor of this bill, i am also an asw, an associate in social work, and a graduate of cal state east bay class of 2015. post graduation, it became frustratingly clear that there were roadblocks to collecting hours for licensure, despite having an asw. the current requirements to obtain an asw number from the board of behavioral sciences, prior to claiming hours towards licensure, significantly impacted my progress. in the california state university system it takes between one to three months for degrees to be conferred, the board of behavioral sciences requires an official transcript with your degree posted. when the degree is posted, one can request the official transcript and send off to application to the bbs. once the bbs has received the application, it takes one to two months before the asw number is posted. when adding this all together, it could take between two to five months of waiting for the red tape to clear before one can start counting hours. for me, it was about three months of a wait period from graduation to asw number, at the time, i was collecting between 30 to 40 supervised social work hours a week, at that rate, i lost the ability to claim between 300 and 480 hours. 480 hours out of 3200 that we have to collect is significant, this alone delayed my collection of hours by three months, compared to those who graduated at the same time as me, but are on the marriage and family therapist track, or licensed professional counselor track. not only does this impact my ability to advance in my career, compared to other mental health professionals, it also impacts my ability to increase my income, limits job opportunities, and otherwise that are more accessible to those who are closer to licensure status. i also feel it's important to point out that this extra stipulation put on asws does not actually support having more qualified social workers, in my case, it merely meant that the work i was doing was dependent on a number to be valid. i was in the same position prior to graduation as i was post graduation, just unable to capture those hours, the scope of my position didn't change, and my quality of service didn't increase by getting my asw number. assembly bill 456 supports social workers in their pursuit of licensure by increasing parity among mental health professionals, thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anna Mitchell: Hello, my name is Anna Mitchell, I support the field work program and graduate programs at Seneca Family of Agencies, a co-sponsor of this bill.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Gonzales: Rebecca Gonzales, National Association of Social Workers, California Chapter, also in support of this bill. I work with a lot of students who experience these barriers to begin to collect their hours. We're asking for parity with other mental health professionals. I also want to point out that the BBS will have cyclical delays. So after students graduate in May it usually takes even longer for them to get their registration number. Because a lot of students are trying to do that upon graduation. So this will just put us at parity with other professions and we ask for your support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Gonzales: Rebecca Gonzales, National Association of Social Workers California Chapter, also in support of this bill. We support the addition of the licensed professional clinical counselors to this program, and many of our graduates have benefited from this loan program over the years. As a representative from CALPCC said, it incentivizes students to work in these under-served areas. It's a good program, and it is a very small increase in fees to shore up this program and hopefully provide more financial aid to more students, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amanda Levy: Amanda Levy, on behalf of the California Psychological Association, we're one of the provider types who would be included in the increased fees. We polled our members, and overwhelming support for a small fee increase to benefit students who will be working in under served areas to increase numbers in those areas, and we ask for your support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gary Cacciatore: Chairman Salas and Vice Chair Brough, members of the Assembly Business and Professions Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of Assembly Bill 401, which will offer remote dispensing pharmacies in medically underserved areas. My name is Gary Cacciatore, I'm the Vice President of Regulatory Affairs at Cardinal Health. Cardinal Health is a healthcare solutions company with more than 37000 employees worldwide. That are committed to working to reduce the total cost of healthcare and improve the lives of patients. We serve customers across the entire continuum including hospitals, surgery centers, pharmacies, physicians offices, manufacturers and suppliers of medical products and pharmaceuticals, payers and ultimately the patient or the consumer who is need of medical health or wellness support. In California, Cardinal Health serves more than 17,500 customers. We employ more than 2, 200 individuals and we have eight facilities in the state. Cardinal Health has long promoted the benefits of community pharmacy, remote dispensing pharmacies that we're talking about here today are one way which the pharmacist can further their reach to provide health care services in really medically under served areas. Remote dispensing pharmacies can improve patient's medication adherence, which reduces medical costs. It can provide local access to a pharmacist in communities that often lack any form of a healthcare provider. In order to further the goal of increasing access to both dispensing and pharmaceutical care services, AB 401 would allow the establishment of these remote dispensing site pharmacies in medically underserved areas. These remote dispensing site pharmacies would be licensed by the California board of Pharmacy. The remote dispensing pharmacies would be staffed as we said by one licensed and certified pharmacy technician under the supervision of a pharmacist at a remote location than electronically. Direct supervision does not require the physical presence of the pharmacist on site which is important in these remote areas because economically it is not feasible sometimes to place a pharmacist those areas. Access to prescription medications and pharmacist consultations in settings of a convenient to California citizens will improve health care for your constituents. We are committed to supporting the thoughtful and effective legislation that aligns with our mission of making healthcare accessible and more effective. We are in support of AB 401, thank you again for the opportunity and I can welcome any questions you might have.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 14, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 30, 'end': 36, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 261, 'end': 276, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Revis: Good morning, Michelle Revis with the California Pharmacists' Association. We appreciate the work the author has done, and we support this legislation.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gregory Kremer: Good morning, Mr. Chair and members, Gregory Kremer on behalf of Planned Parenthood Affiliates of California in support.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Camare: Mr. Chair, members, Tim Camare with SEIU Local 1000, representing over 96,000 public employees across the state. We support, thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kara Corches: corches on behalf of the california optometric association. and we are in support, thank you.
[]
Jennifer Simoes: Jennifer Simoes with the Medical Board of California. The Board supports a concept of integrating existing health information technology systems with the CURES database because we believe it will increase efficiencies. We just want to make sure that the integration isn't limited to a small number so all physicians have access to those efficiencies and we look forward to working with the author's office and the sponsors on this, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Betsy Armstrong: Good morning, Mr. Chair and members. Betsy Armstrong on behalf of the County Health Executives Association, representing local health departments in support.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dorothy Johnson : Good afternoon, Dorothy Johnson with the California State Association of Counties. My colleague from the League of California Cities also asks to have his comments align with mine. We respectively do oppose this measure and we would note this is markedly different from the Mullin measure introduced in prior years, which would expand it to properties of greater value. Nonetheless, this measure is still problematic. Our counties, three-fourths of them are seeing less property tax revenue today than they did pre-2008 Recession. We believe this measure could have very negative consequences for some counties, some counties could benefit, and that's why we believe the decision should remain a local decision to reflect local fiscal conditions and local service demands. We've seen over the many years since Prop 60 and Prop 90 have been in effect, counties have adopted ordinances, they've rejected them, they've adopted them and renewed them. Again, all based on the local fiscal conditions of the counties. There is a companion measure, which I know is not before you today, and while we appreciate the opportunity for the voters of California to make this decision, we believe that the voters of these specific counties that would have to change their ordinances should be the ones making the decision, if not the Board of Supervisors. So for these reasons we do remain respectfully opposed, thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 31, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 274, 'end': 280, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Samantha Corbin: Samantha Corbin, California Tax Reform Association, mirroring the sentiments of my colleagues from the counties, also respectfully in opposition to the measure. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dorothy Johnson : Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and members. Dorothy Johnson with the California State Association of Counties and also speaking on behalf of my colleague from the League of California Cities. We were opposed, but with these amendments we are pleased to remove our opposition. We thank the Committee and also the author for his time to review this bill and remove the threat to local revenue streams. So with that, we remove our opposition.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 54, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Russell Noack: Thank you, Mr. Chair, Russell Noack on behalf of the California Fire Chiefs Association and the Fire Districts Association of California, in support.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Samantha Corbin: Samantha Corbin from California Tax Reform Association, unfortunately in opposition to the measure even with the amendments. There's been a number of bills over time proposed much like this one, things that would eliminate the sales tax on textbooks and other materials, things purchased by libraries, or of course, in this case, public safety equipment. There are many, many, many important purchases made throughout the public sector that are subject to sales tax. I believe to quote, Assembly Member Quirk earlier, he mentioned a bill was sort of robbing Peter to pay Paul, or at least a Robin Hood Bill and this is certainly one of those bills. Essentially you would, you are robbing Peter, so say, city schools, the General Fund, funding that goes toward K through 12 education and other programming to pay Paul, in this case the Fire District. And in the past this is something the Legislator has chosen not to do. Again, prioritizing one aspect of public services over another at the expense of the other is problematic, even when you remove the impact on the locals, and for that reason we oppose this measure, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 591, 'end': 601, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 688, 'end': 693, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 812, 'end': 816, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Randy Hanvelt: Thank you very much. My name is Randy Hanvelt, I'm a supervisor in Tuolumne County. I also sit on the Governor's task force on this tree mortality issue, and I was recently recognized by California Forestry Association as their conservationist of the year. This problem is pervasive. The pictures, the one picture there just shows you extensive dead trees, all their structures. Those are expensive trees to take out, that's really what we're talking about here. They typically come in with a crane and take them out in three pieces, very dangerous work. Let me point out to you every dead tree is a hazard tree because they're going to come down. Not a question of whether, it's when, and they are coming down. I have a bunch of pictures that I think we can circulate around of damaged, or, no, there's another set of pictures. I don't have copies for everybody. Did he give them to you?
[{'start': 32, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Staci Heaton: Staci Heaton, Rural County Representatives of California, this is a very important issue for the citizens of our member counties in strong support of this bill today. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Fear, Jr.: my name is fear, jr. i am a member of the california association of health underwriters and i am an agent and i have been so for 14 years. since the very beginning, i have been a certified agent with covered california and have helped hundreds of people enroll in a covered california plan as well as help small businesses find health insurance solutions that work best for them. i am in support of this bill and feel that hsas were always intended as an option for consumers. when covered california first came to light, there were two different bronze plans offered to anybody who would like them. one was an hsa plan and the other one non-hsa. and in my enrollments throughout the years, i've always offered and explained to consumers what hsa plans are and why it might work in some cases and not in others, but i think it's fair to say that hsa plans go hand in hand with the aca and would not be anything that would not promote consumer direction and choice. i also wanted to talk quickly on the issue of employers offering these plans. ever since i've been working since 2003, it's always been an option for employers to offer more than one plan, even a group of two employees can have two separate plans. and so, the days of an employerooffering only an hsa plan are really gone. the very rare cases where i have had that it's because the employer was offering to fully fund their hsa accounts, which i don't think would be anything that would be a negative to an employee. and then lastly, the thing i would say is hsa plans have the same risk as any other plan. on a health insurance plan, you have an out of pocket maximum which on most plans offered in today's market is about $6,500 and that out of pocket maximum is the same or better. and when i say, better, i mean, lower an hsa plan. so, in no way is it putting an enrollee at a greater risk. it's really just promoting the ability to save for catastrophic claims that may occur down the road. and with that i-
[{'start': 11, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Faith Lane: Faith Lane on behalf of the California Association of Joint Power Authorities, in support.
[]
Sara Flocks: Mr Chair members, Sara Flocks from the California Labor Federation we're also in opposition to this measure. As unions, when we go to the table to negotiate, we fight very hard to avoid employers switching our members to high deductible health plans linked to HSAs. The reason is because we know we're going to represent those members for a long time. And as Calper's as said, they're going to represent into taking care of their members for life, basically from when they start working till retirement. And high deductible plans linked to HSAs actually end up costing more for the people who are paying for them, because people delay and forego care. And in terms of, I know several of the witnesses raise Affordable Care Act, California has gone beyond and improved upon the Affordable Care Act. So we don't have to kind of conform to everything in it. And I think the question for this Committee Is should the state create a tax preference for health savings accounts at a cost of $95 million a year as I said in the analysis. That's the question, HSAs are out there but does the state want to spend public dollars to create an incentive for something which as Mary June said is actually bad healthcare policy? We're facing a lot of choices in our budget, and we have a lot of health care choices. I don't know if $100 million is what to go to spend on something that's not only just It's not good health policy but is actually a regressive tax break as well. Since really it has the most benefit for people in higher tax brackets and those who have more disposable income to put in an HSA. And given that, we do appreciate the Chair's amendments to have this be subject to a budget appropriation. We think that is better policy to put this In the budget but still and compare the different priorities but we still do unfortunately I oppose.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 22, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1164, 'end': 1173, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jack Rice: thank you, members of the committee. jack jonah rice, associate counsel with the california farm bureau, representing 48,000 ag collegiates and associate members. so, in real simple terms, the focus of the bill is assembly member gallagher said, really to provide clarity, and one of the reasons for that is the way that lake and streambed alteration agreement program works is a bit different then some other conservation laws and what happens is a person who's going to conduct a certain type of activity. they're obligated under the law to describe, or to notify the department if they're going to engage in an activity in it's stream that may have, or that will alter, substantially alter, that stream. so there certain terms define, but the obligation is on the person that's acting to say, okay this is going to be something that is under the jurisdiction of this law and they need to be able to understand what that is. so recently there have been specific instances and there's been communication with the department, really trying to flesh out that there are how a person can understand that. the reason is is there have been a few reports and some specific instances where it has been suggested that the definition of extreme is much broader than what the long history of how people practically, and how the regulations define extreme, and how case law has. and these documents indicate that it's wide open, effectively, and so this is trying to say, wait a second, we need to make sure that this practical law still provides a practical understanding that's consistent with how it's been interpreted, and that really is a matter of fairness to those who are acting and need to notify the department because when you notify you have to pay a fee. so it's $500 for any kind of activity and it can be up to it goes up much higher, but for an activity it might cost $10,000. it will take $1,400. so you can't just notify for every instance that may occur because that is prohibitory expensive. this really just tries to clarify the existing law and people continue to understand what their responsibilities are under the lake and stream alteration agreement program and that is going to keep the program functioning, it is going to keep protecting rivers and streams and it is going to make sure that people have their due process and fair understanding of what's required of them.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 230, 'end': 239, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Justin Oldfield: Justin Oldfield with the California Cattleman's Association given the motion I'll be brief. I just want to thank the author for bringing this bill forward. It's an important bill. Essentially provides regulatory certainty for our members and we respectfully ask for an aye vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cliff Morey: Cliff Morey on behalf of the California Building Ministry Association in support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Valerie Bush: Valerie Bush for the California Chamber of Commerce in support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stacy Heaton: Stacy Heaton, Rural County Representatives of California in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gail Deleham: deleham western growers association in strong support.
[]
Mark Fenstermaker: thank you. good morning mr chair, fenstermaker on behalf of the sonoma county water agency, the sponsored ab 57. five years ago, our water agency along with a strong coalition of concerned counties and water agencies, worked together to pass ab 2443 and establish a prevention program to slow the spread of quagga and zebra mussels. this program should be considered a success as many lake and reservoir operators and managers have developed and implemented prevention plans. the grant dollars from the prevention program have helped spread the word. on a threat these mussels pose and provide good public outreach. so more and more folks are showing up to our inspection points cleaned, drained, and dry. despite the success, the prevention program is not perfect. and additional steps need to be taken to ensure that we continue to slow the spread. and hopefully prevent the spread of these mussels into new water bodies. and the need for this action is evidence by recent happenings. back in december adult quagga mussels were found in the angeles pipeline. it's a tunnel that moves water from pyramid lake down to the elderberry ford bay and onto castaic lake. about a week later more quagga mussels were found in elderberry ford bay and both of these water bodies are currently considered infested with quagga mussels. fast forward two months in february some unconfirmed vellegers which are the larva of quagga were found at an intake valve for a pipeline that moves water from silverwood lake in san bernardino county down to lake paris in riverside county. so we have new quagga findings in both the west and the east branch of the state water project. and this is the first finding of these mussels in the state water project. this causes us great concern, that the threat of spread is going to continue to move northward. so to try and get another step ahead and make sure that these coagulants do not spread into our water bodies, we have ab 1587. which if passed would require both exiting and invested water way go through a decontamination process and allows for the grant funding from the prevention program to be allowed invested water bodies where they currently are not. these mussels pose a serious cost. as the analysis points out, in the great lakes where these first started, it's had an economic impact of $5 billion between 2000 and 2010. and the metropolitan water district spends $3 to 4 million annually on maintenance as a result of these quagga mussels. our water agency cannot afford these costs. the biggest impacts if our reservoirs were infested is that we would have to close our coho salmon food stock program. we cannot afford the costs. we cannot afford to think that we are done working on this issue. and if i may just very quickly, i have a demonstration of what these quagga mussels look like. this is a roughly two-month infestation. so very quickly they will start clogging pipes. imagine what this would look like after six months, or after a year. so for this reason, we thank assemblymember levine and respectfully ask for your aye vote today.
[{'start': 3037, 'end': 3043, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jenna Long: jenna jack long on behalf of the tahoe alliance support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tom Jefferson: good morning, everybody. my name is tom jenna jefferson, and that is my real name. i'm a biologist who's been studying marine mammals for about 34 years, and i'm the director of the nonprofit organization, viva vaquita. a little bit more background on the vaquita, in addition to what you've already heard. it is one of only seven species of porpoises in the world, so it's not a very big family that it's a member of. and losing a species is a very, very big loss of biological diversity. the species was only scientifically discovered about 60 years ago, so we don't really know much about its biology. it's found only in a very small area of the northern gulf of california and mexico. and it's sometimes called the panda of the sea, and that's in relation to both its appearance as well as its very endangered status. it is, without a doubt, the most endangered species of marine mammal in the world, quite by a long shot, actually. a little bit about the status of the population. the species has already thought to be rare when it was discovered back in 1958, and it was primarily due to entanglement in gill nets. for the last few decades, shrimp gill nets have been the major culprit. currently, by-catch and gill nets set illegally for a large fish called the totoaba are the main threat to the species. and corvina fishing which uses gill nets, is also a threat. the vaquita population declined from about 600 in 1997 down to about 30 in late 2016. and it's continued to decline, and we currently estimate numbers maybe as low as 25 or 26 individuals. and it's declining at about 50% per year, which means next year, there will probably only be 13 or so. a couple of recent developments. mexico has established a two year ban on gill nets in 2015, but that has not been effectively enforced and it's set to expire later this month. there's currently massive illegal fishing going on in the northern gulf of california where the vaquita lives. recently, four or five vaquitas have been found dead, including an aborted fetus. enforcement appears to be minimal right now, giving poachers free reign. and finally, and i emphasize this, that situation for the vaquita is currently very, very desperate, as desperate as it can be. and the species is on the very verge of extinction. thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Zak Smith: thank you, chair and members of the committee. my name is zak tom smith for the natural resources defense council. and i want to thank you for allowing me to speak today on this important step california can take to help disrupt the tragic extinction of the vaquita. as we heard from dr. jefferson moments ago, we know exactly what is driving the vaquita towards extinction, the use of gill nets in their habitat. and we know exactly how to save them. getting the use of gillnets out of, from their habitat. the necessity of transitioning away from the use of all gill nets in the region by all fisheries, including the corvina fishery, which you may hear about today, is the reasoned conclusion of the international committee for the recovery of the vaquita. this preeminent group of scientific experts, people at the top of their field in biology and fisheries management from the united states, the uk, canada, and mexico, including people from the mexico's national institute of ecology and climate change, have concluded that gill nets must be banned entirely from this area. with respect to the corvina fishery, this is what serva said in its most recent report, that's the international committee for recovery. they state, they reiterated their recommendation that the gill net ban include the nets used in the corvina fishery. the existence of this fishery as an exception to the gill net ban reduces the efficiency of enforcement, and facilitates the illegal fishery for totoaba during the corvina season. i urge the members of this committee to align themselves with the experts who have been working on vaquita recovery for decades. ab 1151 reflects their conclusion that the time for half measures, incremental steps, carving out harmful exceptions has passed. if the vaquita are going to be here in three years, comprehensive measures must be taken now. serva, the united states, mexican officials, have dedicated time and substantial resources to the development of alternative gear and market development. and they will continue to do so, even this year, when the upper gulf corvina fishery was effectively canceled for not complying with mexican environmental regulations. the mexican government has offered compensation to fishermen at double the price that they were achieving on the market for the last two years. there is no silver bullet to save the vaquita, i wish there was. people are working every angle, reducing chinese demand for totoaba, busting smugglers, tackling corruption, the live capture of vaquita. they're using all of the laws that are available to them. and there's just a limit as to what these laws can do, such as the endangered species act and others that can't reach as far into mexico for good reason. but ab 1151 is part of this overall effort, and it supports mexican initiatives to enforce its rules and realign the fisheries in the upper gulf. doing, otherwise, will inadvertently support the status quo and doom the vaquita. thank you very much, and thank you to assemblymember gloria.
[{'start': 58, 'end': 71, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 288, 'end': 297, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1867, 'end': 1872, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3029, 'end': 3035, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kyle Jones: kyle zak jones, sierra club california, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julia Kingsley: julia kyle kingsley with ecoconsult representing heal the bay, seventh generation advisors, and surfrider in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rico Mastrodonato: Rico Mastrodonato, California Citizen, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kim Delfino: Kim Delfino with Defenders of Wildlife in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Fearing: fearing with the san diego humane society and the humane society of the united states in support.
[]
Jonathan Gonzalez: good morning, mr. chairman garcia, members of the committee. my name is jonathan julia gonzalez. i'm here to represent pacific seafood group. we're vertically integrated seafood harvesting, processing, and distribution company headquartered in clackamas, oregon. we are family-owned business that has been around for over 75 years. and we currently employ over 400 employees in the state of california, and that number is steadily increasing, thankfully. the stated purpose of ab 1151 is to protect the endangered vaquita porpoise. vaquitas need help now, and  pacific seafood group fully supports appropriate efforts to save this species. banning corvina however is not a responsible or effective way to help them. corvina is a popular, affordable protein that many low income californians especially latino and latino americans have come to rely on to feed their families. the fish sells for half sometimes less than half of the price of other fish on the market. as a result, many grocers have had a hard time keeping it on the shelves. our los angeles distribution facility distributed tens of thousands of pounds of corvina to grocery stores throughout the california in march 2017 alone. so, the fishery has been active this year. including covina in ab 1151 will not benefit the vaquita porpoise, because corvina is not a vaquita harmful fish. the real culprit threatening vaquita, the world's rarest marine mammal is the international trade in exotic animal parts, specifically the totoaba fish bladder. a single totoaba fish bladder can sell for as much as $10,000 in the chinese market. totoaba clearly is a vaquita harmful fish, and the totoaba fish bladder is a vaquita harmful product. corvina is not a part of the international trade that threatens vaquita. significantly, the mexican government expressly excluded the corvina gill net fishery from it's ban on gill nets. we understand that the iucn made a recommendation on november 2016 to remove this one exclusion. but the problem is the lack of enforcing a legal fishing practices coupled with the mexican cartel's involvement in the totoaba fishery, which is bad news for the vaquita no mater what is done in the california legislature. including corvina in ab 1151 will not benefit the vaquita, but will deprive many low-income californians of a healthy affordable protein that feeds their families. we therefore encourage you to remove language restricting access to this important fishery. it is also very important to note that the national marine fisheries services southwest fishery science center, which is in your district assemblymember gloria, is well aware of the plight of the vaquita and even has a webpage dedicated to their efforts to save the vaquita. i have a link to the webpage that's in the opposition letter i submitted if you wish to visit it. and assembly member gloria, i urge you to visit the southwest fisheries center if you have not already to see what they are already are doing. i thank you for your attention to this important issue. and please do not hesitate to contact me in the future or now if i can provide any additional information.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 33, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 72, 'end': 95, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2216, 'end': 2223, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2615, 'end': 2621, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2855, 'end': 2861, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Steven Choi: steven jonathan choi speaking. i'm trying to understand the situation and listening to both sides. i am first of all concerned about the endangered species. only 30 left. that is a very dramatic situation. i realized at the same time, this reminds me of delta smith. so a story to protect that those species, that the water flow to southern california has been banned and agriculture in the southern california. people who were deprived of the necessary water. to protect this mammal, again we will be totally impacting the fishery industry who are relying upon this method of whatever the method that is used, getting that. and that will impact the people who are generations upon generations relying upon. so when you think about on the one side, why not come up with some other alternative method? for example, already existing mexico's ban on this gillnet. it is not what i hear is that the not fully implemented, not policed properly. and when california fishermen are operating and the band and hurting their livelihood, will it save this vaquita population when mexico government is not even though that the law has already been in place, but mexico is not properly policing the use of the gillnets? so i feel this requires two countries in total agreement and then acting together, not just hurting the us fishing industry. that's my concern, so maybe you can consider continue this bill and allow sometime to work out the long term solutions with the mexico government.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 254, 'end': 265, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John McCall: Thank you Mr. Bloom. John McCall with Sonoma Land Trust, as your analysis pointed out we've invested about $26 billion even since the year 2000 in land protection. So California has an amazing system of parks and open space and wildlife habitat. But we've learned over the last decade that those areas aren't necessarily be connected. So just as there are large areas of protected land, but how do animals move between them. And so the public policy's been catching up with the science. We want to thank Mr. Levine for his bill AB 498 that started to put some policy and direction around this area. Mr. Bloom's bill goes to the next step further. We've identified roads as both the biggest impediment to wildlife moving across the landscape safely as well as an area where we can work with Caltrans and other agencies to solve a lot of problems simply. In our work in Sonoma Valley, we've been looking at Highway 12 and some of the other more rural highways and learning that mountain lions, bobcats, deers, species you wouldn't think would crawl under a highway, are doing just that. They're moving under bridges, they're moving under culverts. So a lot of our work in a more rural county is to remove impediments in those culverts. Taking blackberry out, putting structures in that don't in anyway impact the transportation elements of the project, but help wildlife move safely. So we think this is a great first step in working with Caltrans and developing relationship with them so we can move these projects forward. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 19, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 21, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 508, 'end': 514, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 603, 'end': 608, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kyle Jones: good morning, kyle steven jones with sierra club of california in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Smith: good morning, smith on behalf of the laguna greenbelt and the land trust of santa cruz county in support. thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chad Mollolan: Chad Mollolan on behalf of the Santa Clara Valley Open Space Authority in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kim Shire: Kim Shire on behalf of the Nature Conservancy in support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Juan Altamirano: Juan Altamirano on behalf of Audubon California in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Russell Novak: Russell Novak on behalf of Midpeninsula Regional Open Space District in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kim Delfino: kim kyle delfino on the behalf of defenders of wildlife in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kim Delfino: Good morning, my name is Kim Delfino. Maybe I need to cut back on my coffee before I show up today. I work for Defenders of Wildlife and I've worked for the organization for 16 years in California. And for those 16 years, I've worked on funding issues as it relates to the Department of Fish and Wildlife. For those years as we have seen in California, we have got an immense abundance of wildlife diversity. We're a very lucky state in that sense. You can just go down to the Carrizo Plain, the spring right now and see a super bloom going on. It is a tremendous responsibility and resource that we have here in the state. Department of Fish and Wildlife is charged under its public trust responsibilities to take care of all of those resources. And every year, we pass new responsibilities on the department. This morning, you've already had folks get up and talk about the fact that the hunting program, the commercial fishing program, the recreation program, the wardens that have to patrol the lands and protect against illegal activity. The fact that they patrol our ports to prevent illegal importation of products such as Ivory that are banned. The responsibilities are significant. At the same time, as you heard from the folks that got up here and testified on the LTAG bill, the number of folks that are hunting are declining. Previously, the department was largely funded through hunting and fishing licenses, but we're finding that that's completely unsustainable and untenable for the department. And meanwhile, we continue to move money around within the department and we try to use general fund. But as we know, general fund is a very unstable funding source for the department. We've used environmental license plate funds, that money has been backed out. And not surprisingly, every so often, we have the department get up in front of Budget Subcommittees and testify about the structural imbalance going on within the department. Several years ago, the preservation fund had a $20 million hole. It was a $20 million infusion of money from then Governor Schwarzenegger that brought the fund back into balance, but the problem is we've never addressed the underlying problem which is that we do not have a stable funding source, a comprehensive, sustainable funding source for the Department of Fish and Wildlife. Yet, every year, we continue to pass and give them more responsibility. And every year, their responsibilities become more complex in such a populated and diverse state with so many resource constraints. So this year in front of the Budget Subcommittee, we have a $24 million structural imbalance and the response for how to fix it is to increase fishing fees on the commercial fishing industry by 1,300%. The department is running out of options on how to fix their problem. They're not going to go to the hunting guys, because the hunting community just testified they paid the highest hunting licenses in the state. We can't continue to go to the general fund, because there's continuing restraint on the general fund. We can't use the environmental license plate fund. And so, you see where the problem lies. And so Mr. Bloom's bill, it comes at a perfect time where we really need to sit down and get the stakeholders together to look at a more sustainable funding source. And for those reasons, we would urge your aye vote on this bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2073, 'end': 2087, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3156, 'end': 3161, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Fearing: Jennifer Fearing, on behalf of the Humane Society of the United States, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Juan Altamirano: juan kim altamirano on behalf of audubon california, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: kyle juan jones with sierra club california, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kim Jenner: Kim Jenner on behalf of the Nature Conservancy, in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pablo Garza: good morning, pablo kyle garza with environmental defense fund, in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dan Connelly: dan, pheasants forever, quail forever, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stacy Heaton: stacy pablo heaton, rural county representatives of california, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicholas Harris: nicholas stacy harris, western states representative for the american motorcyclist association in full support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Don Amador: Don Amador, Blue Ribbon Coalition in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Granat: Amy Granat, California Off-Road Vehicle Association with strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Abe Pickett: abe nicholas pickett, ama district 36, motorcycle sports committee, 46 years of strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vern Goehring: Thank you, Mister Chairman and members. Vern Goehring on behalf of the California Native Plant Society and a dozen or more organizations. They're working together on this issue this year. We filed a letter of opposition to this bill, and I understand the author has taken the Committee's suggested amendments, so I won't go into a lot of detail. But I did want to make a couple of comments about the entire program that's a concern to the environmental community. I just want to point out to the Committee, as you know that any form of outdoor recreation can cause environmental degradation whether it's hiking, camping or off roading. The challenge is, how do we individually and collectively do no harm to common resources such that others' ability to enjoy them is not compromised. Some forms of recreation demand little because the impacts are little. Others demand a lot because the potential impacts are great. Off-roading of highway vehicle recreation is one of those that demands a lot because the impacts are significant. The department's mission, the Department of Parks and Recreation mission is to preserve biodiversity and natural and cultural resources while also providing quality recreation. So the recreation part is kind of a secondary nature actually. It's more providing the natural biodiversity and cultural Resources in their mission statement. The OHD division, on the other hand, has a conflicted legislative charge. Which directs it first to make the fullest public use of designated areas, even to the extent of modifying natural and cultural resources. And we think just removing a sunset and moving forward with this program maintains this conflict within the department and this program. It's the nature of OHV activities that have environmental impacts that are continuous and ongoing. And simply removing a sunset, or simply extending it, will keep in place significant shortcomings in the natural resource protection of this program. For example, current law does not require periodically updating soil conservation standards to avoid erosion, sedimentation, and water quality. Current law does not require periodic wildlife inventories or evading habitat protection plans. Current law prohibits designating within state vehicle recreation areas. Cultural and natural preserves which are the standard tools for protecting the resources and the rest of the state park system. So with that I'll just close and encourage the Committee to work with us approving this program in this bill and others we'll move forward there is a lot of shortcomings that need to be addressed. Still in this bill to make it an ongoing substantive bill. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: hi, kyle abe jones, sierra club california, also posted opposition.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Terry McCale: To Mr Chairman Terry Mccale with Aaron Reid and associates who are representing coalition of off highway vehicle recreationist. Just to say that we look forward to working with stake holders for both sides. And this Committee staff and negotiating this is we move forward. Thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 33, 'end': 43, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Stan Van Velsor: Good morning. My name is Stan Van Velsor. I represent the Wilderness Society, and from 2009 to 2013, I was also a member on the OHMVR Commission. And during that time, I witnessed some relatively troubling evidence, levels of degradation within the program to many of the natural resources in our state. And so I think it's important that we take the time to look at necessary changes, look at some of the issues. Just a me too, would be very appreciated if you're against the bill. I'm against it.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Juan Aldavedan: Juan Aldavedan on behalf of Radan, California, also in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 28, 'end': 33, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kim Delfino: Kim Delfino with Defenders of Wildlife, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Cole: good morning. my name is mike kyle cole. i'm a sutter county rice farmer. i've been involved in rice farming for 30 years. and i farm in four different water districts. one of which is the state water district sutter extension, and three of the fields that i farm a total of approximately 430 acres border the east side of the sutter refuge. in 2014, we entered in to a water transfer agreement through sutter extension water district. and inevitably i was forced to disk the fallow ground. because the ground hadn't been worked and i had flooded it the previous fall. i had a fair stand of smartweed and it germinates about the first of april. and we had adequate moisture. well as the year goes along, and because the ground was left fallow, the smartweed matured but was very stressed. this ground that i farm is about, i have about 18 inches of soil and then there's a hard pen below it. so really, the weeds, call it the weeds. the smartweed, the vegetation basically survives with some moisture that's in the soil, but also the dews that takes in moisture from the leaves as well. this smartweed had matured, and was actually showing a lot of stress symptoms. and the state was going around and checking, and they demanded that i either disk the field or i would not qualify for the program. so i had to disk the field. by now it's late june. and unfortunately, i dissed up a number of depthness and it just, then that's why i'm here now. i studied dutch in college. i have a bachelor of science degree in biological conservation and it's been my thing since i was very young. in addition to that when i disced the field i was farming part of the field and the majority of the field was fallow. after discing the field, then i started getting this subbing which was consistent with a hardpan layer shallow from the field. and when i disc the field up, what moisture was in the field immediately disappeared, and that's kind of ag 101. if you want to hold moisture in your soil, you do not disturb it. so i really felt like in actuality we have more of a problem than what we'd had if i didn't left it alone. in discussing the matter with dwr, i was told that the part of their reasoning, and it makes sense that in the delta, they have issues with the having excess smartweed. but the delta, it's a different, it's not like one size fits all. the delta, their biggest deal they're trying to pump water out, reclamation is a huge thing. and they're growing in higher organic soils which has a natural nitrogen that as long as that smartweed or whatever vegetation you have is pumping up, yeah, they're probably are using some water. i don't know how much, but where we were up in the valley there, it's just not an issue. and then furthermore in the fall, i flood for waterfowl. and own and operate a duck club. but it was like a moonscape. it was just a sheet water. we had nothing. we lost all of the cover. the smartweed provides a lot of cover for the dabbling ducks, as well as the feed. the food value is huge. so that's my-
[{'start': 25, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pablo Gardo: Good morning. Pablo Gardo with Environmental Defense Fund in support of this bill. Good morning.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roy Griffith: Roy Griffith on behalf of California Rifle and Pistol Association, we support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kim Delfino: good morning. kim with defenders of wildlife in support of the bill.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jermail Allen: Jermail Allen on behalf of the Nature Conservancy in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dan Connelly: Dan Connelly with Pheasants Forever Quail Forever and we would like to see you support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joy Kingsley: Joy Kingsley with ECO consult representing community alliance of family farmers in the California climate in agriculture network in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Juan Altamirano: altamirano on behalf of audubon california in support.
[]
Gary Link: gary mike link with ducks unlimited in full support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ryan Spencer: Ryan Spencer with the Northern California Water Association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matt Lyon: good morning, mr chair and members. thank you for the opportunity to speak in favor of this bill. my name is matt gary lyon, i'm the founder and ceo of hydrapak. we currently employ 20 people at our headquarters in oakland. our company develops and manufactures hydration backpack reservoirs and flexible bottles for variety of activities such as biking, hunting and camping. our state is the largest outdoor economy of any state in the nation. yet, there is no government office or entity that is focused on supporting, growing, and promoting this industry. as assemblymember garcia has noted over $85 billion in economic benefit comes to our outdoor recreation in california. and more than 730,000 people are employed directly in outdoor recreation related positions. i've personally been contacted by other states, who have recognized the attractiveness of outdoor recreation jobs and are providing incentive for businesses to relocate. these include colorado, utah and washington, all states that have opened offices of recreation that are similar to what is being proposed today. as someone who have been in the industry for 21 years, i am proud to operate in california. but i see great potential for our state to do better by tapping into the innovation, expertise, and enthusiasm that our employees offer. an office of outdoor recreation in california would be a great resource for our industry. and a way for california to take advantage of the existing base of businesses to maintain and grow its competitive advantages for the future. i ask you to vote in favor of this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 109, 'end': 123, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 577, 'end': 583, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Katie Hawkins: hi, good morning. my name is katie matt hawkins and i'm the national sales manager for marmot mountain. marmot is an outdoor recreational company that produces high and technical apparel and outdoor equipments, such as tents and sleeping bags. we were founded in 1974 at uc santa cruz by two students, and have grown to be a global leader in designing and manufacturing the highest quality performance product in the outdoor industry. we are located in rohnert park, and we employ 120 californians. i've spent my entire professional career in the outdoor industry because it's what i do. it's what i love, whether it's back country skiing in the sierras, climbing in joshua tree, or backpacking on the pacific crest trail. this is what we do and this is what we love. companies like marmot and other brands in the recreational industries such as matt's, partner here in california. and are enabling californians and others throughout the world to have transformative experiences in the outdoors. as businesses in the outdoor recreation it is what we love and what we live by. and our industry is being shaped every day by changing preferences and demands of our retail consumers. by the creation of new technologies, products and the innovation pathways, and development of new ways to recreate. ab 907 creates a new office of outdoor recreation that will be a focal point for the outdoor recreation industry in meeting those challenges. it affirms the incredible economic powerhouse that the outdoor recreation economy is in the state of california. it also creates a visible platform to state leaders to work with industry and develop and employ strategies to better position california to companies and brands that want to expand and relocate here. at a time when every state is looking for ways to better attract and to compete for employees and talent in growing industries, creating the new office of outdoor recreation moves california in the right direction. i ask for your strong support in ab 907.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Naz Ahmed: i am naz katie ahmed, rei's market manager for the sacramento valley in tahoe region. we're in strong support of this bill. our outdoor education arm has put 50,000 participants through our outdoor programs each year in the last three years. bringing new users and diversity to our outdoor lands and public recreation, as well as building appreciation for stewardship of our public lands.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dave Polivy: My name is Dave Polivy, owner of Tahoe Mountain Sports, based up in Truckee. We support this as well and I hope you do too, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stacey Heath: Stacey Heath, Monroe County Representatives of California, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rico Mastrodonato: rico naz mastrodonato trust for public land, in support.
[]
Mark Olson: good morning madam chair and committee members. again, my name is mark jonah olson. i'm the vice-president and general manager of gerdau steel. i manage the operation of gerdau steel mill in rancho cucamonga. gerdau's rancho cucamonga facility is the last steel mill in california that actually melts steel. we recycle steel sourced from the greater los angeles area, melt it and make high-quality rebar that is used in large infrastructure and commercial projects throughout the state. gerdau employs 1100 people in california and we have an annual payroll of more than $73 million. these are good middle-class jobs that can support families. our use of recycled steel and california's advanced energy and emission reduction requirements have made gerdau's rebar one of the greenest and cleanest steel products available. the addition of a new multimillion dollar environmental system this year will make our rancho cucamonga mill one of the cleanest in the nation. gerdau supports ab 262 because it shows that california values efforts made by companies like mine to produce greener, cleaner, high quality products. it requires california state agencies to acknowledge the environmental and climate goals outlined by the legislature and governor and develop a process to evaluate and procure products with better environmental profiles. if companies like mine are going to invest in significant, significant amounts of money to improve the emissions profile of their production facilities, we would like to see the state place a value on procuring greener, cleaner products. this effort will help california meet its greenhouse gas reduction goals and it will develop a market for greener products. thank you, and i respectfully ask for an aye vote.
[{'start': 66, 'end': 82, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
J.B. Tengco: my name is j.b. mark tengco and i'm the west coast director for the bluegreen alliance. the bj, bluegreen alliance unites labor unions and environmental organizations to protect the environment and create and maintain quality family sustaining jobs across the economy. we believe that ab 262, the buy clean bill, perfectly aligns with those goals. if california continues to build a low carbon future, we must take steps to ensure that we do with low carbon materials and buy clean does just that. make sure that california taxpayer dollars go to businesses that reduce emissions and comply with the state's climate laws. promotes investments in cleaner manufacturing, which maintains good family sustaining manufacturing jobs and it helps level the playing field for businesses that have invested in manufacturing products with fewer emissions. many of our california in state companies like gerdau steel, where bj has members, are meeting the requirements of the global warming solutions act, ab 32, to reduce those emissions. but enterprises from other states and nations don't face the same pollution reduction requirements that our california companies do. buy clean california make sure that california tax payer dollars go to manufacturers and workers in california, across the country and around the world that are reducing their carbon emissions and producing cleaner products. the bluegreen alliance is proud to be here today and we ask for your support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeff Davis: Good morning. I'm Jeff Davis, Vice President at U.S. Concrete. I'm responsible for four operating units in Northern California, Central Concrete Supply, Right Away Ready Mix, Rock Transport, and West Side Concrete Materials. We employ over 600 employees in the Greater Bay Area; Oakland, Brentwood, Pleasanton, San Francisco, San Jose, 20 manufacturing facilities, and operate over 300 delivery vehicles. We have been focused on developing low carbon, cleaner, greener concrete for over the last eight years. We were a leader in developing EPDs for the concrete sector. We urge you to support AB 262. We highly support this initiative. It will drive innovation within our industry. We've been fortunate to work in a market where we have private developers and owners that demand sustainable, greener products. It's forced us to innovate to meet their needs, but with the State of California being the largest purchaser of concrete in the state, this bill will drive innovation through our industry to drive lower carbon products through the concrete sector. And we urge you to vote-
[{'start': 18, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Lynch: good morning madam chair and members, danielle j.b. lynch on behalf of 350 sacramento in support.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Romero: Melissa Romero on behalf of Californians Against Waste in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Rosenberger: kimberly danielle rosenberger with service employees international union in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Shern: Hello, David Shern with Physicians for Social Responsibility in strong support.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sam Rodriguez: sam kimberly rodriguez on behalf of united food and commercial workers, 160,000 employees, a board member of the green blue alliance, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eileen Foster: eileen sam foster, united steel workers local 5, women of steel in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Ortiz: How you doing? My name's Paul Ortiz, President of Local 8065 and we have over 300 members in LA and Inland Empire area in strong support of this bill.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lori Kammerer: Good morning members, Lori Kammerer, Small Business California and also the California Metals Coalition, in support.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ernest Pacheco: Ernest Pacheco, Communication Workers of America District Nine in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Daniel Brad: Daniel Brad on behalf of Breathe California in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Diana Vazquez: hi, diana eileen vazquez on behalf of the california environmental justice alliance and also the asian pacific environmental network in support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Fenstermaker: good morning. mark diana fenstermaker on behalf of the environmental defense fund in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bonnie Holmes-Gen: Hello, I'm Bonnie Holmes-Gen with the American Lung Association of California urging your strong support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Clair Brown: clair, uc berkley economics professor, 350 bay area and san diego 350 and fossil free california in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathryn Phillips: Kathryn Phillips with Sierra Club California, also speaking for the National Council of Jewish Women Los Angeles, and Voices For Progress, which is a group of business owners, entrepreneurs, and philanthropists in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Scott Govenar: madam chair, members, scott mark govenar here on behalf of the construction employers association. my members build the majority of all vertical public work projects in the state. as mr. bonta mentioned, they're actually currently building the apple facility, so they have no issue with green products. we've actually offered mr. banta an amendment which accomplishes what we believe is the exact same goal. what we've asked is that dgs simply put in the bid specifications the level of products they want. so if they want ultra clean products, just put it in the specs. otherwise, what we're looking at is this list which is hard to see. it's at least 30 products that we have to provide epds for. now if a contractor, in the bidding process, has to look at all of these epds and evaluate which one is cleanest and then determine if it's worth it to take that clean product in exchange for the bid preference. dgs then has to pull apart every single bid, pull out all these numbers, and rank them so i may have better structural steel, brett may have better rebar. someone else may have better flat glass, and they have to weigh all this.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 187, 'end': 192, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 330, 'end': 335, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1037, 'end': 1042, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bret Barrow: Madam Chair and members, my name is Bret Barrow with the National Electrical Contractors Association, the California Legislative Conference of the Plumbing, Heating, Piping Industry, United Contractors, the Northern California Allied Trades, and the Wall and Ceiling Alliance. And I won't repeat everything that Mr. Govenar has said, but we certainly want to reinforce the fact that this creates a calculation and a process at DGS that would end up in a bid preference on the backend. The listed products are products that we use on almost every project in a multitude of ways that you may not even recognize it are right in front of you. For us to have to weigh our bid and our skilled and trained qualifications and bonding and all of that against environmental attributes and the EPD's, and as Mr. Govenar said, a multitude of EPD's because we would bring a multitude of products to that job, creates not only complexity that public works bids don't need additional complexity or administrative burden, but also a preference in bid decision. That's our main concern with this bill, the way it's written today and for those reasons we're in opposition.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 316, 'end': 323, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 801, 'end': 808, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Adam Harper: Adam Harper with the California Construction and Industrial Materials Association. We represent the ready-mix concrete, construction aggregate, and industrial minerals industry. We're opposed unless amended to remove concrete. There are significant challenges for the ready mix concrete industry to implementing this bill. Each facility can have thousands of different mixes, each one, which would require an EPD to provide a bid to a job. The content of that EPD is somewhat dependent on their own manufacturing control of the concrete, whether they produced the rock, the cement, whether they can assume the cement criteria based on not being the producer of the cement, etc. It's really a challenging process. It creates a lot of uncertainty for the ready mix concrete industry, and in the process we've expressed our reservations about this bill in a letter and we thank you for your consideration.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Todd Bloomstine: thank you madam chair, bloomstine for the southern california contractors association in opposition. we understand... but still have strong concerns, thanks.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jena Price: if there's no more opposition, i apologize for my tardiness, this is actually registering in support, we were late, my name is jena scott price on behalf of the california league of conservation voters, thank you.
[{'start': 127, 'end': 143, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rico Mastrodonato: I also apologize for being late. Rico Mastrodonato with the Trust for Public Land in support.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Skip Daum: Thank you. Thanks Madam Speaker, Madam Chair, Skip Daum on behalf of the America Subcontractors Association of California. Particularly want to thank the Chair and thank the Committee consultant for arduous work in the last week, I appreciate their efforts. Yes, as the author has said this is an era of transparency and disclosures and accountability to the taxpayers, and those who-
[{'start': 46, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eddie Bernacci: mr chairman members, eddie on behalf of the national electrical contractors association, the california legislative conference, plumbing, heating, piping industry, northern california allied trades, the wall and ceiling alliance, and united contractors. as previously stated, california's done an excellent job on establishing prompt payment statutes to benefit subcontractors so that they can stay whole and pay their suppliers, employees, and overhead. where this falls short is that the timelines are all predicated on when the public agency pays the general contractor and that information is not readily available. this bill would provide sunshine into that, ensure that folks are being paid on time and limit litigation, and we would urge your aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dorothy Johnson : Good morning, Mr. Chair and members. Dorothy Johnson with the California State Association of Counties. My colleague from the Urban Counties Caucus would also like to align her comments with my testimony and we are here in respectful opposition.  We believe there's a significant disconnect between the stated goals of this bill and what local agencies would be required to complete. It puts an agency on the hook even when we are in full compliance with statue and making payments on the on time, with no real benefit to our own local agencies. As was mentioned, this bill would require the posted payments to be put online and I believe the amendments wouldn't move it 21 days. However, this is creating requirements for items that are already public records. So we would suggest in lieu of creating this mandate, a costly mandate will drain sources from public agencies, that the subcontractor simply contacts that agency and requests a public record. That requires again no new law, no new statutes and, again, for the reasons of a duplicative and burdensome requirement, a mandate on local agencies respectfully oppose this measure and urge your no vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 52, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jarell Cook: Yes, thank you to the Committee. My name is Jarell Cook and I represent the California Manufacturers and Technology Association. We are here in support of AB 77, as it is consistent with our long-standing effort to improve California's regulatory climate and ensure good governance in the state. This bill is a measure that restores the Legislature's role as an effective oversight body. It is consistent with a February 2017 report by the LAO, which called for the improvement of California's regulatory climate by establishing more robust guidance and oversight measures over our state agencies. Over the past few decades, there's been a slow creep in a succession of authority from the Legislature to state agencies. As a result, stakeholders lose their ability to have input into the processes and the rules that govern them, as they do when the Legislature goes through its deliberative process. And we've also seen, as a result, that sometimes agencies go beyond the authority that the Legislature has intended when they created the statute granting them their authority. As a result, this bill would correct that creep and restore the Legislature to its proper role in writing oversight for California. So we ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marti Fisher: yes good morning, fisher here from the california chamber of commerce, in support. we believe this is an important measure, it will help create some transparency and accountability, providing information for oversight to the legislature, and we're fully in support, thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ken DeVore: Okay, good morning, chair members. Ken Devore, on behalf of National Federation of Independent Business, and I've also been asked by Howard Jarvis Taxpayers Court to also voice their support. This bill's polled really high with our members.  So we're in strong support.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jacob Moss: next person, name and affiliation. good morning, madame chair. jacob, california building industries association, in support.
[{'start': 63, 'end': 68, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matthew Allen: Good morning Chair and members, Matthew Allen, Western Growers Association in support.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sumami Chaka: good morning chair and members, sumami jena chaka on behalf of the california nurse's association, and national nurses united. we're in respectful opposition to ab 77 as it would undermine important environmental, health, and safety regulations. this bill is an assault on the integrity of the democratic regulatory process. it would override laws that have been crafted by experts in the subject matter with public input. this bill in an overreach that would allow the legislature a second bite at the apple for all major regulations. according to the office of administrative law, only state agencies can adopt, amend, or repeal regulations. ab77 would grant the legislature authority that it does not currently possess, the authority to review approved regulations, thereby undermining executive branch authority, and arguably creating violation of the concept of separation of powers within state government. for these reasons, we urge no vote on ab 77. thank you.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Leza Coleman: Thank you. Good afternoon, I'm Leza Coleman with CLTCOA, I want to thank Ms. Weber for sponsoring this bill. Truly, the intent behind AB 940 is not to add any additional work to anybody. It's for the opportunity for residents to have the greatest access to the long-term care ombudsman program. Residents in skilled nursing facilities find themselves in need, often, in need of an extra advocate. And so the bill was designed to make sure that California residents get that higher level of advocacy that was designated by the federal rule change. But I think it's probably more of interest to you to know how it's actually impacting the field and so I give the reminder of my time to Nicole Howell, a practicing ombudsman.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 77, 'end': 82, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 684, 'end': 697, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nicole Howell: hello, my name's nicole. i represent 10,000 residents of long-term care and today i'll attempt to make paperwork exciting to you. i think it's really easy to get lost in the idea that this is simply about someone getting handed a piece of paper and of course they can make a good discharge plan for themself. but this is really about compromised residents who may experience dementia, may be post-surgery, may be experiencing homelessness or addiction, being transferred to out of the facility without appropriate notice and information to their friends or responsible party. and this is about facilities doing their jobs. i'd like to remind you that the way that many skilled nursing facilities are paid is with state and federal dollars. and if they're going to do that, they have to do a good job of that. so in my county, we presented and rolled out our training to all of the 32 skilled nursing facilities and we began to track discharges, and what we found is that many facilities didn't have discharge planning processes in place. in fact, they ended up calling the ombudsman office to say, what should i include in discharge plan? how can i make this better? can i talk to other skilled nursing facilities who are doing it well? and we began to track that and we found trends across ownership bodies, areas of the county which are typically lower income, and we found that many just needed additional supportive services. so in my county, contra costa, which has 3,000 residents of skilled nursing, many of them medi-cal recipients, that they actually just needed supportive services, and what i've heard some of this in the opposition is there's indeed a duplicative process, and particularly burdensome. in my county, they send it simply to an email, discharge@ccombudsman.org, and we review the information and we analyze it. and we're actually using that as part of the collaborative to reduce unnecessary discharges from acute care hospitals and unnecessary admissions. thereby, saving the state additional money because we are actually analyzing what are the causes of unnecessary re-admissions, whether it be unsafe discharges or whether it be poor decisions by families or the resident. and we are really thrilled to see that this is being taken seriously. this is not a paperwork issue. i can't leave kaiser from a flu shot without five sheets of paper, why would someone who experiences dementia or has had traumatic surgery leave a skilled nursing facility without adequate information about when they're being discharged and why they're being discharged and the opportunity to dispute that? thank you so much for your time. i want to highlight that this is simply not a matter of paperwork, but this is residents' lives. thank you
[{'start': 17, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Hicks: hicks, california for disability rights, california alliance for retired americans in strong support and thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Aaron Lewis: lewis, consumer federation of california, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gary Passmore: Gary Passmore, Congress of California Seniors in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Crista Chelemedos: crista jonah chelemedos in support. you know me by now.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carol Sewell: Carol Sewell, California Commission on Aging, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Jones: karen crista jones, long-term care ombudsman services, san luis obispo county, strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Flaherty: Melissa Flaherty, Stanislaus County Ombudsman Program, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tippy Irwin: Tippy Irwin, Ombudsman Services of San Mateo County, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Marcellene: Amy Marcellene, Santa Clara County long-term care ombudsman in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Wanda Hale: Wanda Hale, coordinator, long term care ombudsman, Santa Clara County, strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gary Edwards: gary, executive director of advocacy, inc. santa cruz and san benito counties, strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Guevara: Paul Guevara, Yuba County, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Catherine Driver: catherine, mother lode long-term care ombudsman program, in strong support on behalf of those that we serve.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tracy Barber: Tracy Barber, long-term care ombudsman; Lassen, Modoc, Shasta, Siskiyou, and Trinity Counties, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jedd Hampton: chair and members, hampton on behalf of leadingage california. we are regrettably in opposition to ab 940 unless it is amended. leadingage california represents over 400 providers of senior affordable housing, skilled nursing, residential care facilities for the elderly, and continuing care retirement communities here in california, all of our members are not-for-profit providers in this field. first, we would like to thank the authors' office, the sponsors, and the committee staff for their willingness to engage us on this very important issue. our members interact very frequently and often with the ombudsman program and certainly appreciate the work that they do. our concern with the bill at this time is that we believe it may be a bit premature. currently right now, as the analysis points out, the transfer and discharge requirements were updated in november of 2016, yet the federal interpretive guidelines on those regulations have not been released yet. now we do anticipate that they will be released very shortly. that will, again, provide some guidance on interpretation of this rule, but they have not done so at this point. also, as the analysis points out, the federal rule has not clarified the time frame for when the notification must be sent, does not specify how the notices should be sent... specify what enforcement mechanisms are appropriate. so again, we anticipate that those federal interpretive guidelines will be released very shortly. and we certainly hope to see that this bill coalesces with those interpretive guidelines, so it is in fact consistent with federal rule. so for those reasons, unfortunately, we are opposed to the bill unless amended. but we do look forward to working with the author's office and the stakeholders moving forward.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Morgan Carvajal: Good afternoon, Morgan Carvajal with the Hernandez Strategy Group on behalf of the California Continuing Care Residents Association, or Cal CRA for short. We are sponsors of this bill and appreciate the Assemblymember's hard work on it and all the Committee work as well. It's really a bill that strengthens the current dispute process to make sure that when a dispute is made about an involuntary transfer, the Department has the ability to do a really meaningful review of that transfer and of that provider's decision to make the transfer. I will go ahead and hand it over to Margaret Griffin now, and we urge your support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 579, 'end': 595, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Marianne Becker: Marianne Becker, I'm a resident of University Retirement Community in Davis, strongly support the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Curley: curley on behalf of the california retired teacher's association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susanne Boyd: susanne karen boyd, a resident of university retirement community, davis, i strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Aaron Lewis: Aaron Lewis, Consumer Federation in California, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Adalana Menta: Adalana Menta, University Retirement Community, Davis, California, strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Hicks: Randy Hicks, California Alliance Retired Americans, Californians with Disability Rights, Inc, in strong support, and thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rose Burgess: Rose Burgess, Eskaton Village, Carmichael, I strongly support the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tippy Irwin: Tippy Irwin, Ombudsman Services of San Mateo County. We're currently dealing with a case where we're watching a CCRC trying to push people out of the memory care unit and into the nursing home, simply because they have room in the nursing home. And they want to make space at the bottom of the rung for the pressure that's coming from the bottom. So very strongly in support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joe Rodriguez: Joe Rodriguez, California State Long Term Care Ombudsman in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Taylor: karen susanne taylor, resident of eskaton village, strongly support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cynthia Kay: Dr. Cynthia Kay in education member of Eskaton Village. There are 18 Eskatons, all of us and all of California need your aye vote.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Wanda Hale: wanda karen hale, coordinator, long-term care ombudsman, santa clara county in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Jones: Karen Jones, Long-Term Care Ombudsman Services, San Obispo County. We don't currently have any CCRCs in my community, but one is on its way. And anything that strengthens support for the residents, we strongly support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gary Edwards: gary wanda edwards, executive director of advocacy, inc., strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Flaherty: Melissa Flaherty, Stanislaus County Ombudsman Program, strong support. Thank you, is there anyone here in opposition?
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Hicks: randy gary hicks, california alliance for retired americans, californians for disability rights inc., in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tracy Barber: Tracy Barber, Long Term Care Ombudsmen, [UNKNOWN] in Modoc County in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Jones: Karen Jones, Long Term Care Ombudsmen services, Contra Costa County, very strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicole Howell: Nicole Howell, Executive Director for Ombudsmen Services of Contra Costa County in very strong support, thank you. Katherine Driver, on behalf of every resident that we help from Catholic Charities Motherhood Office of Investment Program.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 115, 'end': 131, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Darrel Celts: Yes, Darrel Celts of the California Association of Airing Agencies on Aging. I don't know that any of us could imagine trying to open an office with 35,000 a year, everything that needs to be paid just to open the doors. So we strongly urge you to vote yes on this bill.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Marcelline: marcelline, field ombudsman, santa clara county long term care ombudsman program, in very strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Wanda Hale: wanda randy hale, coordinator, long term care ombudsman, santa clara county, very strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Flaherty: melissa, stanislaus county ombudsmen programs in very strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nikki Lorre: Nikki Lorre, Long Term Care Ombudsmen Santa Cruz and San Bonita Counties. I just want to say, I started as a volunteer, I'm a staff ombudsmen now. There's such a great need for our program. We literally help people survive. And to see somebody so vulnerable, reach up and say I don't know what I would do without you, it's so important, strongly support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Molly Davies: molly wanda davies, wise and healthy aging long-term care ombudsman program, los angeles. very, very strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gary Edwards: Gary Edwards, Executive Director of Advocacy Inc of Santa Cruz and San Benito counties, even stronger support than Molly.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 115, 'end': 120, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Molly Davies: Thank you. I'm Molly Davies, I'm the Vice President of elder abuse prevention, an Ombudsman services at Wise and Healthy Aging and I serve the city and County of Los Angeles. I'm also the chair of the California elder justice coalition. Victim compensation for elders and dependent adults who been victims of financial crimes is necessary and long overdue. Mass marketing scams for example are costing Americans billions of dollars each year and victims not only suffer on recoupable personal financial lost, but they also experience psychological trauma, suicidal ideation, and major upsets in their live's stability. They often become impoverished, and rely on public benefits like Medi-Cal and SSI. Financial abuse is insidious and there are few services to offer relief to victims. Our agency is one that has some funding from Cal OAS to provide victim services, but we are one of two providers in this particular grant funded area, and we provide a weekly telephonic support group for survivors of scams, and the group focuses on prevention, and also trying to reduce future victimization because often people, you would think that they would learn and it wouldn't happen again, but that doesn't happen. They're often re-targeted and get re-victimized. Part of what we do is process the emotional impact of this scam, help them see what their future potential may be. Each member of our group has noted being suicidal at one point, directly because of the experience of the scam and the loss. Most victims will never get their money back, but from the words of some of our clients who've given us permission to share with you today, they've regained their dignity and strength and are able to move past the trauma. We have members who've lost $40,000 up to those who've lost over a million. Most of them have lost their life savings, and now they're having to figure out how to live again. Moving into different neighborhoods, going on to public benefits, and getting roommates and things like that. One of our group members summed it up the best. This group has helped me recover from the most devastating time in my life. There's a common language and feelings that we share that no one else would understand. They are amazing women of courage, strength, and love. We are all warriors. We need to increase access to programs to not only combat scams, but to intervene in the aftermath and help break the cycle of financial violence. AB 502 is a step in that direction and although I'm not from San Diego, our hope is that, with having more knowledge about this that we'll be able to have this throughout the state. So, your aye vote will help victims become warriors. Thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carol Sewell: Chairman and members, Carol Sewell from the California Commission on Aging and I'm the Vice Chair of the California Elder Justice Coalition. I wanted to address a question in the analysis why we are only looking at San Diego County in this bill. You may not be aware, because most of you are new, this is actually the fourth time we have run this proposal through the Legislature. The first two times were an effort to make the state wide change, because there is no data. There's no program doing this that's collecting data anywhere in the nation. So we can't show the Department of Finance what it's actually going to cost, or what percentage of victims will actually use services. We know that the incidents of financial abuse among elders and dependent adults has increased 23% between 2011 and 2014 and prior to that, in the prior 10 years it had increased 32%. This is an escalating problem and I haven't seen this as said, but I believe this is the fastest growing crime in the nation. I know that if there were another crime of this magnitude that were affecting a different target population, we would have a very different response and it's just heartening that we look at this people into their lives. They should have families who can take care of them. It should be fine. We don't need to worry about them. This is a crime that has the same impact as a violent attack. The mental health impacts can send people careening into nursing homes. Their health can just plummet within several weeks because they are demoralized. They thought they knew the person they trusted, they thought they were making a wise decision and everything that they knew about themselves and about their plans for the rest of their lives is suddenly gone and there's no hope. There's no possibility of restoration. Usually the perpetrators of these crimes are If it's insurance fraud or annuities fraud, they can't take that company to court, they don't have the resources to do that or if it's an internet scam or a phone scam, those people can't be found. Rarely do these cases go to court. So there is nothing for these people. So we would love to see this San Diego pilot go in. We chose San Diego because at the time, the Senator carrying the bill was from San Diego and because San Diego really is very well equipped to just start this service. They don't have to put pieces in place, which will make it much easier and more cost effective to get the program running. So I know we'll have support from this Committee. I hope that your efforts will help us move it beyond this Committee and maybe make something happen for this population. Thank you so much.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Hicks: randy molly hicks with california alliance for retired americans, californians for disability rights inc, in strong support, and thank you. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sean Hoffman: Sean Hoffman with the California District Attorney's Association, also on behalf of San Diego County District Attorney Bonnie Dumanis in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 119, 'end': 133, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Crista Chelemedos: Crista Chelemedos, Senior Advocacy Services, Sonoma County Ombudsman HICAP, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Aaron Lewis: Aaron Lewis for the Consumer Federation of California, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael McLaughlin: michael randy mclaughlin, aarp, we are in support of 502.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Leza Colman: leza michael colman, calcoa, california long-term care ombudsman association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Jones: karen leza jones, long term care ombudsman services, san luis obispo county, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cathy Senderling: cathy karen senderling with the county welfare directors association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gary Passmore: gary, congress of california seniors, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tippy Irwin: Tippy Irwin, Ombudsman Services of San Mateo County, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Flaherty: flaherty, stanislaus county ombudsman program, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katherine Driver: katherine cathy driver, long-term care ombudsman program, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gary Edwards: gary katherine edwards, executive director of advocacy inc of santa cruz and san benito counties, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Wanda Hale: Wanda Hale, Coordinator, Long-Term Care Ombudsman, Santa Clara County, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Marseline: Amy Marseline, long-term, sorry. Sorry, my apologies. Amy Marseline, Field Ombudsman, Santa Clara County Long Term Care Ombudsman Program, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 54, 'end': 67, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Carol Sewell: Carol Sewell from the California Commission on Aging, we are in strong support of this.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Corleone: rebecca gary corleone on behalf of the california retired teachers association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Morgan Carbaholic: Morgan Carbaholic, with the Hernandez Strategy Group on behalf of the California Continuing Care Residence Association, also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Krista Chelameatus: Krista Chelameatus, Senior Advocacy Server Ombudsman High Cap Program, strongly in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joe Rodriguez: Good afternoon, Joe Rodriguez, California State Long Term Care Ombudsman, in strong support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lisa Coleman: Lisa Coleman, Executive Director CALCOA, California Long Term Care Ombudsmen Association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Hicks: Randy Hicks, California Alliance Retired Americans in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Jones: Karen Jones, Long Term Care Ombudsmen Services, San Luis Obispo County, also a member of CALCOA, also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael McLaughlin: Michael McLaughlin, volunteer with AARP, AARP supports 270.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Molly Davies: Molly Davies with Long-term Care Ombudsman Program in Los Angeles in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tippy Irwin: Tippy Irwin, Executive Director of Ombudsman Services in San Mateo County in strong support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bernie Mallet: bernie rebecca mallet taking over as executive director of san mateo ombudsman for san mateo county and i am in support of this program.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Wanda Hale: wanda bernie hale, long-term care ombudsmans santa clara county coordinator, strongly support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Marceline: Amy Marceline, field ombudsman with the Santa Clara County Ombudsman Program, strongly support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tracey Barber: Tracey Barber with the Long Term Care Ombudsman Program in Counties in strong support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicole Howell: Nicole Howell, Executive Director for Ombudsman services of county, strongly in support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katherine Driver: Katherine Driver, mother lode office of Catholic Charities in the mother lode longterm Ombudsman program, strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Flaherty: Melissa Flaherty, Stanislaus County Ombudsman program in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Curt Child: Curt Child, Disability Rights California in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Voepel: I'm a new kid on the block, Randy Voepel, down in San Diego, East County. I just want everyone to know that, as far as I'm concerned, this particular Committee Is by partisan, and unless we are put in charge of the bullet train, I'm working with the Committee Chairman.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Annie Adams: My name is Annie Adams. I'm a resident of California Assembly District 28. I'm a Co-Chair of Women's March Sacramento and a board member and Co-Chair of Women's March California. I serve as the Co-Chair of the Policy Committee. And I serve here as a coach here of the partner's Committee. At women's march we believe that women's rights are human rights and human rights are women's rights and that women should be free to nurture and care for their families however they are formed in healthy environments and free of harm. They should also have access to the democratic process reasonably. There's two issues that I would like to address today. Working on election day affects women in two specific ways. One is that mothers are more often than not the party or the parent that is in charge of getting children to and from daycare and school. It's a large ask for women to have to drop their kids off, go to work and then go back and wait in possibly unpredictable lines to get into the voting booth. My daycare charges $5 every minute that I'm late, and if I do that twice or three times they will kick my children out of that daycare, so that's a risk. It also serves as a barrier to hourly workers, because hourly workers often do not take time off to leave and return to work because they may not get paid, and they may have to stay late to complete the work that needed to be done that day. And this also may interfere with caregiving responsibilities. In addition, those who live in metropolitan areas, such as the Bay Area or Los Angeles, face the cost, time commitment and unpredictability of traffic and public transit, which may serve as a barrier to getting to and from places. I think it's a responsibility of law makers to reduce barriers to voting and make it a civic participation as accessible as possible for women. I strongly support AB 674, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maya Ingram: Maya Ingram, legislative advocate with the ACLU of California, we are pleased to support this bill today because it removes barriers to voting. According to the US census 47% of eligible adults with a family income of less than 20,000 voted in 2012 and just one in four voted in the midterms in 2010. By contrast, those will annual earnings of $100,000 or more turned out of rates at 80% or 60%. AB 674 will help remove barriers to voting for low income individuals who face financial hardships when taking time off to vote. While state law laws Californians to take two paid hours off, the state can do more to remove barriers. This time off is generally given at the start and end of shift, but that is when the longest lines are most frequent at polling places on Election Day. Observing a state holiday on Election Day will enable people to vote at any time of the day Not just before and after work. We respectfully ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Hernandez: Paul Hernandez Deputy Director of California. California supports making Election Day a holiday, because it makes voting more convenient, increases voter turnout, and creates a larger pool of poll workers, and election volunteers. Doing so would allow people to vote at any time of the day, and not just before or after work. This increases access to voting and decreases voting line at often crowded times at the start and end of election day. We see this as a large obstruction, the election day that is held on a Tuesday when most people are at work or at school. An election day holiday would also barely increase the number in diversity of poll workers that are available at hub, polling places to run efficiently. Most fundamentally, election holiday would highlight election as a fundamental part of our democracy and support a culture of voting for the reasons stated before. And now California supports this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Browning: hi, jessica jonah browning, women's march california, and i strongly support this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jonathan Stein: Jonathan Stein, Asian Americans Advancing Justice, California. Very happily in support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Samuel Molina: samuel jessica molina,  very much in strong support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
James Schwab: James Schwab on behalf of Secretary of State Alex Padilla in support. We have made it much easier to register to vote in recent years and since definitely the adoption of the current regulations in law. But outreach for voter education is important because voter registration is not just about getting a voter registered. When candidates go out to new citizen ceremonies, to schools, high schools, college campuses, they're also educating those voters on how to vote, what voting by mail is, what a polling place is. And often times, election officials will even bring out voting machines. So students and and new citizens can understand what a voting machine is and how to use it. So these are important opportunities to educate voters, new voters about democracy and voting and We support the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 45, 'end': 57, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Christopher Carlisle: christopher samuel carlisle with the california association of realtors, the sponsor of this measure. the analysis, quite appropriately, ask why only taxes and bonds? ideally, every local government website would have a button on the main page that with a click would take a member of the public to information about all upcoming ballot measures. you can only imagine the type of opposition that would receive from the opponents. the opposition takes a position that it is unnecessary and overreaching for the legislature to direct them to provide this information, forgetting that they are subdivisions of the state and this is the proper rule of the legislature. taxes and bonds were chosen because these hit voters in the pocketbook. while, for example, the parcel tax on any one home was probably less than $100. the parcel tax on a multi-unit building where it's assessed per door can run into the thousands of dollars. property owners need as much warning as possible with regard to the potential increases in their property tax bill. and so let's let them know about these things as soon as possible. we ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jolena Voorhis: Mr. Chair and members. Jolena Voorhis on behalf of the Urban Counties of California, also here representing the California State Association of Counties, unfortunately in the opposition category. The home page requirements, we believe the posting of the specific notices aren't necessary. The sponsors have indicated that they just want something that's easily attainable as far as what's upcoming in our elections. I went back to my office after that meeting and I googled Sacramento county elections. The first website that came up is the Sacramento county Department of elections. So you can find out any information. I even googled Modot county. In a first website that came up. So I don't think it's a difficult thing to find out what's going on in your local county elections. It's really easy to find that on all of their websites. And when there's a major election, I know, because at least for my urban counties, I always go to the county website and look. They usually have a homepage on the website. So we just don't think that's necessary. In addition there's the seven day requirement in the bill that says as soon as the county adopts the initiative or a bond issuance they must post that within seven days. The reason why we don't like that provision is because that election may not be coming for months or maybe it's next year. It doesn't make sense to post it immediately if it's not right in front of the voters. It also takes away hot topics that that county may be working on whether it's homelessness or the economy or transportation. This removes the ability for our counties to provide information to their members. In addition, we believe the county news letter is a specific overreach. There's never been a bill in my recollection that has asked counties specifically to put something in their county news letter. Also, counties have multiple newsletters, individual supervisors have newsletters, each department generally has a newsletter. It's just really, we think, overreach in the state mandate and for those reasons, we are opposed.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Trudy Schafer: Mr. Chair and Members, I'm Trudy Schafer representing the League of Women Voters of California. And I apologize, our legislation Committee only recently a couple of days ago came to a decision about the bill. And that's why you didn't get a letter from us in advance. But as strong sponsors of Proposition 11 on which this model of diverse membership of an independent Commission, strong standards for drawing lines and a very robust public input process. Because of those elements, we think that this is an excellent way to go and urge your support.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julia Devores: mr. chair and members, julia on behalf of the urban counties of california also here representing the california state association of counties in opposition. we do believe that this goes contrary to the keyhole bill which we supported. and removes the local control in the process of that is already working at the county level. so for that reason, we're opposed to the bill, thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jonathan Stein: yes, good morning. my name is jonathan. i'm the head of the voting rights program at asian americans advancing justice in san francisco, we're a sponsor of ab 918. the bill dramatically strengthens the language assistance that immigrant and limited english californians receive during voting, using a series of simple, proven, cost-effective best practices that are already used in many counties around the state. for many, for hundreds of thousands of californians, as the member just mentioned, their lifeline to voting is something called a translator facsimile ballot. that is required by state law to be posted on polling place walls. it's simply inadequate to provide language assistance to voters. one in, we provide, we conducted a poll monitoring effort in 2016 that went to 1,300 polling places around the state. one in four facsimile ballots was not posted at all. and hundreds of polling places, there was no signage indicating that a facsimile was there. poll workers are often not trained on facsimile ballots and their purpose and so on. ab 918 uses a collection of simple steps to fix all of these problems. it makes facsimiles available for use while casting a private vote, so you don't have to stand at a wall in order to use it. it requires poll worker training of facsimiles, it requires signage about facsimiles, and allows for the first time, a vote by mail voters to access a facsimile before election day. the rest of the nation is marching voting rights backwards. we urge you to support ab 918 so california can show the nation what it looks like to move them forward. thank you.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Samuel Molina: Good morning, everyone. Samuel Molina, California State Director of ... Here in support of AB 918. As elected leaders or leaders within our community, we must do all that we can to ensure that our voices of our community are uplifted and represented. Especially when it comes time to vote. That is why me and...both is happy to support AB 918, California's Voting for All Act. By making translated copies of the facsimile ballots more visible and accessible to in-person voters, and providing these translated facsimile ballots to vote by-mail voters for the first time, AB 918 makes California elections much more accessible to our communities. Spanish-speaking voters, or those whose primary language is not English, continue to face barriers in the democratic process. In 29 counties the translated facsimile ballots are Spanish-speaking where there's only lifeline to an accessible election. This includes 91,000 Spanish speakers in Sonoma County, 65,000 Spanish speakers in Solano County, 40,000 Spanish speakers in Yolo County, and 36,000 Spanish speakers in San Luis Obispo County. The need for language assistance in a Latino community is real. Last year for example in July of 2016 I was registering voters in Madera County when a Spanish speaking elderly Latino man approached our booth. This man had his vote by mail ballot in his hands and had asked us to help him complete his ballot. We informed the man that unfortunately we were unable to assist him because the election already taken place in June. The man was understanding and upset, because he had already missed his opportunity to vote. By providing voters, including vote by mail voters, with more information in their languages, we enable them to take advantage of their fundamental right to vote. I am certain that this man was not the only Californian who did not understand how to complete their ballot. We need to take action to help people like him and make sure no one is disenfranchised because they cannot understand their ballot. We urge your support.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lee Lawrence: lee christopher lawrence league of women voters of california, in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Trent Lange: mr chair, members, first trent lee lange, president of the california clean money campaign would like to really thank the majority leader for bringing forth this important bill. california clean money campaign is a non profit, non partisan organization representing 150,000 californians who care deeply about the issues of money in politics and elections. and one of the most common questions that we get from our members and supporters is, where can i find out who my city council member is, my supervisor, my board members? and we can tell them where to go to look up their assembly member or their senator on the legislative website but there's not good place to look it up any place else. you can google the san mateo city council or, and it will usually show a list of those city council members. but because they're in districts it's not easy for people to know exactly which one of their council members is, what the contact information is, and so forth. so having all this information in one consistent place on the secretary of state website would be greatly enabling people to know who their legislative officials are, elective officials are, and how to contact them. big improvement and california, we're the home of the silicon valley we should have this sort of positive change. so we respectfully request your aye vote.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
James Schwab: James Schwab on behalf of Secretary of State Alex Padilla. I want to first thank the author for working with our office on the bill. Unfortunately, we still remain opposed unless amended. As the author stated, there's a line in the bill that says we may seek an outside vendor to complete the project. It's just unusual language, we already have full discretion to procure services and products to complete legislative requirements or our own priorities. And it just muddies the water in terms of that procurement from outside versus internal projects. And we've had success over the past couple years on completing projects with our own staff. Online voter registration was completed by our own staff. Our agency's first app, which has the find your polling place lookup tool, the quick guide to props, all of that was developed in house by our own staff. And indeed, it would probably be the most efficient effective way to meet the requirements of the bill. So we'll remain opposed until that line is removed from the bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 45, 'end': 57, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
David Jefferson: Assemblyman, I'm David Jefferson. I'm a computer scientist from Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, although I'm not speaking for my employer. I'm also a member of the Board of Directors of Verified Voting, and of the California Voter Foundation and have served as a technical advisor on technology issues to the last five Secretaries of State of California, prior to the current one. And Internet voting and email voting have been studied many times in the last 20 years, and email voting, which I would consider this bill to be, at least before the amendment that you just mentioned, is a form of Internet voting. And it's been studied so many times, the security community of the United States is in, essentially, unanimous agreement that the transmission of voted ballots over the Internet is an extreme danger.  It's a national security issue and we really time and again have recommended against it. One of the problems with it is, of course, that when you transmit a ballot electronically, you don't have a hard copy record of the original voters intent, so there's no way to meaningfully audit ballots that are transmitted that way. But the thing that I'm even more concerned about is that of all of the forms of Internet voting, all of which are dangerous, email voting is I'm afraid the most dangerous.  Not all forms of Internet voting are created equal. I have provided for the Committee a letter from Verified Voting describing its position. I've also given the sergeant a letter from myself describing all of the technical concerns that we have, security concerns with Internet voting, and with email voting in particular, because email is not encrypted for transmission. It's transmitted essentially in the clear. Email is relayed from point to point several times between the voter and the county. There's no way to avoid that, it's transmitted in the clear. Anyone who controls one of those, any IT person who controls one of those intermediate points can read your ballot, can modify your ballot, can drop your ballot. Email is just extremely dangerous. Email is 40 years old. It was designed long before the technology, the security technologies that we have in other parts of the Internet today.  I'm especially concerned about email now because it's a national security issue. National enemies of the United States have demonstrated the capability and willingness to hack our email and in an election context, certainly the Russians in the current most recent election, but before that the North Koreans and basically every major power, foreign and domestic, have the capability to hack email. We just do not want ballots, I think, to be subject to that. We want to minimize, not encourage, the electronic transmission of ballots. Now I do understand and I appreciate the concern about making voting easier here for overseas and military voters. And I, and Verified Voting and other colleagues that I have worked with over the last 20 years, have done a lot and worked a lot on that point. And I would like, I'd be more than happy to In fact, I would love to talk to Assemblyman Obernolte and others about other ways to make it easier to reduce barriers for overseas and military voters. But I just think that encouraging them to have a two step, to introduce an email step into voting is an extreme danger and California shouldn't be going in that direction.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 3101, 'end': 3110, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jim Soper: My name is Jim Soper, I am a Co-Chair of the Voting Rights Task Force. We oppose the previous version, we oppose this version. I'm also a Senior Software Consultant, I know how to program these things. And I'm author of countedascast.org and countedascast.com, which I've been involved with elections for 12 years now. I'll be a little briefer than I even planned on. But these emails are travelling some of them through hostile territory. You can't control where an email goes over the internet. It can go through China, it can go through Russia, probably not North Korea but other places. And unencrypted email so that people understand, can be automatically photoshopped, en route or simply blocked and it's easy to identify that this is going to Los Angeles County so it's vulnerable. I've sent in a message to all of the members here going into more detail. I lived 17 years in Europe, I know all too well the difficulties of voting from overseas. When I first started to vote it was a lot harder than it is today. I could vote now, somebody living overseas, can 60 days ahead of time, although what the Committee should make sure that this actually happens, 60 days ahead of time, go to the county website or the Secretary of State's website, download a copy of the ballot blank, print it out, check it, fill it out, put it in an envelope and send it in. They've got 60 days to do that, I know how hard it is to vote from overseas. I also understand the risks of sending voter ballots through the Internet. To me it is not worth the risk to do this when we have very good alternatives, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
James Schwab: James Schwab on behalf of the Secretary of State, Alex Padilla. We don't have a position on the current version or the amendments accepted today. We were opposed to the original version of the bill. But I will say that, in our position, we try to balance security and accessibility. They're not mutually exclusive, you can have both and if you look at November 2016, roughly 20% of military and overseas voters returned their ballot by fax. And it's my understanding that the same security concerns we have about email, you can apply to faxes as well. And so on the flip side of that, the reason we had a confidence in last year's election results was because we know that voting machines and vote tabulators are not connected to the Internet. The one exception in that process is the return of voted ballots by fax from military and overseas voters. So we make an exception for the accessibility for military and overseas voters. And I think as we move forward on the bill, continue to work with the author, we want to figure out how to strike that balance to continue to provide convenience and more options for military and overseas voters while striking the security measures that make sure we have confidence and continue to have confidence in our elections, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 50, 'end': 62, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Meg Homburg: meg, i'm a long time member of the voting rights task force. i have a couple of additional points to add, is that allowed?
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Tamm: Good morning, my name is Richard Tamm. I'm also a Co-Chair of the Voting Rights Task Force, but I'm also Treasurer of the Wellstone Democratic Renewal Club. The analysis says the Wellstone Club was opposed to the prior version. If I talk to them they would also be opposed to this version because of the danger with the security of email voting, thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Natalie Kofel: thank you, good morning, my name is natalie trent kofel and i am here representing the state building and construction trades council. you've heard from assembly member medina about what ab 890 does and why it is so vitally important. i would like to talk to you about what ab 890 does not do. it does not rewrite the california constitution. it does not violate the existing constitution. and it does not outlaw all initiatives. in fact, most initiatives would not actually be affected by ab 890 because they would not be considered projects under ceqa. the term project is well defined under existing law and the examples that opponents of this bill have put forward most certainly would not be considered projects under ceqa. while ceqa requires agencies to consider indirect environmental impact, those impacts must be reasonably forseeable, and they cannot be speculative. in addition, ceqa is only concerned with physical impacts to the environment, it is not concerned with economic or social impacts. that is why you would not see an environmental impact report for a minimum wage ordinance, for example. additionally ceqa has numerous exceptions that would keep certain projects, or certain initiatives from being considered projects. that includes exemptions for government fiscal activities, and for environmentally beneficial projects. so you would not see a soda tax analyzed in a ceqa document. the legislature has the constitutional authority to limit the initiative process when there's a matter of statewide concern. and the legislature has already declared that the environment is a matter of statewide concern in public resources code section 21000. accordingly because this is a matter of statewide concern, the legislature could actually preempt all local legislation on this matter. or it could exclusively delegate to local governments to legislate on this matter. ab 890 does neither, it actually preserves the local initiative process to the greatest extent possible, while delegating authority to local agencies when there is a potentially significant environmental impact. so those lead agencies can comply with their substantive mandate under ceqa and impose mitigation and consider feasible alternatives thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 169, 'end': 175, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kyle Jones: good morning chair and committee members. jones with sierra club california in strong support ab 890. i think assembly member medina spoke to what, you know, can happen with regards to environmental impacts, and i think it's best served in natural resources. i did want to speak to the other side of ceqa which is making sure that the public's aware and informed of the impacts that are happening around them. and the ir is not just about mitigation, it's making sure that when something is going in next door, down the street, in the town over that you're aware that your air quality may decrease, your water quality may have impacts. and for the public have a forum to discuss those impacts and find opportunities to mitigate them. with the initiative process that we have now, and the petition process. you're only required to gather numerous signatures which is a low bar to get a project forward, especially since it's tied to a gubernatorial election, and not a presidential election. i think this committee's seen numerous bills reflecting potential changes to those issues. so, we think with that low bar, you're not doing a service to the community. you're instead allowing for projects that would have potential large environmental impacts like the one in moreno valley, to sneak through undetected and cause harm to community. and i would just also mention that while initiative process works within a jurisdiction, environmental impacts are not limited to those jurisdictions. so, throughout the state, we have a patchwork of cities and counties that don't really conform to watersheds or air quality regions, and that's all fine. but, the problem is that if you have a smaller city that wants a project in with a friendly city council, they can then bypass this initiative process and those impacts can be felt region wide. and so for that reason, we think that there needs to be a fix for this loophole. we think ab 890 is that fix, and we urge your aye vote today, thank you.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 126, 'end': 132, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cesar Diaz: Thank you, Mr. Chair and members. Cesar Diaz, on behalf of the State Building and Construction Trades Council. We're proud to work with Assemblymember Medina on this important measure. It's about disclosure and accountability and making sure that the initiative process tracks with environmental protections. Those issues are a matter of statewide concern. Long standing case law allows, and the constitution allows the Legislature to look at these issues and track them, so that the initiative process doesn't damage or unnecessarily, another set of laws that are meant to protect communities at large. So, we're proud to work on this bill, and ask for your support, thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 151, 'end': 157, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Caitlin Vega: mr. chair and members, caitlin natalie vega with california labor federation, also here in support. this is an issue that the state fed has been concerned about for several years. our members rely on the public process to be able to advocate for themselves, for their communities, and we think that anything that takes away that ability to be part of a public process, to have your voice heard, and to have the ability to get mitigation, is a bad thing for democracy, and a bad thing for workers. so we're here in strong support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Hassins: Hi, my name's Michelle Hassins with the Center for Community Action and Environmental Justice based in the Jurupa Valley and we are here in strong support. The reason that we're so proud to work with with Assemblymember Medina on this is that small jurisdictional boundaries do not confine air pollution. They do not confine water contamination, and they do not confine the impacts of large projects. In our district, in our region, we were faced with the World Logistics Center, a warehouse that was 700 football fields and that was passed in one small jurisdiction, that had vast regional consequences and that used a democratic process. That should be available to citizens but was usurped by developers. And we're really concerned about the immense geographical impacts and air quality impacts and water impacts this has in our region, and that these developers have been able to use this loophole. We believe strongly in democratic processes, but we also believe strongly in the protections that CEQA grants us, and we urge your strong support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 220, 'end': 226, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cassie Gilson: Good morning, Mr. Chair and members. Cassie Gilson on behalf of the California Building Industry Association, respectfully in opposition to the bill. As noted in the analysis, this bill is a significant departure from existing local initiative procedures developed by this Legislature, and it enacts a massive shift of power away from the local electorate to local elected officials. And it does this by barring virtually all local initiatives from going to the ballot. And instead, requires them to be reviewed under CEQA, and their fate determined by the elected officials at the local government level. It does this by amending the definition of project under CEQA. So it actually goes into the CEQA statute, takes the definition of project and adds initiative to that, and then bars any initiatives from going to the ballot that result in a direct physical change in the environment or a reasonably foreseeable indirect change in the environment. I'm a CEQA lawyer, not an elections person, but I suspect it would be quite difficult to find a local planning department that's willing to ensure that an initiative proposal will not result in a reasonably foreseeable indirect impact in the environment, given the way the CEQA law looks at indirect impacts today. The kinds of initiatives that we read this measure to bar include Ventura County's open space and Aglian preservation, measure E from last November, Richmond's measure L which would establish rent control. LA's measure JJJ, which imposed minimum affordable housing requirements, and the idea of being, we talked a little bit like would a minimum wage increase initiative, trigger this bill? If you raise the minimum wage in your community, then you have people coming to the community to get jobs, there's different traffic patterns. Under CEQA today, we look at all of those things. If these measures were done by legislation at the local level, you would do a CEQA initiative around them. And probably one of the clearest examples of this is the discussion we've been having statewide about plastic bag bans and whether you think well, that shouldn't trigger CEQA. But of course, there's been great debate about it, and it does. Even those initiatives where a planner's willing to say, this does not result in an indirect change in the environment are going to end up being held up by litigation because we're talking about this in the initiative context. People go to initiatives because proposals are controversial, and our experience and CEQA is that controversial projects get litigated. So, even a project that the planners say, okay, this can go to the ballot, the likelihood is that someone's going to sue at that time. So then that proposal is caught up in litigation for 6 months, 12 months, 18 months. I mean depending on the proposal, who knows whether it's right at that time when that litigation is concluded and it could actually go to the ballot. Fundamentally, AB 890 is also unconstitutional. So, not surprisingly, the Constitution really jealously guards a citizen's right to initiative. And, it says that there's a very narrow category of things in which this Legislature can designate local governments to be their sole agent, and those are on issues of statewide importance. Local land use is fundamentally not an issue of statewide importance. To speak to the concern that the author and the proponents raise, which i think is legitimate, which is that if you have, for the logistic center, that trucks are coming in. And obviously, those emissions don't end at the jurisdictional boundaries. I think a court would find that that's why the state has the Clean Air Act. And the purpose of California's suite of environmental laws, the Clean Air Act, the Clean Water Act, other things, are to require analysis and mitigation and permits for projects regardless of how they're approved. That would certainly be the case here. Finally, the implication of 890 is that there would be no environmental mitigation required of projects that are approved by local initiative. And of course that's not the case again, because we have a suite of world renowned environmental laws. Endangered species, clean water, clean air hazards, all of those permits would need to be pulled, and all of their mitigation obligations would need to be complied with. So for those reasons, we respectfully oppose. Thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 663, 'end': 667, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dean Hutchins: good morning chair members, dean caitlin hutchins with the league of california cities regrettably here an opposition. while well intended this not weakens cities authority over local land use matters, it also takes away the voice of the very residents were directly impacted such measures. the land use initiative process is an opportunity for residence of a community to directly voice their opinions on what projects they do and do not want in there communities. it is also an opportunity for supporters and opponents to share the benefits and drawbacks of a proposed project. directly based in the voting materials by way of arguments and rebuttals. as my colleague mentioned, ab 890 is a significant departure from current law, as it requires a legislative body to exercise authority to determine whether a proposed initiative is suitable for the ballot, and transfers power to the state over the local land use and initiative process. moreover, our city clerks, city attorneys, and city planners all have expressed multiple concerns with this measure, such as ensuring elections are conducted in a timely manner, workload concerns around extensive and unnecessary ceqa reviews, as well as the cost and time associated with well documented and protracted ceqa litigation from stakeholders who either support or oppose a potential land use project. ab 890 fails to recognize that a stringent environmental review is a well established part of the local land use permitting process. if there are shortcomings in existing law, and practice relevant to environmental review. the permitting process should be the focus around this measure. and not a process that undermines local governments and public engagement. and finally, at the time, the legislature and the administration publically advocates for and has placed a significant focus on addressing the states housing and homelessness crisis. ab 890 seems to run counterintuitive to this important policy objective with an unprecedented expansion of local elections duties, as well as increased workloads to every department that overseas land use planning and environmental reviews. increasing staff costs and work time. for those reasons we oppose.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 49, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cara Martinson: good morning mr. chair. those of the committee. my name is cara, i'm here on behalf of the california state association of counties today, csac. regrettably also in opposition. we do understand the intent of the bill and the desire for increase transparency in additional environmental review and we appreciate i think the author's statements that they would like to work with us but we just don't really see how we can reconcile the process and that's really our biggest concern with the bill. it really put our planning department and elections officials square in the middle of our constitutional issues determining whether or not a measure can go on the ballot not based on procedural statewide impacts, but based on the content of that measure, and that's very troublesome to us. it would require us to make that determination if a ballot measure is subject to ceqa by a standard that's not currently in ceqa if a measure has a reasonable, forseeable, indirect or direct physical change to the environment not a significant impact. so this is also very troublesome to us and not only as my colleague mentioned this threshold quite broad, and not in ceqa. we feel that planning departments, by being put in this position, would be conceivably forced to say that everything has an indirect forseeable impact on the environment, just to avoid challenge. and also, this measure has tremendous cost impacts requiring us to conduct this environmental review within the confines of the elections timelines. and we see this bill really creating two classes of initiatives, those that can go to the ballot and those that are forced onto local governments to make those decisions and for those reasons, we remain in opposition. thank you.
[{'start': 59, 'end': 63, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ellie Coleridge: good morning, ellie with the california association of realtors, also in opposition. thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dean Hutchins: good morning members, dean dean hutchins with league of california cities, also here on behalf of special district counties. we actually do not, we no longer have an opposed position based on the amendments accepted by the author. i want to thank the author for working with the committee and accepting those amendments, but should those amendments come in print, we would be removing our opposition. thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 40, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Laura Steven: Good morning Mr. Chairman, and Members of the Committee. Thank you for allowing me to testify today. My name is Laura Steven, I'm the Vice President of legislation for the California Political Treasurers Association. We are the sponsors of this bill. The California Political Treasurers Association represents 90% of the treasures who do all the campaign and lobbying disclosure reports in California. We support Assembly Bill 895 for many reasons. The existing law requires most campaign filers to both electronically and paper-file. We believe that eliminating the paper filings will not only be more efficient and more productive, we also believe it will save a lot of time and paper resources. My firm files campaign statements and with those filings, we use over 120 reams of paper per semi annual filing. This bill will not only save the time for the treasures who prepare these reports, but for secretary of states office who has full time staff who just stamps and files these same paper reports. We have witnessed the streamline in lobbying disclosure reporting since the paperless filing requirement went into effect in the year 2000. We also have witnessed the ease in paperless filing with county and city agencies that have already adopted codes to eliminate the paper filings. I want to thank you, Assembly Member Quirk, for authoring this bill, and I'd be happy to answer any questions.
[{'start': 112, 'end': 124, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1328, 'end': 1333, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
David Montgomery: Good morning Mr. Chairman, Members of the Committee. My name is David Montgomery, and I'm President of Net File, the largest provider of campaign and lobbyist disclosure software in California.  Net File supports AB 895. Revising the law to allow state campaign filers to eliminate their paper filing requirement makes a lot of sense. Net File provides an electronic filing system directly comparable to the secretary state's Cal Access System to cities and counties across California. Of the 66 cities and counties currently using Net File for campaign e-filing, all of those jurisdictions allow filers to e-file instead of paper file. Some of those jurisdictions do not allow any paper filing or what so ever. When an agency accepts both paper and electronic filings, it creates a lot of wasted effort. The agency is required to manage their paper filings as one separate filing system and their electronic filing to a separate electronic filing system. On a periodic basis, agency staff needs to reconcile those two different filing systems to make sure that the content of the filing for paper documents matches the content of the electronic documents, and reconciling that both copies are available for the public to review. That's a lot of duplicated effort. Removing the paper filing requirement will also reduce the waste associated with paper filing. Net File in this last semi annual period has helped filers submit documents to Secretary of State of 12,000 pages in length. Duplicating and storage of large document is a ridiculous waste of resources. Especially when no same member of the public would actually want to physically acquire a 12,000-page document for manual review when a Google-type transaction search or a PDF document can be scanned on a tablet or desktop computer. It's much more convenient. I would like to thank Assembly Member Quirk for authoring this bill and I'd be happy to answer any questions.
[{'start': 64, 'end': 80, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1859, 'end': 1864, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
James Schwab: James Schwab on behalf of Secretary of State Alex Pedia. With the author agreeing to take our suggested amendments, we appreciate that and we are in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 45, 'end': 55, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Christopher Castrium: thank you, mr. chair, christopher jonah castrium, on behalf of the sacramento county board of supervisors in support.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christopher Castrium: thank you mr. chair, christopher, on behalf of the sonoma board of supervisors and the city of santa monica in support.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Skippa: good morning, mr. chair and members of the committee. mike christopher skippa, representing alcohol justice and the california alcohol policy alliance. we are opposed to this bill, we believe the cost as designated in the analysis are but a tip of the iceberg. there will be great additional costs to the districts and to areas outside of the districts that might choose to keep a bar open until 4 am. thank you. there will be great additional costs to the districts and to areas outside of the districts that might choose to keep a bar open until 4 am. thank you.
[{'start': 54, 'end': 77, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Lovell: John Lovell, California College and University, Police Chiefs Association. We believe that the fiscal implications of the bill are significant, and we are opposed to the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Faith Lane: lane with california advocates on behalf of the california association of joint power authorities in support.
[]
Christopher Castrium: castrium, on behalf of the california faculty association in support.
[]
Coby Pizzotti: mr. chair and senators, coby mike pizzotti with the california association of psychiatric technicians. our members currently treat individuals with severe mental health problems in the community. and we believe that the state has an obligation to serve it's veterans that fought to protect our country. by providing more mental health services in our veterans homes. this bill simply allows calvet's to develop a plan to deliver more specialized care for those individuals. in our vets homes, that need more severe mental and behavioral health treatment. with that, we ask for your support.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Murphy: good morning, mr. chair, murphy on behalf of the university of california rising today in strong opposition to sb 574. this bill completely reconfigures our low bidding procedures for contracted staff. we've identified for your committee in excess of $88 million. in costs, primarily for benefits costs and salary costs associated with the change. again, we're in strong opposition. thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ed Barrons: ed coby barrons on behalf of the los angeles county board of supervisors, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Christopher Castrium: Christopher Castrium on behalf of the California Academy of Child and Adolescent's Psychiatry in support of 395 and 394, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cynthia Castillo: cynthia ed castillo with the faculty association of california community colleges, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christopher Kastree: Christopher Kastree on behalf of the California Faculty Association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Craig DeLuz: Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee, once again, Craig DeLuz with the Firearms Policy Coalition as well as the California Association of Federal Firearms Licensees. One of our major concerns has to do with we believe that, at least in terms of the analysis, the compliance standards, we believe, in terms of putting together the regulations and enforcing compliance, are severely understated. If one actually goes to the CCNRs that specifically cover the idea, for example, of safes, you'll notice there is no mention of vaults. And vaults are actually rated differently than safes are. And we note that because right now, there is no mechanism, there are no CCNRs that address that particular item. Plus, because they are rated differently, one could potentially assume that you would need to send inspectors out to every single FFL in order to inspect each and every individual safe, in order to make sure that it meets the compliance that is listed here. In addition, when it comes to the ballards, how are we going to determine whether or not these ballards actually fit these specific standards? We believe that this is a very drastic measure, that's going to put significant costs on retailers. It's going to cost significant tax revenue to the State of California, and therefore we oppose this measure.
[{'start': 55, 'end': 66, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Lovell: John Lovell, on behalf of the Association for Los Angeles Deputy Sheriffs, the Association of Deputy District Attorneys, California Association of Code Enforcement officers, California College and University Police Chiefs Association, California Narcotic Officers Association of the Los Angeles County Professional Peace Officers Association, Los Angeles Police Protective League, and the Riverside Chairs Association. We're all in support of this bill, utility workers are on the front lines in some very highly tense situations, this is an appropriate bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gil Topete: Good morning, Senators, Gil Topete with the California Municipal Utilities Association, representing both electrical and water municipal utility service providers, in support of the bill.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Elisha Priga: Elisha Priga, with SoCal Gas and San Diego Gas and Electric, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Harris: thank you, mr. chairman, richard from the norseman firm on behalf of the padre dam municipal water district. it's a proud financial partner with the conservancy to the, i just want in support of this measure.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Lynch: good morning, danielle cynthia lynch on behalf of the urban corps san diego, county, in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kurt Blackburn: Kurt Blackburn of Ellison Wilson Advocacy on behalf of the City of Santee in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rico Mastrodonato: Rico Mastrodonato, with the Trust for Public Land in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jack Gualco: good morning, mr. chair and members, gualco with the gualco group on behalf of the imperial irrigation district, fully in support of senator hueso's measure. given the cutoff of return water to the salton sea at the end of 2017, moving this bill along as well as taking action to the state water resources control board is absolutely imperative. so we commend the senator, and we respectfully urge your aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 141, 'end': 146, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Juan Altamirano: Juan Altamirano on behalf of Audubon California, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Audrey Durfor: durfor on behalf of the san diego county water authority, in support and we thank the senator for his leadership in advancing meaningful restoration of the salton sea.
[]
Rico Mastrodonato: Rico Mastrodonato with the Trust for Public Land, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert Sumner: yes, robert danielle sumner with the california department of justice here as sponsor and to answer any questions.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Lovell: John Lovell with the California Association of Code Enforcement Officers, we're in support of this good sense bill as Senator Monning is pointed out. The ramifications of lead exposure are critical and permanent. This is a very important good sense bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 126, 'end': 133, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Teresa Cooke: Morning Chair and members, Teresa Cooke on behalf of the County of Alameda in strong support.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: Thank you Mr. Chair, members, Ignacio Hernandez on behalf of the California attorney's for Criminal Justice Statewide Association of Criminal Defense Attorneys. We are co-sponsor of the measure. Just very briefly creating the special master for these hearings we think will bring not only expediency but also unique expertise to oversee these claims. Oftentimes if someone has not secured a claim of factual innocence, they have to almost relitigate their case in front of the board. And think it's important to have a special mouse service especially when you consider these individuals have spent a substantial amount of time wrongfully imprisoned in California prisons and are not afforded an attorney. They have to pay out of pocket or find other ways to have legal counsel during these hearings. This is a way we think that these claims will be settled much more quickly and more appropriately. I'm going to ask for your support once it's considered for suspense.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Afrack Vargas: thank you mr chair. afrack, with the san manuel band of mission indians, in support. also the rincon band of luiseno indians, and the tule river tribe out of porterville.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Lupina: morning, michelle robert lupina, i'm an attorney for the hoopa valley tribe, the potter valley tribe, and the dry creek rancheria. they greatly support this bill. they feel it will help the most impoverished members of their tribes. and we ask you for an aye vote.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Nelson: thank you mr. chairman, committee members. it's a pleasure to be here and i'm jessica jonah nelson representing golden state power cooperative, the other three electric cooperatives in the state. i urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 78, 'end': 98, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Miller: Hi, Jennifer Miller, Anza Electric Cooperative. And I, yes, I support it, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Madeline Stanow: Hi, thank you. My name is Madeline Stanow, and I'm an attorney at the Center on Race, Poverty, and the Environment in Oakland and Delano, California. I'm here to urge your support for AB 523, which ensures low-income and disadvantaged communities overburdened by pollution can participate in the state's clean energy programs. In California our transition to clean energy is already underway, leading the globe with aggressive renewable standards, technological innovations and is first in the nation for renewable energy jobs. However, current data suggest not all of our state's residents are participating fully in these programs. In December of 2016, the Energy Commission adopted the SB 350 barrier study, which identified many obstacles for low income and disadvantaged communities to participating in the state's clean energy, efficiency, and weatherization programs. The report found these communities face many barriers, including low home ownership rates, insufficient access to capital, financial obstacles for small businesses, and so on. These communities also endure greater health risks and pay additional healthcare costs due to their higher exposure to fossil fuel-linked pollution. AB 523 works to build justice into our energy transition by ensuring at least 25% of the EPIC Fund goes to support projects in disadvantaged communities and 10% to low-income households. In 2015, only 14% of these funds went toward these projects even though they constitute 25% of the state's population and pay into the fund as rate payers. The Energy Commission itself recommended it dedicate more funding to these communities. It is important that we make this recommendation a binding commitment for the state. EPIC is an innovation fund, planting the seeds for a healthier and more efficient California. We must commit to including our state's most vulnerable residents in this essential planning and implementation phase. That is why AB 523 is so important and I respectfully urge your aye vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laiseng Saechao: Laiseng Saechao, Asian Pacific Environmental Network in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Aguilera: amy jessica aguilera with poder sf also in support
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 26, 'end': 34, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kim Shergar: shergar on behalf of environmental defense fund, in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Finn: Madam Chair, I'm Karen Finn with the Department of Finance. Senate Bill 132's before you today. It appropriates $971 million for various transportation projects that were agreed to with legislative leaders and administration in connection with SB1. Of that 971, it also includes 50 million to the Air Resources Board. For an advance implementation of zero emission heavy duty vehicles at freight facilities. In addition, the bill also appropriates approximately 5.1 million funding for collective bargaining agreements that were reached this spring with bargaining unit 16, which is for physicians and dentists. We're here to answer any questions, if you have any.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Colo: Mark Colo, Department of Finance. It's understanding that these projects are all, they've been discussed. I don't believe the CTC has necessarily passed these in part of their programming exercises, but these are long standing issues, long standing projects.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Lang: good afternoon, madam chair and members. karen on behalf of stanislaus county supervisor, vito chiesa, who's the chair of the san joaquin rail authority, specifically in support of the ace provisions. thank you so much.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 90, 'end': 101, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jean Hurst: Madam Chair, members, Jean Hurst here today on behalf of the Riverside County Board of Supervisors, here in support of the provisions that provide investments in the region, thank you so much.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Wayne Nastri: Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair, good afternoon Committee Members. My name is Wayne Nastri, I'm the Executive Officer of the South Coast Air Quality Management District. AB 1132 seeks to give the air pollution control districts authority similar to what other environmental agencies already have, in order to remedy imminent and substantial endangerments to the health or the environment. This bill is urgently needed to correct the type of situation that we recently encountered in Paramount where a chrome anodizing facility continued to emit high levels of hexavalent chromium even after we had identified the danger to the public. This bill also provides a due process by requiring a prompt hearing and it would require the air pollution control officer to issue a temporary order for abatement. Requiring a source to cease specific operations and I want to site that specific because there's some concern that this could cause an entire facility to shut down. Often times what we found is that there are specific operations, specific processes that cause unit or substantial endangerment. And this would take place before a full hearing before the hearing board. Currently, there are districts have to wait at least 15 days before hearing can begin. And hearing may continue over weeks or months before any order can be issued to protect the public. In contrast, the US Environmental Protection Agency, the State Water Resources Control Board, and the Department of Toxic Substances Control all have this authority. And importantly, the Clean Air Act requires that implementing agencies of the Clean Air Act have similar authority to that granted to EPA. So, in fact, this bill is necessary to correct a deficiency. And the federally acquired state implementation plan for all districts. At the same time the bill protects due process by requiring the district to notify the violator and provide an explanation of the basis for the accusation and a set hearing before the hearing board as soon as possible, but within 30 days of receiving notice. It's important to realized that this is the tool of last resort, there'll have been constant communications and discussions with the facility in question and so.
[{'start': 80, 'end': 92, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Magavern: Members, Bill Magavern with the Coalition for Clean Air and also speaking for groups in Los Angeles that could not be here today: Delano Action Committee, Coalition for a Safe Environment, The NAACP of San Pedro and Wilmington, California safe schools and the Mothers of East LA. All in support. You've heard the rationale, I'll just add that we've had communities being endangered by lead, arsenic, hexavalent chromium. Let's give the air districts the same tools that similar environmental agencies have. So that they can protect our communities when they're facing imminent endangerment. Thank you.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tom Addison: Tom Addison on behalf of Legislative Committee at the Bay Area Air District. In support this bill corrects a fundamental imbalance that exist today in statute.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Mokum: Of the Committee, Amy Mokum on behalf of the California Chamber of Commerce. We currently are opposed to the bill as written. I want to acknowledge the fact that we've had conversations with the author's office. We understand that she wants to be very specific about how this issue is dealt with and how you do deal with these violators. But we do have concerns regarding the due process. When you come out immediately and you do shut down a facility without any specific process in place besides the shut down of that and you basically designated them as being guilty until proven innocent. And I think what we want to do is ensure that when this does happen, when there is a serious violation, that there is a process in place where the facility is notified and the facility has a chance to rectify the problem. That they're not doing this intentionally. That they are doing this to ensure that they are protecting the communities around them and we are working together to come up with some sort of amendments and some suggestions that we can provide to the author's office to work on this to ensure that there is some sort of a process in place where we can have rather than this informal sort of dialogue to put something more structured in place where there is a start time to when this process begins and that there's some sort of stipulation that's put into place with these facilities, so that they have the opportunity to respond to the accusations and to rectify this and to proceed forward and in hopes that this can be done in a very timely manner where it is not delaying the process, but in fact will be put into place immediately, and have something time certain on the end. So we do look forward to working with the author's office to present them with some amendments and hopefully we can work forward to come to some sort of an agreement. Thank you. Thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Doug Subers: thank you mr. chair and members. doug jonah subers on behalf of the western states petroleum association. we'd like to thank the author for continuing to work with the stakeholders and look forward to working with her.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 43, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jerry Desmond: Jerry Desmond on behalf of the Metal Finishing Associations of Northern and Southern California. Buttressing the statements by the State Chamber of Commerce but also looking forward to addressing those due process issues with amendments that are being developed. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shana Brown: Good afternoon, Shana Brown with the California Manufacturers and Technology Association, also part of the stakeholder group that's working with the author's office and appreciate your consideration.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julie Kingsley: Julie Kingsley representing Hilda Bay. On behalf of Sierra Club, California, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cliff Costa: Good afternoon, Madam Chair and members. Cliff Costa on behalf of the California New Car Dealer's Association. I'm going to keep my comments relatively short, because our contract lobbyist, Mike Belote testified on the Frazier Bill, but we have an administrative problem with the tire fee. It is the only fee that's not accessed on a per tire basis. We have submitted amendments to the author. We have no concern with the existing policy of what Mr. Holden is trying to proceed forward with in AB 1180. With the exception that, if we don't have our reform in terms of how we would assess the tire fee on new and used vehicles. We now are, this new bill would make it much more difficult for us. So all we're asking for is to allow CalRecycle to set the number for new cars and set a number for used cars, we'd like it to be revenue neutral but we'd leave that up to CalRecycle and we just want to be able to automate our systems and not go through the unclaimed process that Mr. Bloat talked about as well as the BUE auditing. Which is excessive, thank you.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 190, 'end': 201, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 219, 'end': 226, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 450, 'end': 456, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 979, 'end': 984, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jeff Severs: Good afternoon Madam Chair, member, Committee. Jeff Severs on behalf of the Rubber Manufacturers Association, the Association for all the US tire makers. We respectfully oppose this measure because it is placing a tax, in fact it's doubling the current tire tax, to essentially address an issue as pointed out. It's a real issue down there, but addressing the entire needs of storm water in the Southern California area which has by the author on estimates exceed billions and billions of dollars. With by doubling the tire tax is literally a drop in the bucket. It's not going to address the issue, and it's probably the wrong solution. In fact, our Association began working with CASQA, the Association for the Storm Water Quality Associations recently to try and actually figure out some alternatives that might actually address the problem. Unfortunately, these meetings just occurred last month, and we're in the beginning discussions on what is actually needed as far as potentially seeking a variance from the EPA because of zinc as it occurs in California, Southern California, storm waters, comes from a lot of different sources. Tires might be one of them. There's only two studies that we know that are really out there that have looked at this. One is from the State of Washington, the other is from the Netherlands. Both of them identified that any potential zinc that ends up in storm water from tires may be in the measure of five to 10% maximum. Most of the times it's actually naturally occurring in the environment number one, and the second thing, biggest source those are from coatings. All the various coatings that are put on steel Air conditioning, heating units in Southern California, on the undersides of cars, on every single sign and guard rail on the roads. So there are a lot, I mean zinc is one those sources that are used to protect against a lot of different metals and a just on a quick comment made regarding tires, if you just pull zinc out of the tires then we wouldn't have to pay a fee. The problem is you cannot make tires without zinc Unless you want to go back to lead and nobody wants to do that. So it is one advance Unfortunately it is a necessary element to make tires, it needs to be there. So we are committed to helping address this issue, unfortunately doubling the tire tax isn't actually going to solve this particular issue. So for those reasons we respectively oppose, and look forward to working with the author in hopefully finding a solution that actually addresses the issues in Southern California.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Valderrama: Hi, Tim Valderrama with the Weideman Group, on behalf of NextGen California. We're the sponsors of this measure. Appreciate your aye vote.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Louis Blumberg: louis with the nature conservancy, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Newkirk: chair garcia and members of the committee my name is sarah doug newkirk. and i'm the coastal program director with the nature conservancy. the nature conservancy's coastal program is committed to maintaining california's beaches and natural coastal habitat for wildlife. and people into the future, even in the face of sea level rise. these areas are important recreational and economic assets that belong to all californians. armoring including sea walls, threatens the long term existence of beaches by exasperating erosion. and preventing the beach from moving inland with sea level rise. sea walls fix the shore in place leading to the loss of the public beach in front of the sea wall. we recognize that people need to protect their homes and property from coastal hazards. and although coastal armoring is not the only way to do this, it is clearly a part of the overall formula for protection of coastal communities. and is certainly appropriate in some places. for that reason this bill does not ban armoring. in fact, according to the coastal commission the bill largely codifies and clarifies existing permitting permitting practice. a coastal property owner can still apply to install a sea wall. and assuming that he or she meets the coastal acts requirements relating to access and natural resource protection. he or she should expect to get the permit. we also recognize that emergencies arise unexpectedly. the call for the use of sea walls to protect property. and that their environmental review is not always possible under this circumstances. that's why the bill maintains the ability of property owner to apply for an emergency permit. it simply calls for environmental review to occur after the emergency is passed. as i said before, sea walls are not the only option for providing protection for coastal homes, although they tend to be the first and sometimes only option that people consider. we're learning more and more about using nature to protect people, and there's a whole category of coastal natural infrastructure that can be used in this way. for example in ormond beach where the nature conservancy owns a lot of wetland property we're learning how to use those wetlands to protect the community of oxnard nearby. beach nourishment is another example of a non wall approach to coastal protection. in sum ab 1129 is an important tool that can help california prepare for sea level rise and climate change. it will also help to maintain our legacy of preserving beaches and coastal habitats for generations to come. i'm happy to answer any questions and we respectfully ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 12, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 53, 'end': 71, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marcelo Derasgaldi: Good afternoon Chair Garcia, Members of the Committee. My name is Marcelo Derasgaldi, I'm the founder and director, we're a Latino focused Coastal rain and Environment Justice Organization. Today we're supporting AB 1129, because it will help me attain public access to the beach world of Californian's, especially those that are not fortunate enough to live on the coast. Going to beach is a big part of the California experience. A recent study from UCLA showed that a large majority of California residents, regardless of who they are, or where they come from go to the beach regularly. And this makes sense, because it has a lot of benefits for physical and mental health. And it gives people a much needed opportunity to connect with friends, family in nature especially in park poor areas. Access to the coast is both a natural right protected by the public trust and a one of the primary objectives of the California Coastal Act. However, seawalls they may limit public access to the beach. They do it by making it difficult or impossible to get to the beach and they eliminate the opportunity to walk along the beach by increasing erosion. More importantly though, as sea level rises, beaches backed by seawalls are disappearing. A recent study by USGS predicts that between 30 and 67% of Southern California beaches will be lost altogether due to sea level rise. Beaches without seawalls behind them, without walls behind them can move inland as sea levels rise but those that have them are limited and are as the sea level rise they drown, so this bill represents a rational approach to sea walls by giving cost of Commission 2 important tools. It provides clarity on when a property owner is entitled to a sea wall, specifically if their structure was grandfathered in under the Coastal Act, or if they comply with the Access and Natural Resource Protectous under provisions of the act. Second, it gives the Coast Commission the authority to order the removal of seawalls that are there illegally. The Commission's own numbers suggest that there are between 150 and 400 of these. In other words, this is not a ban of seawalls and it would not have any retro-active effect, so any seawalls that are in place right now and they are valid, and remain legal. This is why we support this legislation that protects access to the beach for all Californians as a practical moderated approach to the sea walls, and a shoreline management tool, and we respectfully ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 66, 'end': 84, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Victoria Realm: victoria sarah realm with the natural resources defense council in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julia Kingsley: Julia Kingsley, representing the Foundation, seventh generation advisors and Surfrider, and on behalf of Audubon California, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kim Shriner: kim victoria shriner, behalf of the environmental defense fund, in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: jones with sierra club california, in support. thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Entra: Danielle Entra on behalf of the Ocean Conservancy, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Christie: Sarah Christie with the Coastal Commission, and I just want to clarify, the Commission hasn't had a chance to meet since the amendments to this bill went in, but we do appreciate the authors office working closely with us on the language, and I'm here to answer any questions you may have. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Charles Schulz: charles kim schulz, sea shore planning group in opposition and we're just want to say for the record that we submitted our letter to the committee on this issue, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ellie Gobrich: madam chair and members, good afternoon. my name is ellie charles gobrich. i'm with the california association of realtors. and i'm here to highlight a few points that are important, not only to realtors, but to a lot of people that work and live in the coastal community. people basically rely upon the government to ensure that homes are being built in areas that are safe. so one of our biggest issues with this bill is that the coastal commission approved the local coastal programs that allowed for the construction of post-1976 housing along the coast. we think that it's unfair to property owners to have the government approve developments, allow people to move in and then turn around and not allow for the protection of those properties from erosion. as we all know, potentially hazardous natural processes are not unique to the coast. in the wake of hurricane katrina, this legislature increased the minimum levee standards needed to protect people and communities from flooding. as a result, levees have been raised and armored all across california flood zones to protect life and property. the coast is california's first line of defense against rising sea level. there is a lot of debate about how to address this issue. as referenced in our letter to this committee, a recent study by the u.s. geological survey acknowledged the coastal erosion and the future loss of beaches due to rising sea level. this study also recommended increased armoring along the coast to protect the billions of dollars of infrastructure that already exists. and we agree with this recommendation. ab 1129 works against communities and property owners trying to protect themselves against rising sea levels. it is for this reason that we respectfully ask for your no vote. thank you.
[{'start': 52, 'end': 73, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sherman Stacey: ms. madam chairman, my name is sherman ellie stacey. i'm here on behalf of the coastal rights coalition, which is a coalition of homeowners associations that include homes along the shoreline. we have arranged and you have received from us letters from homeowners associations representing 4,900 homeowners along the shoreline that would be severely affected by this bill. the bill i'm going to focus on contains two things in section 30235 that i believe are problematic and i come to this from considerable experience of dealing with the coastal commission for the past 43 years in how they administer the coastal act. so i have dealt on numerous occasions with seawalls, with walls along creeks, with other ways that people attempt to protect their homes against the coastal commission which is generally adverse. i believe this bill grants far too much power to the commission. and i think even within its terms, it explains to you why, even though it says you can apply for a permit, you're not going to get one because it tells you, you can get a permit as long as you're consistent with policies pertaining to public, protection of public access, shoreline ecology, natural land forms, and other impacts on coastal resources. well, just exactly what does that mean when in the preamble of the bill you tell the coastal commission and the people of california, that all of those things will come out back. that it hurts public access. and it's inconsistent with the shoreline ecology. what chance does the home owner have? and generally this comes to you with one single home owner at a time with whatever resources that one single home owner has to brings his case to the coastal commission to try to keep his home. to try and keep it from being destroyed by the ocean, that's what this bill is about. it's about supporting the coastal commission's policy of managed retreat, which is a policy of managed destruction, it is a policy intended to force people to watch their homes be destroyed, in order not to have what is called armoring and when it says there are lots of natural alternatives. well, tell your department of transportation their natural alternatives when they want to protect highway 1. tell the railroad there're natural alternatives when they want to protect their rail lines that go along the shore. armoring is the way we protect our ports. so the government uses it regularly. the homeowner, is by this bill, going i think to be severely affected. if, in fact, it makes no change to what the coastal commission policies presently are. and i believe that is incorrect. if it makes no change, why adopt it? because the coastal commission would already have sufficient powers. as to the penalty provisions, let's turn then to it saying it only applies to houses that have been built before-
[{'start': 31, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Damian Chiff: thank you, madam chair and members of the committee. damian, on behalf of the pacific legal foundation. i'll be brief. in addition to the legal and policy arguments we set forth in our written comments as to why the committee should reject ab 1129. i'd like to point out that it does not reflect what was the longstanding view of the coast commission itself articulated in a brief file  by the coast commission in an appeal against surfrider foundation, 2006. concerning the interpretation of section 30235, which is the provision that coastal act that it gives the right to protect one's home with a protective device. in that brief the commission says that the commission, quote, has consistently interpreted section 30235 to refer to structures that exist at the time of the application. and the brief goes on to say that the commission is not aware, quote of a single instance in the history of the coastal act in which it is determined that existing structures in section 30235 refers only to structures that predated the coastal act. so you have property owners from 1977 to at least 2006 who undoubtedly acquired their property under the reasonable expectation that they would be able to protect their property when necessary. under existing law as consistently interpreted by the coastal commission. and that very legitimate expectation would be directly undercut and forwarded by the propose bill and that's why the city legal foundation respectfully ask for you no vote.
[{'start': 53, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kira Nitaburger: kira sherman nitaburger and i am general manager of the seadrift association in stinson beach. i'd just like to bring to your attention-
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathryn Bohr: kathryn kira bohr with the western manufactured housing communities in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Deborah Carlton: Deborah Carlton with the California Apartment Association in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Valerie Nera: Valerie Nera for the California Chamber of Commerce in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erin Guerrero: Erin Guerrero with the California Building Industry Association also in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eric Anderson: anderson, capistrano shores opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anne Grimes: Anne Grimes, I'm in opposition, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tom Riley: Tom Riley, as an individual, and on behalf of my family, opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julia Kingsley: julia kathryn kingsley representative of the california environmental health regulators, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Johnson: johnson, sierra club california, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Evan Goldberg: madam chair, evan julia goldberg with state controller, ready in support.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: kyle evan jones with sierra club california in support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeff Severs: good afternoon madam chair and members of the committee. jeff kyle severs on behalf of the rubber manufacturers association, the national trade association representing all the major us tire makers. we are in support of the bill, this is a follow up from last year's gordon bill where the association was opposed. and we do appreciate the opportunity to work with the sponsors, californians against waste and the author's office. and we agree, this is a better bill than mr. holden's bill. we've spent a lot of time trying to craft how does calrecycle use the money that it gets from the tire fee. every time you purchase a tire, money is collected. and we've worked for the past 20 years to try and increase the, first of all the diversion rate, and we've been very successful of that. and now we're working to try and increase the recycling rate. we found that tires used in the roads tends to be one of the most effective, which is why you see some of the provisions in here that 50% of that was going to go to rubberized asphalt and concrete. so we appreciate the opportunity that work with calrecycle, the sponsors, the author, to come up with some sort of compromise legislation that we think is a pretty good solution going forward. and we're proud to support this bill today.
[{'start': 57, 'end': 66, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 267, 'end': 273, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 475, 'end': 481, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Danielle Lynch: good afternoon, danielle jeff lynch on behalf of the california association of local conservation corps in support
[{'start': 16, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julia Kingsley: Julia Kingsley from Ecoconsult, representing the California-
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julia Kingsley: thank you, please start over. so this is for ab 509. i'm julia danielle kingsley with ecoconsult, representing the california directors of environmental health, as well as alameda county waste management authority, in support.
[{'start': 57, 'end': 80, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stacey Heaton: Stacey Heaton, Rural County Representatives of California, also speaking on behalf of the California State Association of Counties, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Balot: Thank you Madam Chair and members, Mike Balot for the California New Car Dealers Association. Thank you, Mr. Frasier for mentioning the issue the car dealers have. It's been something that's been percolating for a number of years. Turns out, this is really the only tax issue that applies to a component of a car. Everything else applies to the car itself. And it sounds funny to say that it's difficult to count tires, but a car dealership is a fast moving enterprise. You have cars coming in and out. Some cars have four tires, some have five, some have six, some have a spare, some don't. If we get it wrong, we end up issuing, under present law, a refund for $1.75. That check doesn't get cashed. It then sits around and has to be accounted for. Finally is escheated to the controller as unclaimed property. So we've been talking about, if we could work with Mr. Frazier and Mr. Holden on a system that sets a base fee for the entire car. It would make our life easier, and we'd asked Mr. Frazier, and the Committee as the bill moves forward to work with us on that.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 109, 'end': 116, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 867, 'end': 874, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 883, 'end': 889, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 993, 'end': 1000, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sarah Christie: Good afternoon chair and Committee Members, I'm Sarah Christie, the Legislative Director for the California Coastal Commission. And I do want to let you know that the Commission did vote unanimously at its last meeting to support AB 663. That's part of a long historical continuum that the Coastal Commission has demonstrated in its support for affordable housing. The drafters of the Coastal Act recognize that with California's increasing population projections, that gentrification of the coast was inevitable. And that affordable housing was an important form of coastal access in public access that needed to be protected at the same level as Assembly Member Bloom said, with all of the other coastal resource protection policies in the Coastal Act. For the first five years of the program, the Commission was extremely successful and approved over 5000 units of affordable housing. That's roughly about 1,000 units a year. Unfortunately in 1981, the Legislature did approve a measure that repealed the affordable housing policies out of the Coastal Act. And also allowed those permit holders that hadn't yet built their projects to come in for amendments to remove the affordable housing condition. So unfortunately as a result, only about 1,200 of those units got built. But nevertheless, the Coastal Commission was directly responsible for the provision of 1,200 affordable units in Southern California, some of the least affordable communities in our state today. I hazard a guess that if the Legislature had gone a different path back in 1981, that California's affordable housing crisis on the cost will looks substantially different than it does today. The Coastal Commission did oppose that bill in 1981, unfortunately we were not successful. And the Executive Director at the time considered that the most devastating blow to the Coastal Program in its entire 45 year history. I do want to echo what Assembly Member Bloom says that the affordable housing policies of this billable get worked out in more detail in the housing Committee after the bill gets out today, and I hope it does get out today. The questions of how it will align with the Mellow Act and the Density Bonus Law, and some of the other relevant case law will be worked out in the housing Committee. So essentially it's a very straightforward question that the Committee has in front of it today. Do you think that affordable housing is a coastal resource that deserves to be protected at the same level with public access, wetlands, habitats, and scenic view sheds? The Coastal Commission certainly thinks that it does and we respectively ask for your aye vote today. We are here to answer any question you have about implementation or anything else you that you might care to discuss.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 62, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 664, 'end': 669, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1930, 'end': 1935, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Yohan Place: yohan representing leadingage, which is an organization of over 200 senior, not for profit, affordable housing developers and owners. we would like to support this bill. we think the coastal commission should do affordable housing. what we simply want is an amendment which hopefully we can work out in the next committee, is to have an exemption from paying the payments in lieu of taxes. this is based on ab 1760 which was authored by assembly member chow and sb 1203 which was double joined and authored by senator hannah-beth jackson, which prohibited payments in lieu of taxes to be charged by local governments. and since this a state agency, we're requesting the same amendment in the bill to do that. and otherwise we support the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 453, 'end': 457, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 518, 'end': 537, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kyle Jones: Kyle Jones with Sierra Club California in support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julia Kingsley: kingsley representing seventh generation advisors, as well as surf rider and on behalf of autobon california, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Newkirk: Sarah Newkirk with the Nature Conservancy in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debra Carlton: Good afternoon Ms. Chamber and members, my name is Debra Carlton with the California Apartment Association, we represent housing providers, producers, developers in California. While we appreciate the author's intent to focus on and produce affordable housing, we don't think the Coastal Commission's the place to get that done. Nothing in the Coastal Commission's mission is about the production of housing. Cities and counties are required to produce housing elements and general plans. That's where we believe this production and focus should remain and we believe that there'll be an inconsistent indication of what the housing and how it should be produced if we have either two separate agencies, or we have the cities and counties in conflict with the Coastal Commission. So with that said, we respectfully request your no vote.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 26, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 51, 'end': 64, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christine Dugger: Good afternoon, Madame Chair and members, my name is Christine Dugger on behalf of the California Association of Realtors. We are also in opposition to AB 663. Generally echo the comments of the Apartment Association. A few points that are of importance to the realtors. We believe that granting that authority to the Coastal Commission to adopt affordable housing does not necessarily translate to an uptick in affordable housing in the Coastal Zone. Local governments already aren't meeting their RHNA numbers and if they were held accountable for meeting those RHNA numbers, the Mello Act would most likely protect those units in the Coastal Zone. Further complicating matters is the possibility that the Coastal Commission might independently adopt policies that are actually quite harmful to housing production, such as rent control. This scenario circumvents local government, and it would obviously thwart the goals of regional planning and in the end would result in less housing, not more. For those reasons the California Association of Realtors respectfully the requests your no vote as well.
[{'start': 53, 'end': 69, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ellie Nayer: ellie julia nayer for the california chamber of commerce, we too are on opposition to the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maria Stamas: good afternoon, madame chair and committee members. i'm stamas with the natural resources defence council. nrdc strongly supports ab 1088. while california's leading the way on clean energy programs that reduce air pollution, create quality jobs and provide energy choices for working families, the state is falling short on programs that serve multi-family dwellings. despite the fact that 4.3 million californian households reside in multi-family households and nearly half of these households make less than 32,000 for a family of two and could greatly benefit from efficiency programs that provide bill savings, the multi-family sector has been historically underserved. it receives less than 5% of the state's annual investment in state and customer funded energy efficiency programs every year. and the complex and fractured nature of available programs means that californian property owners and low income renters are much less likely to participate in what's available. so ab 1088 takes the following steps to improve the accessibility of these available programs and to make sure that multi-family households are not left behind. it directs the energy commission to adopt regulations to streamline and coordinate the enrollment in these programs and to establish a statewide website and application for easy access to available programs. secondly it establishes a multi-family expert advisory committee inclusive of a range of experts including multi-family property owners and tenant and resident experts and this expert advisory board will identify model programs and incentive programs for this sector. and lastly, it directs the energy commission to set non-binding statewide 2030 savings goals for this sector based on findings from the stakeholder, process and expert advisory committee and to foster long term market certainty for multi-family incentive programs. ab 1088 ensures that multi-family buildings contribute to california's climate and energy efficiency doubling goals for 2030 and that incentive programs are accessible for owners and tenants alike, and that property improvements benefiting renters will increase. as a result, california can expect to experience greater job creation, economic output, and public health benefits. for all these reasons, we strongly support the bill and ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 56, 'end': 62, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Emmel: Melissa Emmel on behalf of the City of Santa Monica here in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: kyle ellie jones with sierra club california in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kirstin Kolpitcke: Kirstin Kolpitcke, with the California Forestry Association. This bill builds upon last year's AB 2029 by Assembly members Daly and Gordon which made changes to the forest fire prevention pilot program. The pilot provides an exemption from the preparation of a timber harvesting plan only. The exemption acts as a ministerial permit whereby thinning can occur under specified and limited circumstances for the purpose of reducing fuels from the Forest. All the forest practice rules still apply and CALFIRE is still responsible for reviewing the work afterwards to ensure complete compliance. When AB 2029 came before this Committee last year it, extended the sunset date of its pilot until 2021, expanded the diameter of trees that can be removed from 20 to 26 inches and allow the construction of temporary roads up to 600 feet. The then chair of the Committee requested an additional amendment to limit the road construction to slopes of 40% or less. With that AB 2029 passed this community unanimously. The bill passed the Assembly floor in the Senate Natural Resources Committee with no no votes. However, by the time the bill got to Senate Appropriations Committee, CAL FIRE indicated they opposed the provision relating to the construction of roads. We offered to work to resolve their concerns with amendments but the roads provision was removed during Senate Appropriations Committee. Ultimately, AB 2029 passed without a single no vote and was signed by the Governor. We began conversations with CAL FIRE this year by expressing our members' concern that the inability to construct the roads was the single most constraining element to this exemption. CAL FIRE agreed to act as the arbitrator between us and the other departments impacted by this exemption. Before the bill was introduced, CAL FIRE gave us a list of concerns relative to the construction of temporary roads. As a result, we drafted a bill with additional protections from those in AB 2029. We met with CAL FIRE on a second occasion, where they expressed additional concerns. In response, we amended the bill on April 4th. In all, there are 17 additional protections in AB 425 that were not in AB 2029. While CalFire and the other departments do not have an official position yet on this bill, we remain committed to addressing any remaining concerns from any other departments weighing in on this bill. Our goal is not to have a bill passed by the Legislator only to have it vetoed by the Governor. Having the ability to construct these small spur roads and landings is critical to being able to thin our forests. And we also want to ensure that there are no negative impacts to wildlife, soil or water. The bill enjoys a broad range of support including local governments, insurance industry, firefighters, and the forestry sector. we ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 123, 'end': 127, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 132, 'end': 138, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sara Olsen: hello, my name is olsen, i'm a registered professional forester for w.m. beaty and associates, a consulting forestry company based out of redding, california. i'm responsible for preparing and implementing timber harvesting plans, exemptions and emergencies for our clients based in northeastern california. i support ab 425. the forest fire prevention exemption is a key tool for foresters and landowners to thin overly dense stands of trees that contribute to the increasing trend of catastrophic wildfires in california. this exemptions allows the thinning to reduce horizontal and vertical fuel continuity, both of which are significant factors in the intensity and rate of spread in a wildland fire. last year roughly 2,000 acres were thinned under this exemption, however there's still hundreds of thousand acres in dire need of treatment. by allowing the construction of temporary roads less than 600 feet, this exemption becomes a much more functional tool for foresters to use, if we have access to this stands so we can treat them. a temporary road is just that, temporary. upon completion of use, temporary roads are required to be abandoned, meaning they be removed from the permanent roads network. in addition, maintenance-free drainages will be installed and often limbs and branches are placed on the road to help with additional stability. all of these measures, plus the numerous requirements within the forest practice rules reduce the potential for erosion and environmental impacts to levels of insignificance. although this is a ministerial permit in a streamline process make no mistake, all activities comply with the stringent forest practice rules overseen by a state licensed forester like myself, and inspected by a department of forestry and fire protection inspector, whom is also a state licensed forester to ensure that no negative impacts occur from these operations. the cost of not doing thinning projects is increased damage to cultural and natural resources, higher suppression costs, degraded air quality, lots of revenue to communities, destruction of homes, increase risk to firefighters and public safety. all of which are costs we cannot afford. the addition of temporary roads makes this exemption a much more effective tool for foresters to utilize, and enables us to create healthy forests, which are more resilient to drought, insects and disease, and catastrophic wildfire.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrea Howell: good afternoon, i'm andrea kyle howell with sierra pacific industries. sierra pacific is a third-generation, family owned company. we have more than 1.6 million acres of timberlands in the state, employ 34,000 people and operate numerous manufacturing facilities. as has been discussed, the forest fire prevention pilot program exemption was established to help forest land owners thin overly dense stands of trees in order to help reduce the risk of catastrophic wildfire. while it is an important tool, its use has been limited. for example, across all of spi's ownership, we have only used the exemption three times, treating about 200 acres. one of the reasons for the program's limited use is because roads aren't always located where the needs are. the allowance of temporary roads to complete projects under this program would provide an incremental tool for forest landowners in our continued efforts to reduce stand densities and reduce fire risk. we recognize the concerns and risks associated with road construction. it is why this bill has a number of additional protections. some have been talked about already, others include that the roads can't be constructed in unstable areas, cannot be located across a connected headwall swell or convergence slope. construction of these roads cannot occur during the winter operating period. in addition, all class three water course crossings must be removed prior to the start of the winter operating period. all temporary roads are required to be abandoned at the completion of the operations. also, as has been mentioned, there is a total limit on the number of feeder roads. but it's even variable from that. so a smaller project will have less roads, up to a maximum of 600 feet. so this kind of things provide the protection of water, soil and wildlife while allowing for the temporary roads to improve forest health, reduced densities and reduce forest risk. on behalf of spi, i ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Valerie Nera: valerie andrea nera for the california chamber of commerce, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stacy Heaton: stacy valerie heaton, rural county representatives of california, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Noel Kramers: Noel Kramers, with the California Farm Bureau Federation, in support
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian White: Brian White here for Licensed Foresters Association and Forest Landholders of California, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katherine Pettibone: Katherine Pettibone, American Insurance Association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Yuri Jimenez: Yuri Jimenez, Green Diamond Resource Company, in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Anderson: anderson, mendocino and humboldt redwood companies, this is our project, and we are in support.
[]
Arnie Holdquin: holdquin, roseburg forest products, asking for your support.
[]
Stacy Heaton: thank you. heaton, royal county representatives of california, in support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gale Dillehante: gale stacy dillehante, western growers association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Blazic: Danielle Blazic, California Municipal Utilities Association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tanya Vandrick: Hi, Tanya Vandrick here on behalf of Board of Equalization Vice Chair George Runner in support of 288.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 70, 'end': 83, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Christopher Carlisle: Christopher Carlisle of California Association of Realtors, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Staci Heaton: staci gale heaton, rural county representatives of california, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erin Gilbert: erin staci gilbert for the county of san diego, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Whitey: Brian Whitey, Forest Landowners of California, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Russell Noack: noack, on behalf of california fire chiefs association and the fire district's association of, california, in support, thanks.
[]
Nick Clappus: good afternoon chair and assembly members. my name's nick erin clappus with environmental group californians against waste. i won't take up too much of your time, but a few years ago, sb 1016, the legislature streamlined the reporting for local governments under the state's recycling law, make it easier to submit less paperwork, but focus more on actual recycling programs. it was a policy that was supported by the environmental community, the local government community and the solid waste community. this simply extends the sunset for that program.
[{'start': 53, 'end': 70, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Emmel: Good afternoon Melissa Emmel on behalf of the Legislative Task Force of the California Chapters of the Solid Waste Association of North America here in support.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julia Kingsley: thank you, julia on behalf of the audubon society in support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: Good afternoon Kyle Jones with Sierra Club California in support, thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kelly Browning: good afternoon, mr. chair, mr. vice chair and members. my name is dr. browning, i'm the executive director of impact teen drivers, a nonprofit organization dedicated to stopping the number one killer of teens in america, which are preventable car crashes. in california alone we lose roughly eight school buses filled with teens every single year to preventable crashes. across california and the nation, impact teen drivers works with first responders, educators, and health professionals to provide education on how to stop this number one killer. excuse me. we provide very specific strategies about the decisions and choices that both teens and their parents can make to help keep themselves safe behind the wheel, whether as a driver or as a passenger. an important part of our evidence-based curriculum is educating teens, parents and others about graduated driver licensing or gdl laws. gdl involves a three-tiered system of licensing in which novice drivers gain experience before being exposed to the highest risk situations of nighttime driving and driving with teen passengers. it's an evidence-based strategy that has proven to reduce teen driving fatalities by 40 to 60% across the us. the first chart in front of you that was provided shows a reduction in crash rates for california 18 year olds over a three year time period that went through the graduated driver's licensing system in california. that would be the red and the green lines, versus those who avoided the graduated california driver's licensing system, which is the blue line. this was a 10% sample of california licensed drivers of roughly 1.1 million people. california gdl laws clearly work. teen drivers who successfully go through the graduated driver licensing programs are 45% less likely to cause a crash than older novice teen drivers who did not go through the gdl. ab 63 addresses a deficiency in california's otherwise successful gdl law. california's current gdl program ends at 18, leaving new teen drivers ages 18 to 20 without the benefits of the gdl program. the second chart that you see reinforces why it's so important to extend the current gdl program through the age of 20. california novice drivers ages 18 to 20 have higher fatality and serious injury rate than all other novice drivers, regardless of the age. gdl does not prevent teens from getting a driver's license. the three step program allows teen drivers to gain training and experience on the road, while minimizing those highest risk situations, before they can obtain an unrestricted license. exemptions already exist in the current law to allow teens the flexibility to attend school functions, work, and help their families when no other options are available. i thank assemblymember frazier and his staff for their important and life saving work on the issue of extending graduated driver licensing for young novice drivers on our roadways, for my kids, for your kids, and for really all of us. i respectfully ask for an aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 70, 'end': 78, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2752, 'end': 2759, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tom McGuire: good afternoon, mr. chair, mr. vice chair, and members. my name is tom jonah mcguire, i'm a 21 year and current serving member of the california highway patrol, currently serving still in the east bay. in addition, i'm a board member of the california association of highway patrolmen, and we are cosponsors of this bill. as you may or may not know, this is our third attempt to pass this bill that would increase this age requirement for the gdl. and to add to dr. browning's comments impact teen driver was formed by us, the chp, to resolve the number of traffic fatalities that we see for young adults on california roadways. it's a common misnomer amongst the public and media that traffic collisions are accidents, they are not. i'm here to tell you, i've never investigated a traffic collusion in my 21 years plus in this job that was not preventable. every single collision that occurs on california roadways is preventable, and the way that we prevent them is by education. ab 63 closes this loophole, which allows young adults between the ages of 18 and 20, to skirt this education requirement. this age group still represents the largest injury and fatality rate in motor vehicle collisions amongst all drivers, not only in california, but nationwide. i am confident that this bill will reduce collisions, reduce injuries, and therefore reduce fatalities. between us, the arguments against this bill, whether it be the military argument or the rural argument, are far outweighed by the number of lives that will be saved by this bill. i personally want to thank assemblymember frazier for his tireless efforts in working with roadway safety. and i admire him for that fact and for authoring this bill, excuse me, which we believe will save lives. i respectfully ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 67, 'end': 84, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 466, 'end': 474, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1587, 'end': 1594, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rosemary Shahan: Mr. Chair and members, Rosemary Shahan, President of Consumers for Auto Reliability and Safety. And we greatly appreciate the Assemblymember's leadership on auto safety on a whole range of issues. And as more and more young people are buying cars later, and we have older teenagers who are becoming first time car drivers. This bill makes eminent sense, and we respectfully ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Steve Barrow: My name is Steve Barrow, I'm the Co-Chair of the California Unintentional Injuries Strategic Plan Project. Unintentional injury is the leading cause of death and hospitalization for all of California children and youth. And this is of the eight leading priorities that we've identified in our state to get that situation changed. Teen driver safety is the number one leading priority for the state strategic plan on that. I also would want to identify, it hasn't been brought up yet, that the states own strategic highway safety plan has, at one of its leading strategies to reduce youth driver problems, is to move the GDL through age 20. So our own state highway safety plan, that has been endorsed by the governor's administration and eight different agencies, has this in it now. Did not have that earlier, a couple years ago, so we really appreciate the Assembly Member Frazier carrying this, and would ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 875, 'end': 882, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mike Skippa: Mr. Chair members, Mike Skippa representing Alcohol Justice in the California Alcohol Policy Alliance. 25% of all young teen drivers who get into trouble are impaired drivers either with alcohol and or alcohol and drugs. We believe this bill will help reduce those numbers. And we're firmly in support, thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Gunning: mr. chairman and members, gunning, personal insurance federation representing the home and auto insurance carries in the state and we're also here in support and urge an aye vote. thank you.
[]
Jay Beeber: mr chair, jay tom beeber, safer streets la in support of the bill.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kelly Browning: assembly member o'donnell. yeah, i'm here. browning, impact team drivers. we've kind of really spend a lot of time on this over the last four or five years. and we've talked about whether or not this would be a disservice. we don't feel that because you're indigent or lacking in finances, that it's fair to allow them to die on the roads at any higher rate than we would anyone else. so looking at this, we feel that the stats show that this goes across all socio-economics, all racial, all geographical, and we're trying to do what's right to keep our children alive. so we're not trying to hinder a person's ability to get a license. we're simply saying, anything else that takes severe focus and experience, that they gain that before they get behind the wheel.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 25, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 43, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Tree: I'm Michael Tree, I'm the Executive Director with the Livermore Amador Valley Transit Authority. And for those of you who may not be familiar with LAFTA, we operate the bus system for the Bay Area cities of Pleasanton, Dublin and Livermore. And we carry about 2 million passengers a year, including several thousand to multiple BART stations within the service area. As Assemblymember Baker has mentioned, this bill is exciting because it involves innovation. And it involves technology. And it closes the gap on what's commonly referred to as the first last mile dilemma in public transit. And that is, many people would like to access good quality public transportation at the BART system. The Wheels Rapid Bus System, but they don't live close to a transit stop or a BART station and so cannot take advantage of those opportunities. We started to work with the Contra Costa Transportation Authority and its partners to envision a new way of resolving the first and last mile dilemma. And we have two things that are important. We want to reduce congestion on the 680 freeway. And our vision is in solving that first and last small problem is using autonomous vehicles to bring residents into the quality transportation system such as a bus rapid transit system on that 680 corridor. Autonomous vehicles as you know are being already tested throughout the world. Like the ones that we hope to test their design to provide safe and efficient transportation over relatively short distances. They have the capacity of operating without a driver, steering wheel or brake pedal, have room for six passengers to sit and additional six passengers to stand. And they can also accommodate a wheelchair. The shuttles are designed for lower speed travel and are also powered by an electric motor, so they produce zero emissions. And their small size and advanced technology make them ideal for following flexible routes. And so, perhaps what's most important to know today is that we're working collaboratively with Contra Costa Transportation Authority to solve this first and last mile problem into public transit. The end result is an increased demand for good quality public transportation and transportation jobs. So instead of seeing congestion on the 680 freeway, our goal is that you'll see buses and trains full of travelers experiencing a new level of connectivity. AB 1444 enables the testing of the shared autonomous vehicles within the City of Dublin, which is highly impacted by the 680 corridor. And again, we'll include the partnership with the Contra Costa Transportation Authority. And the bill continues to forward thinking and the innovative reputation of California, and allows our continued work on this high priority project while the proposed DMV regulations on autonomous vehicles are being finalized in adoption, and adopted. And so, I appreciate your consideration today.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 385, 'end': 390, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Steve Walker: Steve Walker here on behalf of Alameda County Transportation Commission, and they've also ask to relay the support of the Metropolitan Transportation Commission. This bill for Alameda CTC compliments it's goal using technology advancements to reduce congestion and to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and urge your support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Bennett: chairman, committee members, laura jay bennett. for the last time this evening with technet at the deadline for the letter submission we were opposed. we've been working with ms. baker on an amendment that will address her concerns and we will do that shortly. thank you.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 179, 'end': 184, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Barry Broad: Barry Broad on behalf of the Teamsters in the Amalgamated Transit Union. The Bonilla bill that you approved last year, was testing a vehicle, as they mentioned, on private land. The testing is not even completed and they're back. We don't know whether it worked or not, and now we're back to test it on public roads with drivers. In which in a vehicle which you can't, with there's nobody there because, and this is what's the difference than the DMV rules. Under the DMV rules, there's supposed to be somebody in there that can stop the vehicle in case the technology fails. So we don't know whether this technology is even worked where it's done in a parking lot of a private facility. But now we're going to, in the effort to make this seven-mile-an-hour vehicle, to move it faster and faster, and faster, we're going to test it on public roads when we don't even know if it works yet. We just don't see what the rush is here. Why, what is the hurry to move this onto a public road? And what is the measure of success versus failure? That's not in the bill and we don't even know what it is. It's just wherever this gentleman decides it is, but he's not qualified as far as I know to determine what is a safe standard policymakers should be making that determination, and that's you. So we would urge a no vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sara Flocks: mr. chair and members, sara laura flocks from the california labor federation. we're here with a similar position of a twiner concerns regarding this bill, similar to what we raised on ab 1141. and this is related though to transit agencies. expanding and relying on autonomous vehicle technology. once again, transit, public transit is similar to truck driving in the number of people that it employs. we were already concerned when there was some first mile, last mile programs being developed with transportation network companies. and in transportation transit systems and this is a similar concern. we already know that in las vegas, there's a fully automated shuttle that takes people down the strip. and there is the ability for public transit drivers to be replaced very quickly as automated vehicle technology replace buses and other forms of transportation that have drivers. so we're raising similar concerns about integrating into these bills a discussion about the economic and labor impacts. thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 33, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Terry Broad: Please state your name and who you represent, please. Terry Broad on behalf of the Teamsters and the Amalgamated Transit Union. We appreciate the author's intent here to try and look at this issue in a more safety oriented way. However, we think we need to take a step back here from moving so quickly in this area. The Legislature need to take a real active role in understanding what we're talking about. When we're talking about 80,000 pound vehicles moving down the road. We know nothing, zero about this kind of a system. We don't know for example, what algorithms are in these trucks? When they have a decision to make do they hit the car or do they take the vehicle off the side of the road to lose the freight, which is the priority? We have no reporting system. We don't know, we know nothing about the liability system. We don't know, for example, whether they're strictly liable in tort for the accidents they cause. Are these product liability problems if they engage in accidents? How does a comparative negligence system work where you're comparing fault? Are these vehicles entitled to have any fault? Are they supposed to be 10% better than people, 20% better than people? Has anyone even thought about this? Leaving that, they're talking about, and this is people like Elon Musk saying by 2030 we're going to lose 10 million transportation jobs in the United States, that will not be replaced by any jobs. Not that they will be replaced by some kind of maintain the autonomous vehicle. And we wouldn't be doing our job if we didn't raise the fundamental question. And some people are saying 50 million jobs lost due to automation at large within 20 years from now that's not very long. What is our society going to do with all these unemployed people? What is the vision for society? That's not a vision that the DMV can come with, they don't do the vision thing. That's something that you people are charged with thinking about. And thinking about I would think in advance of losing the 50 million jobs, not after we lose the 50 million jobs. So we would ask you with respect it's time to put the brakes on this. Wholesale like we got to do this and we got to do it before they do it in Arizona because Arizona is going to get the drop on California and all that sort of stuff. And sit back and maybe have some policy related informational hearing to discuss these and the many issues that are raised by autonomous vehicles and what we do not know about them. So, we would urge a no vote at this time. Thank you.
[{'start': 54, 'end': 65, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1286, 'end': 1295, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sara Flocks: mr. chair, member sara sara flocks from the california labour federation. we're a little bit of a tweener. we'd like to raise concerns about this bill. first, we want to thank the author for putting forward a very thoughtful bill that does have worker protections in it, but we are concerned about the larger issue of technological changes in transportation that threaten to alter our economy and eliminate millions of jobs. truck driving is the number one job in 29 states including california. we've 600,000 people in this state that make their living driving trucks and it's a good middle class job. it's a good union job and it's one of the few jobs where you don't have to have a college degree to have a path to the middle class. and so, we are very concerned that by authorizing the testing of these trucks, absent a larger discussion about what is going to be done for workers who are dislocated, that we are getting a little bit ahead of ourselves. and we understand that this bill does require that there be drivers in the trucks while testing. yet, this technology is moving so much faster than anyone expected, even than the people who are designing the technology expected. even in southern california, just last month in march volvo tested what they call truck platooning. it's where three to five big rig trucks are digitally rigged and connected. and there is a driver in one truck that's the head driver that is able to control the flow of the truck. these are five big rigs that are, could be tied together driving on our roads. volvo is already testing this. it's already moving in europe. and we know that because of the cost pressure on companies, the first thing they want to do with technology is eliminate the drivers. and so the concern that we have, especially around autonomous vehicle technology in freight and in public transit is that it is going to displace hundreds of thousands, if not millions of good jobs. and without a discussion about what this state is going to do to respond to that potential crisis, we feel like we can't have this conversation separate from that and have concerns about bills like this moving forward. so we very much appreciate the work of the author, we just feel like there does need to be a pause to make sure that the work of this committee in transportation and dealing with advancements in the technology of transportation, is also linked to the social and economic upheaval that could be associated with it. so, thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Matt Roman: roman, california trucking association. we're more of a tweener on the measure, we like to thank you author for his work on this bill. we do support lifting the dmv prohibition on testing of autonomous freight vehicles and look forward to working with the author as he moves forward.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Reed Addis: Chair and members, Reed Addis on behalf of CALSTART, a California based non profit that focuses on fuel and vehicle technologies, we're in strong support today. California's been a leader in transportation, vehicle fuel technologies and in particular, set up robust strategies around how many electric vehicles need to be on the road. That leadership has provided billions of dollars of investment into California and over 12,00 direct jobs from that EV production. However, it's not easy to just have a customer show up at the lot or look online and buy an EV. Therefore, the state has invested in rebate programs to try to help incentivize the customers to do so, as my colleague mentioned right now, we have the CVRP program as that. What this bill does, we think, is it allows the state to put forward a new program that is stable, creates a clear market signal, and ultimately allows the manufacturers and the dealers to advertise and provide clear direction to customers that they can receive a tax benefit when they go and buy the car. We think that's a good policy. We think that will help us as CDRP transitions out. We think it's the right way to go in California. We also want to be clear that not only does this policy help when it comes to new cars that are EV, but as the Assembly Member pointed out, what's new and interesting for us, as well in this policy is that it focuses on used cars for low to moderate income individuals in California. Now, I'm going to really focus in on the moderate income individuals who currently today do not have a program they can access. We think this bill goes a long way in allowing them to go and access the used car market. For those reasons, we're in strong support today, thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Albert Turon: mr. chair and members, i'm albert sara turon on behalf of global automakers, i echo the comments of my colleagues in support. i would just briefly add that the auto manufacturers are investing billions of dollars in the california market and nationwide to meet the goals of this mandate to try to reach 1.5 million vehicles sold by 2025 in california. the absence of a reliable stable predictable funding source for zero emission rebate program is really a hindrance to the success of the program and we believe that ab 1341 will establish that reliability. and sustainability to this program so that we can build the type of zero emission vehicle market that the state and auto manufacturers would like to see and so for those reasons, and the others stated, we support the bill.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Wendy Reilly: thank you. my name is wendy albert reilly i represent hid global, manage government affairs at hid global. hid global manufactures secure identity credentials, including identity documents and digital credentials. he did a wonderful job laying out the bill, and i don't want to repeat what he said. but i think the most important thing that i would have to add is over the past couple years, hid's been working with stakeholders, privacy groups, citizens, law enforcement, federal authorities, and state licensing authorities. citizens are concerned about the privacy of their personal information, they'll want to use your mobile drivers licenses for the same reason they use your physical drivers licenses. and it's important to mention that the physical driver's license will exist alongside a mobile driver's license for the foreseeable future. a driver's license built in a secure platform, will give citizens more control over their personal information, allowing them to choose when and with whom they share their information, and as importantly how much information they share. law enforcement also has a compelling stake in the adoption of mobile driver's license. and we've learned that police officers need to trust and authenticate an identity credential, in diverse and sometimes potentially dangerous situations. when appropriate, a secure mobile driver's license platform would allow the authentication of a person's id from a safe distance by using bluetooth technology, to give officers more time to determine if a traffic stop is routine, or if it's more complex. in our discussion with stakeholders four keys concerns surfaced, privacy, security, safety and compliance with the real id act. privacy emerged as the number one major consideration, citizens want to know that their personal information is safe, and state licensing authorities want to know that they're chosen mobile dl solution will protect a citizen's privacy. such a solution must consider the fair information practice principles, which include transparency, individual participation, also know as choice, purpose specification, data minimization, use limitation, data quality and integrity, security and accountability and auditing. many of these principles must be implemented by the dl issuing authority, but that the underlying technology platform should enable those authorities to practice these principles. in conclusion, at the heart of our mobile driver's license solution concept, is the core value of freedom. that citizens have the choice to opt for a mobile driver's license, that citizens control who sees their information, and that citizens control what information is seen. and a citizen must not have to hand over their smartphone for a credential to be authenticated. once again, i'd like to express my gratitude for the opportunity to testify, and thank you very much.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Becca Cramer: good afternoon, cramer with the aclu of california, i apologize that our letter was a little bit late. and i wanted to highlight our concerns, although we're hopeful that we'll be able to work with the author's office, who has been in communication with us about this, to address our concerns through amendments. so our concerns are three-fold, one is the user's privacy. the bill is great about making sure that the dmv cannot use the app to track people or get additional information. but there's no protections to ensure that the vendor can not do that and also can not sell that information to other private entities, and so we would hope for amendments to address that in the future. also we want some amendments that will help ensure that the information is secure when it's in transit between the dmv and the app, as well as when it's on the app, to make sure that that is a secure transaction. and finally, we want to work with author's office on language around ensuring that the driver's license app cannot be used inappropriately by law enforcement in terms of how they access it, either remotely or what it means to hand over your phone. making sure that, for example, handing over your phones, they can look at the app, does not mean you're consenting to a search. and also, that the app is configured in such a way that then law enforcement would not, for example, be able to read any incoming text message, that might appear on your phone in the normal course of business. i know that iowa has been working on some technology to address this issue. and so, we look forward to working with the author, and the industry on the fixes for this.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Gonzales: Rebecca Gonzales, National Associate of Social Workers California Chapter in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barry Broad: barry on behalf of the teamsters and the amalgamated transit union. we have a support of an amended position. our view is these are autonomous vehicles, they're machines, they're computers. we believe there should be automatic reporting of every accident involving property or harm to humans, and every near miss. we need to know whether this technology is actually safe, and how safe it is. and while we appreciate the author and we support the general thrust of the bill, we think it needs to go further and demand much more information out of these computers. thank you.
[]
Caitlin Vega: Mr Chairman and Members, Caitlin Vega for the California Labor Federation. We agree with Mr Broad. I think we would also like to thank the author, Mr Rodriguez, for taking on this challenge. We represent millions of workers who make a living as drivers. And as the technology changes we think it's essential to look out for both the public safety and the future of work and workers. So, we thank the author for starting that important conversation.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 92, 'end': 97, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 150, 'end': 159, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Laura Bennett: chairman, members, laura with technet. we were opposed to the bill in print prior to today. we haven't had the full opportunity to vet the new amendments. we hope that we can work with the author moving forward to good terms of support position. thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Nevin: good afternoon, david wendy nevin, on behalf of the school transportation coalition and the california association of school transportation officials, in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barry Broad: broad with the teamsters and amalgamated transit union, in support.
[]
Scott Piotrowski: my name is piotrowski, i'm the executive director of highway journeys. the secretary of the california historic route 66 association, and a board of trustees member on the route 66 road ahead partnership, which is an international organization designed to educate, promote, and preserve the highway from chicago to santa monica. i don't feel like i need to give too much history about route 66 here. i'm pretty sure everybody has heard quite a bit about it already. but i think it's important to note that the international tourism of route 66 is far greater than domestic tourism, and our opportunity to increase tourism in the state of california is great. and the centennial commission is a good opportunity to present our best foot forward for the mother road, for not only it's past, but for it's future as well.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marina Khubesrian: thank you. i'm dr. marina, a family doctor, represent the city of south pasadena. and i'm also the vice-chair of the connected cities and communities, which is a coalition with the cities of glendale, la canada flintridge, pasadena, sierra madre, south pasadena, nrdc, and the national trust for historic preservation. should i continue? we've been working together for about the last three years to get us to a solution that moves us beyond the 710. in fact, the website beyondthe710.com has extensive solutions that are viable, obtainable with proven strategies, that could be implemented immediately with the existing funds that remain in the measure r fund. it is time to remove a alternative that has caused decades of debate and contention, and will surely likely end up in court, if we do not stop the process and come to the table and find a solution, a viable solution, with proven strategies that will work for our region. according to its own eir, the costly and impractical tunnel alternative will not achieve any of the improvements to air quality, nor traffic congestion in the study area. only 5 to 12% of commuters will experience a travel time improvement of 2.5 minutes, that's after billions of dollars. the current eir process asks the flawed question, how do we move more cars from point a to point b, from a southern stop to the northern stop? it fails to ask the correct question, how do we move people around our region to destinations that they want to go to? caltrans has already acknowledged building more lanes is not the solution to traffic congestion. the tunnel alternative would create induced demand which would not reduce congestion, but simply shift congestion to other areas from one f fail-rated freeway to another, creating more tunnelling bottlenecks at off ramps and portals. local voters have already demonstrated that there is no public support for the tunnel alternative when they passed the new sales tax measure measure m, which included specific language to exclude funding for the 710 tunnel alternative. the san gabriel valley council of governments removed the project from their list of priorities for measure m. the southern california association of governments has called the tunnel alternative the worst case scenario in the 2016 regional transportation plan. the tunnel alternative may have the largest construction cost, and therefore will generate temporary construction jobs. however, the alternative that provides the greatest number of long term jobs is the light rail alternative according to the eir. i ask for your leadership and your support to help us move past, into the future, into 20th century solutions. ab 287 provides caltrans, metro, and all stakeholders an opportunity to participate in a transparent process, where we can focus on improved mobility for all modes of transportation, preserving the environment, improving quality of life, and providing economic opportunities for the surrounding communities, and the region. thank you so much.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Victoria Rome: Sure, good afternoon, I'm Victoria Rome with the Natural Resources Defense Council and we're here in here support of AB 287. This bill provides a collaborative, common sense and community based approach to a problem that has been vexing transportation officials for six decades. We believe the bill would create a process for affected communities, transportation officials and legislators. So representatives of this body would have a seat at the table to collectively design a solution that addresses critical regional mobility issues while protecting our environment and communities. NRDC helped develop and supports one such proposal as was mentioned, the Beyond 710 plan. A comprehensive, multi-modal, cost effective approach to enhancing mobility and increasing transportation options in the West San Gabriel Valley. So we believe, as Assembly Member Holden said, that this bill helps align our transportation future with the goals that we've set and with, really, people's mobility needs as we move forward with things like car sharing, transit, complete streets, biking options, and better options for pedestrians. Urge your support, thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 856, 'end': 862, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Terry Tornek: Thank you Mr Chairman, my name is Terry Tornek, I'm mayor of the City of Pasadena. I appreciate the opportunity to testify on AB 287 this afternoon. This piece of legislation, as has already been noted, has the possibility of ending one of the longest, most divisive, and destructive transportation controversies in the history of our state. The proposal to build a 5.2 mile long tunnel through Los Angeles, South Pasadena and my city, Pasadena, at a cost of $4 to $6 billion, is defended on the basis of improvements to traffic circulation and air quality. But data from the $30 million draft EIR clearly demonstrates that it fails on both counts. Today I cannot compress data regarding cut through traffic not eliminated, traffic shifted from one freeway to another, and air quality not improved. Rather, I'd like to focus on the opportunity costs that this terrible project has imposed for far too long on our communities. The blight that exists in all three cities from homes purchased by Caltrans decades ago, and continuing to deteriorate day by day. The scars introduced in Los Angeles and Pasadena by gigantic freeway stubs that could instead be tax-producing and vital land uses. And reasonable street improvements, known as TSM and TDM, that have not been made during these decades because the specter of the proposed freeway that can never happen precluded their implementation. Improvements that could actually move traffic and people, and put people to work using Prop R money already available. I'm grateful that Chris Holden has stepped forward to identify a process for allowing these long-awaited improvements to happen and I urge you to end the 60-year-old struggle and allow us to solve some real problems now.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1527, 'end': 1539, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sam Burgess: good afternoon, mr. chair. burgess, i'm supporting the bill. i have been opposed to this freeway for the last 44 years. i've been speaking out against it. i also represent the no 710 action committee, a wide variety of folks throughout the los angeles region. thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Capoccia: I'm John Capoccia, Council Member and former Mayor of the City of Sierra Madre, and I represent the City of Sierra Madre. We voted unanimously a resolution in favor of Assembly Member Holden's AB 287. Thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 184, 'end': 199, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jared Sanchez: Hello, I'm Jared Sanchez with the California Bicycle Coalition in support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Terry Walker: Hello, my name is Terry Walker. I'm Mayor Pro Tem for the City of La Canada Flintridge. Our City Council unanimously and wholeheartedly supports AB 287 and we strongly urge you to do the same. Thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cesar Diaz: mr. chair, member, diaz on behalf of the state building and construction trades council. i apologize for being a little winded, i just ran up from a senate judiciary committee off the floor. we're here to respectfully, but and regretfully strongly oppose this legislation. our members have weighed in not only on the local level, but the state level with us urging that we, while thankful for the assembly member's efforts to try to get some work going on for our members in that area, this is simply not the way to go about it. we are about mobility. we are about getting people to and from jobs. this particular bill exempts a very important part of the analysis of a project, specifically a tunnel. that can potentially create 40,000 jobs for our members, and i know this has been an issue that has been around for 50 years. hopefully it won't be around for another 50 more. we've seen incredible things happen in this house particularly the bill last week, but we do feel that this bill has, not only with the amended language, also unintentional problems that may be attributed to it. so by forming a committee, but then specifically omitting a particular type of delivery or a part of the project, i think, is highly problematic. i think for the purpose of our members who'd like to see that advisory committee include all aspects of a project, don't think that this is a solution here that we see. so we regretfully oppose. thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Steven Ly: Thank you. My name is Steven Ly, I'm the Mayor 
Pro Tem for the City of Rosemead. Mr. Chairman and members of this Committee, I want to thank you first for your time to consider this issue. I'm here to speak in opposition to AB 287. The bill analysis is correct. The 710 has been a hotly contested issue for decades, but Metro and Caltrans are wrapping up the EIR process that has spent over $10 million of voter mandated money to find a solution. Not finishing the last piece of the LA freeway system continues to expose our school children and residents to higher then necessary air pollution caused by day and night, bumper to bumper traffic in portions of the San Gabriel Valley that we call home. Over 20 local governments have passed resolutions in support of the gap's completion, which Caltrans and LA Metro are now studying. These cities support the construction of a tunnel. There have been over 300 meetings among stakeholders. Some of these meetings have been in Mr. Holden's district. The freeway tunnel would significantly reduce cancer risk of the majority of the area. The cancer risk rates in communities, including mine, near and around the 710 is 20 to 100 percent greater that compared to neighborhoods north of the freeway and lower income minority communities near the 710 are most impacted by poor air quality and higher cancer risk levels. We represent the hard-working minority communities that are not given a voice on this bill. The creation of the Advisory Committee created by this bill is an attempt to slow down the current progress that Metro and Caltrans have made. This Advisory Committee would not be comprised of experts, which would provide real solutions. And also, despite claims of shared voice, the cities of Rosemead, Monterey Park, San Gabriel, San Marino, Temple City, El Monte, South El Monte, Montebello, are not represented on this proposed committee. I ask that you let the Environmental Impact Report process continue as we have made progress in the last years. This is a local issue. We ask that Sacramento please stay out of this issue, as it is currently decided by Metro and the local experts with input from stakeholders. I respectfully ask for a no vote.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 978, 'end': 984, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tim Cremins: tim david cremins, international union of operating engineers, in opposition also, with regrets from a wonderful author. we also are worried about setting precedent here of doing planning on a statewide local, on a local level on top of that with predetermined outcomes. on a somewhat minor issue, but an issue for us, this bill also takes support that portion of the freeway out of the state highway system. it is unclear to us who would be responsible of the maintenance and the upkeep on that portion of the highway. we're not sure why they're doing that in the bill, and it's a concern to us because we represent those members of caltrans who do the maintenance and upkeep on the state highway.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Margaret Clark: margaret, council member, rosemead, and our city is opposed. we're 95% minority, and this is an environmental justice issue. and i want to clarify, i sit on the, i'm vice chair of the san gabriel valley cog, council of governments, and the reason that we voluntarily pulled the issue off of measure m is because we, it being controversial, we did not want to jeopardize passage for the good of the body. and on scag, i sit on the regional council and it is not, in any way, as was stated, the worst case scenario. so, i respectfully request opposition so that the local metro and the people there can make the decision. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Binnquist: jessica tim binnquist, city of alhambra and the 710 coalition. we respectfully request that you oppose.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Virginia Herold: hi, i'm virginia jonah herold. i'm with the board of pharmacy with a sponsor of the bill. we think, that this is an appropriate use of machines to aid public health and safety. and we think, that we ask for your support.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anne Sodergren: Hi, Anne Sodergrenn with the board of pharmacy. Thank you, Senator Stone, for authoring this for the board. With deference to your time, I'll just say, thank you for your time and I'm happy to answer any questions you may have.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 19, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 67, 'end': 72, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Matt Gray: Thank you Mr. Chair and members. Matt Gray on behalf of Cal Small Biz. Just to add to what was previously said is, sometimes the policies and procedures are general, but then the actual application will vary from person to person, applicant to applicant. And so it's ever more important, especially in light of the fact that the Massage Therapy Council might cling to an answer that was said by a non-English speaking person, which may have misunderstood what the question was, and even used the wrong words. It's ever more important that our immigrant populations are protected and that they can clearly understand what is being asked, and so we urge your aye, your support, thank you.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tony Siacotos: Tony Siacotos again from the California chapter of the American Massage Therapy Association, and we're pleased to support Senator Nguyen's bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 130, 'end': 136, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lauren McLoughlin: Lauren McLoughlin, I stand in support of this. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ahmos Netanel: mr chairman and members of the committee, ahmos, ceo of california massage therapy council. mr. chairman, members of the committee, we all have the same goal. we all want to communication and we want clearly understood communication. this bill will allow us to do more, the amendments that we suggested would help continue the work that we believe is so important in providing open communication to all parties. and providing written language that is understood by everyone. we look forward to working with you, thank you.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 49, 'end': 52, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bernadette Murray: good afternoon, my name is murray, i am a camtc certified massage therapist number 222 from woodland california. and l am very much in support of this bill. i did certify in 2009 with the original round of applications that came out. and between 2009 and 2014, the california massage therapy council did not have an active approval process for massage schools. schools were approved by other entities and the council policies and procedures to unapprove schools. so what happened. am i, yes. and after starting with january 1st 2015, the council was directed to develop policies and procedures to both approve and unapprove massage schools for the purposes of being certified by the massage council. in the time between december of 2014 through march of 2017 of this year i pointed out in my letter of support. the council has amended those policies regarding school approvals and unapprovals 24 times. including an increase on the school application fee for approval of 100%. that's a doubling of the application fee and the hearing fees. and that process is ongoing. i think that this has created a tremendous amount of confusion for massage applicants. especially considering that in state law at the state level, the certification program is described as being voluntary. but at many local levels it has been mandated in order for people to practice. i think that this bill provides an important clarification and protection for a class of consumers. namely massage students who did get their massage education hours from schools that were in compliance prior to july 1st, 2016. i very enthusiastically urge you to vote aye for this bill, and i support the bill. thanks very much to senator nguyen for authoring this important piece of legislation.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1695, 'end': 1701, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Matt Grey: Thank you, Mr. Chair and members. Matt Grey on behalf od Cal Small Biz. I have had the pleasure of dealing with the Massage Therapy Council off and of over the last several years. To put it lightly, some of the policies have been a moving target. And as she mentioned, a lot of the local jurisdictions rely upon the findings of the Massage Therapy Council. And in some instances completely hand off the process to them. However, as you know, we're all required to abide by a level of due process. But when you hand it off to an organization that does not necessarily have that built into it, it causes a lot of confusion, and some would argue some violations of due process. For those reasons, CalSmallBiz stands in strong support, and asks for your support as well.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lauren McLaughlin: good afternoon, senators. my name is lauren virginia mclaughlin, i'm also a camtc certified massage therapist, number 27187. i also happen to be the custodian of records for hanlon arts institute, which is a closed school. they closed last year prior to the deadline. i'm in support of this bill with the amendment. however, i do ask that all of those that are legitimate graduates be considered to be under this as well. and additionally, i'm a member of abmp. laura embleton sent an email this morning. it didn't arrive in time for it to be in your packets. abmp is the largest massage therapy association in the country. it is associated bodywork&massage professionals with over 80,000 members nationwide and if it's the largest in the state of california, with over 7,500 members. and abmp is in favor and supports this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 63, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 462, 'end': 476, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ahmos Netanel: Ahmos Netanel, CEO of California Massage Therapy Council. I'd like to first thank you, Senator Hill, the Committee, Bill Gage and Senator Mason. I recognize that you and your Committee understand perhaps more than anyone the importance of making sure that qualified massage therapists are providing care to millions of people in California who seek massage therapy. I appreciate very much being allowed to be part of this process, and we continue to learn that we can write legislation that strikes a balance and addresses the needs of educated students. And at the same time is mindful of our legislative mandate to protect consumers and local communities. We believe now that this legislation can also be helpful if one last concern is addressed. We suggest an amendment that would specify April 1, 2018 as the date by which students from certain unapproved schools will need to apply. This will keep the language congruent with existing policy of granting 90 days windows to other students with similar circumstances. I'm always available to meet with the Committee. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 95, 'end': 99, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 116, 'end': 125, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 138, 'end': 143, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tony Siacotos: good afternoon. i'm siacotos. i'm the government relations chair for the california chapter of the american massage therapy association. and we'd like to thank senator nguyen for this bill. seeking to protect the population of students who are acting in good faith, did not get the best support from their schools and we hope will one day be our future colleagues. so we appreciate her willingness to work with us on this bill. and we look forward to continuing to amend it in the future to address future concerns. thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 168, 'end': 174, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alison Siegel: sure, good afternoon, siegel. i'm a special counsel to the california massage therapy council, and the term on approve, it's the term of art that the council has used since 2012. this is language that it's currently in the statute in the business and professions code. 4601a, where it references the definition of unapproved or unapproved school. unapproved for camtc basically means that before the current process, which began in july 1 of 2016, schools are currently approved, or they can be denied or revoked. but under the old process, they were unapproved. so under the old process, a school would be approved by bppe or another organization listed in camtc's statute. and also approved by the council, but that approval was on an active approval. it was essentially, if they were approved by one of the organizations that were listed in 4601, business professions code, then camtc essentially accepted that education. however, there were schools that they found that they had various issues, and those schools, they removed that approval. and so the phrase that has been used since 2012 is unapproved. so that's a bit of a technical term that's used, i understand it's not the world's best english and it leads to some confusion. but i hope it answers the question.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stuart Thompson: Stuart Thompson on behalf of the California Medical Association. I'd like to echo Mr. Madden's comments, but specifically talk about, kind of, the timeline of these regulations. Currently the Bureau and the California Public Health Department is required to issue regulations on this very topic but from CMA's point of view, we do think time is of the essence on this issue. And there is a scenario where we could legalize marijuana without having those regulations in place. This bill could actually be in effect before those regulations are in effect, so for us, there's a couple different ways to address this issue, but we want to thank Senator Nielsen for addressing it, because it is one of those that we have to deal with as soon as possible. So thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 86, 'end': 92, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 649, 'end': 656, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Lovell: john lauren lovell on behalf of the association for los angeles deputy sheriffs, association of deputy district attorneys, california's association of code enforcement officers, college and university police chiefs association, california narcotic officers association, los angeles county professional peace officers, los angeles police protective league, riverside sheriffs association. we're all in support of this bill. and as the previous witness indicated, there is real urgency to this as i said in my previous testimony. this is the only marijuana legalization measure in the country that, by its terms, permits the recipients of mass advertising to be as much as 28% children. so a bill like senator nielsen's bill is important because it cuts off messaging that could be of impact to that audience permitted by prop 64. this is a terribly important bill. we commend the senator for introducing it.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 708, 'end': 715, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lauren Michaels: Thank you, Lauren Michaels on behalf of the California Police Chiefs Association in support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nate Bradley: how's it going today? nate with the california cannabis industry association. we're here to oppose this bill today, not because we think kids should have easy access to marijuana products but on a more regulation basis. the rules are being written right now and we have taken a policy after working with the reg agencies who've actually asked us ourselves, to hold off on putting new rules and regulations in place until they get the first round out. and that's the concern we have now, prop 64 did have some of the strictest child protection regulations than of any initiative that's been passed in this country. but the reality is, as the rules are being written right now, they have very limited staff doing that. and so when you put extra rules and regulations on it, they have to then go back that next year when they were supposed to start issuing licenses next year, and start rewriting a lot of these rules. so that's our general concern with this, the other issue is liability issues, who becomes liable as to what's actually attractive to children and what's not? we'd like to do this on a complaint by complaint basis with the local district attorney's offices so they can be a better determinant instead of just having some random employee at the department of public health determine, well that's attractive to kids, that's not. so those are our two main concerns, we have done a lot of work to address this issue. our manufacturing subcommittee within the association has developed a safe cannabis use website which does educate parents, it does educate people on that. we're working with the state to promote that around the state, and we've also given them numerous white papers with best practices for packaging and the standards that should be written around them. but our main concern right now is putting on extra rules and regulations before the first round of rules and regulations have even been written yet, that's all.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Lovell: john john lovell on behalf of the association for los angeles county deputy sheriffs, the association of deputy district attorneys, the california association of code enforcement officers, california college and university police chiefs association, california narcotic officers association, los angeles county professional peace officers association, los angeles police protective league, and the riverside sheriffs association. we're all in support of this good sense bill, and the imperatives of a bill like this cannot be understated. even though prop 64 contains language about direct marketing to children, and that's praiseworthy. one of the other things it does, and this is unique of any of the legalization measures in the country, is that it specifically says that an advertising audience in any mass advertising can be up to 28% children at the only language in the country like that. and so, measures like this, senator allen's bill, are really good sense imperative bills and we strongly support it.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 933, 'end': 938, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cesar Diaz: I'm, Chair Member, Cesar Diaz on behalf of the State Building and Construction Trades Council, I also want to echo sentiments that were already mentioned. This bill is about fairness. It's not about over-reaching, giving the design professional something that the other entities involved in the construction project do not have. It just brings proportionality and fairness to their process. For those reasons, we urge your support.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Thomas: mary jonah thomas on behalf of the california council american society of landscape architects, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Don Schinske: thank you, madam chair. don mary schinske on behalf of the structural engineers association of california, in support.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 41, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark Christian: madam chair and members, mark with the american institute of architects california council in support.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stanicia Boatner: chair and members, boatner with the california state association of counties and we are neutral on this bill. so that's a heavy neutrality. are there any witnesses in opposition to the bill?
[{'start': 19, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Lovell: lovell on behalf of the association for los angeles deputy sheriffs, association of deputy district attorneys, california association of code enforcement officers, california college and university police chiefs, california narcotic officers, los angeles county professional peace officers association, los angeles police protective league, riverside sheriff's association. we have always felt that private prisons, private detention, have no place in public safety, their duty is a fiduciary duty to their shareholders, and not to the public, or public safety, we support this bill.
[]
Joshua Golka: mr. chair and members, joshua jonah golka with the american federation of state, county, and municipal employees, for the reasons discussed by mr. level, as well as those outlined in the analysis, we are also in support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 147, 'end': 152, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jevaughn Baker: good morning mr. chair and members, jevaughn joshua baker on behalf of the california correctional peace officers association. there were a number of issues that were already mentioned that have been reconciled, so we do intend to fully support this bill. we are greatly appreciative of the members' willingness to engage with us, and also the outstanding staff work as well, thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ashley Martinez: mr. chair and committee members, ashley jevaughn martinez on behalf of seiu local 1000, and we're in strong support of this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicholas Gonzales: nicholas ashley gonzales for the california civil liberties advocacy, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Latimer: mr. chairman and members, john nicholas latimer on behalf of corecivic, the company also known as corrections corporation of america. we do not have an opposed position on this bill, but i did feel, since the subject matter involves our contract with the state of california, that it might be helpful to come up and share some thoughts. we certainly do respect the desires of the author, and ultimately the will of the state legislature, and the governor's office, to decide whether or not to contract with any entity, let alone corecivic, but i do think, again, to maybe help elaborate a little bit on our relationship. so, corecivic does operate currently two contracts for two facilities with the state of california out of state, approximately housing 4,400 inmates. that began in about 2007, when the state was faced with over-crowding that reached over 175% of our designed capacity, and through the course of our contract with the state of california, at one point we were up to 10,000 inmates out of state. and the reason for that was the court ultimately found that the state of california had to reduce their prison population by approximately 40,000 inmates, through the course of prison reforms and prison changes, and we were simply a part of that process, we were not the answer to that process by any means, we were part of that process, and we were proud of that fact. but today, as i said, that number is down to 4,400 inmates, as many of the prison reforms have kicked in, like realignment, prop 57, and prop 47, so as we are, at today, two facilities, the governor's budget currently intends to reduce that number down to one facility and about 3,200 inmates in the upcoming budget year. and we certainly understand that as the overall need in terms of the population drops then so shall, and so should, the contracts with the state of california. so this process that i think mr. bonta's bill envisions is happening on it's own already, organically. in fact, the statute that authorizes these out-of-state contracts will expire in 2020. the governor's budget in addition to assuming that our contract will go down to one facility. it also stated their intent that in their belief that by 2020 the state will be out-of-state prison contracts. and again, that is a proposal and a perspective of the contracting party, the state, that we could not or would not resist. it's a matter of capacity need, and as that capacity need is changing, so is the contracting relationship. and that is certainly understandable in the way that we've dealt with california and any other prison contractor. i would point out some other information, just for clarity's sake. our contracts do have significant transparency in them, we have requirements in the contract. i heard an awful lot about the fiduciary duty, and yes it is a for-profit company. but the duties attached to this contract with the state of california, or any contract, falls under the contract. and the state of california is very explicit in what its expectation is of the for-profit contracts. and we're happy to follow those and are following the requirements of those contracts. so in addition to the contract we also have to follow the cdcr's department operations manual. we follow title 15 and we follow all three court orders that govern the state's in-state prison system as well. even though none of the facilities that california's housed inmates in are at or above 100% of capacity. further, i would also offer that in all of our facilities we offer educational, vocational, and rehabilitation programming. and have the entire time in our contract, and are proud and happy to do so. it's the right way for us to run our system and we've done it successfully in the state of california. i think the final point again, just in terms of the context of where california has been in this issue over 10 years. is the reality of being able to not put 10,000 inmates, not build up to four prisons to house those, at the time, 10,000 inmates, means the state has avoided about $4 billion in debt cost. and the requirement to then build and manage four additional prisons. and instead, the state's been able to manage, through their own policies, a change in incarceration through realignment through prop 57 and prop 47. that's meant the prison population has come down, and now at the same time the state is able to correspondingly draw down those out-of-state contracts. so while we certainly understand the philosophical view here offered by the author, i think it is important to talk about kind of where we've been in terms of our partnership with the state. as the state has not embarked on a desired program of housing inmates out-of-state, but in dealing with changing the prison culture in california and reducing the overall prison population. so that has been our role in that and we just wanted to offer those thoughts. we do not have a position on the legislation, but felt again since we were the subject of it it probably make sense to come up and talk to the members. thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1900, 'end': 1905, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: I apologize. I saw there was an in-between. I am late, Ignacio Hernandez. On behalf of the California Attorneys for Criminal Justice actually in support of the bill.
[{'start': 55, 'end': 72, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Hillary Blout: thank you, thank you, mr. chair. thank you to the committee and the author for allowing me to comment today on ab 1115. as the author mentioned, my name is hillary john blout. i'm a staff attorney for californians for safety and justice. and basically what i do there is i work towards enhancing access for record change opportunities and also reentry services for those who are truly looking to turn their life around. prior to coming to californians for safety and justice, i was actually a prosecutor here in california for a number of years. so it is my firm belief that public safety really is about holding individuals accountable for what they've done. but then after they've paid their debt to society, that we create pathways for them to really reintegrate into our society, become law-abiding contributing members of our community. so, ab 1115 really strikes a balance between providing an opportunity for individuals to expunge their record while still maintaining law enforcement's ability to access that old criminal record and also use it for some specific public safety purposes. it's important to know and rearrange that ab 1115 does not guarantee an expungement and it does erase a person's criminal record from their conviction history. there's no guarantee that a petition would be granted simply by filing a petition with the court. a judge, in these matters, they still will review the entire record. they'll review convictions, they'll review arrests, they'll even review failures to appear to court. they'll review how people performed on probation. so, the way that a person is actually able to achieve an expungement in this particular case, is actually something they need to earn. so in our practice what we've seen is that the petition process itself can actually serve as a motivation for people trying to get their life together. we counsel them that they may need to return and complete a class. they may need to enroll in school. perhaps they need to excel at the workplace so they can provide certain letters to the court. the court will be looking at a series of letters to show that the individual has in fact achieved sufficient rehabilitation to have that criminal record removed. so again, this is a measure that will promote public safety in encouraging people to really get their lives together. it is something that an individual has to earn and we ask this committee to provide this opportunity for people who are looking to change their life and also close a chapter of their prior history, thank you.
[{'start': 156, 'end': 174, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susan Burton: susan. good afternoon. i want to thank you for this bill. and thank you all here for listening and considering this bill. my name is susan hillary burton. i am the founder and executive director of a new way of life reentry project. a new way of life provides reentry services for women exiting prisons and jails and help them get back on their feet, obey laws, reunite with their children, and become productive members of the community. so, i'm formerly incarcerated. in 1981, my five year old son was accidentally killed. and, as a result of his death, i drank and it escalated to illegal drug use. for that drug use i cycled in and out of prison numerous times over a 15 year period until someone helped me. when i found help i figured i could pay it forward and help other women receive compassionate services. i bought a little house i started to invite women into that house and there created a new way of life. we all live together. now there's five houses, there's been over a thousand women through those houses. we have a little non-profit. so through a new way of life, through the community, through legal services, i've done everything i can to seek remedies for my felony convictions. i've did expungement's for some. i've did certificates of rehabilitation. i asked the governor for a pardon. i've done everything humanly possible. but still i have a felony conviction that is not expungeable. the governor didn't give me the pardon. i did get the certificate of rehabilitation, but i just want to be able to have every opportunity to restore my privileges as a citizen. i mean i pay taxes, i don't break any laws, i help other people not break laws. and i know that our communities was really hard hit by the war on drugs and we want to restore each one of those individuals in the community. i mean, they have to do their part. but i'm asking you to be a part of that restoration also, by a yes vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 133, 'end': 153, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Wanner: linda susan wanner, with the california catholic conference, in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathy Sher: Kathy Sher, with the ACLU of California, in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jonathan Feldman: chair and members, this will be quick, so i won't take a seat, but, jonathan with the california police chiefs association. we are in respectful opposition right now, but i want to thank the sponsors for meeting with us earlier this week to discuss our opposition, give us some clarification about the process, the effects that we've seen post prop 47, and we look forward to continuing those discussions regarding our position as the bill moves forward, thank you.
[{'start': 68, 'end': 76, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeff Rubin: Jeff Rubin on behalf of the California District Attorney Association, up until a few years ago, it was routine for warrantless blood draws to take place. Then, the United States Supreme Court in McNealy said you cannot justify a warrantless blood draw based solely on search circumstances. That was one of the exceptions to the normal requirement that we get a warrant to conduct any kind of search. Then last year, in Burchfield, the court said you couldn't justify a blood test under the Search Incident to Arrest exception which is another exception to the warrant requirement. And it also addressed the implied consent laws. Previously, we've been able to justify both a breath test as well as a blood test under the implied consent law. But Burchfield said look, we heartily approve of requiring breath tests to be taken under the implied consent law. And if someone refuses to do it, you can impose administrative penalties and you can also impose criminal penalties. What they said was, when it comes to blood, while you can potentially impose administrative penalties for someone who refuses to take a blood test, you cannot impose criminal penalties. Well right now, under our laws, as they're currently written, You can impose a penalty, either a criminal penalty or a fine for refusing to take a blood test. But that's not allowed anymore under Burchfield. So what this new law does is comports what we have to do, comports the statute, with the constitutional requirements. Now, Blood tests are better than breath tests. Blood tests are a direct evidence of the level of alcohol in the blood. And breath tests are a more indirect level. So because of this law, we are going to see fewer blood tests and that's not good because the more accurate the blood test, the better it is in terms of prosecuting individuals who are guilty and exonerating individuals who are not guilty. But what our bill does is, even though it follows what Burchfield requires, it also imposes an additional way of getting people to take breath tests. Now, breath tests are not going to show people who are driving under the influence of drugs. But at least now, under this new bill, someone will not benefit by refusing to take a breath test in juxtaposition to someone who agrees to take a breath test. So this is a reasonable and constitutional means of addressing the issue created by Burchfield and we would urge your support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 746, 'end': 756, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1356, 'end': 1366, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1944, 'end': 1954, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2376, 'end': 2386, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: Good morning, Mr. Chair and members. Ignacio Hernandez on behalf of the California Attorneys for Criminal Justice, statewide Association for criminal defense attorneys. We are opposed to the measure. I want to thank the author of the bill for meeting with me and having a discussion. As always, it's always very beneficial. And I think, in many ways, we wholeheartedly agree with the testimony of the supporters of this bill. This is in response to the Supreme Court decision in Birchfield. You do have to eliminate the criminal penalties for refusal to take a blood test. And most importantly, the Birchfield court decided that law enforcement cannot draw blood, even after a lawful arrest, absent a warrant. You must have a warrant to draw blood. That was the fundamental anchor of the Birchfield decision, we agree. What this bill is doing is saying every individual who gets a license in California must waive that protection. Must waive the warrant requirement as a condition of having the privilege to have a driver's license in California. Now that, to be fair, up until Birchfield, we did require every driver to give permission to give a blood draw, breath or blood. I'm focusing on blood, that's the main issue. So, you did have to give permission. The difference being, as soon as the Birchfield decision came about, it's not permission anymore. It's waiving a constitutional protection under the Fourth Amendment, that is what this bill is doing. We do agree with the first part of it. But their resolution to getting blood, as they stated, they think blood is better, is to say, if you're going to drive in California with a license, you have to waive your right to a warrant. We don't ask a driver to waive Fourth Amendment protections to search a car. We don't ask drivers to waive the warrant requirement for cell phone, which I know all of you dealt with in the last couple of years. We don't ask for constitutional waivers to drive on our roads in California. We think the bill goes too far in that regard. Last thing, In Supreme Court decision, they took evidence that there are more refusals of blood when the penalties are only administrative. This bill, rightfully so, changes the penalties to administrative, which means we can expect more refusals of blood tests. Which means more situations where an officer wants a blood draw, and the driver does not want a blood draw. That is going to be a problem. Especially because in North Dakota, which is where this case originated, there is a law in that state that says there cannot be a forcible blood draw by a police officer unless it's a DUI with injury or death. We don't have that statute in California. We are concerned that individuals may not understand it. They waive their right to a warrant, the warrant requirement when they get the driver's license. And on the scene of the DUI they're going to say no, no, I don't want blood. And the officer's going to say, well, by having a driver's license you have waived that warrant requirement. You have waived your protection of the Fourth Amendment, and we're going to take blood from you. At that juncture, we're going to run into forcible blood draws, and we are extremely concerned about that. We think there are other ways to deal with this. We think breath is fine for DUI alcohol, and that should be the law in California. Not ask drivers to waive any constitutional rights simply for the right to drive on our roads. For those reason we are opposed, happy to try to fix the bill, and, like I said, I do appreciate the conversation with the author.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 479, 'end': 489, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 599, 'end': 609, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 788, 'end': 798, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1078, 'end': 1088, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1296, 'end': 1306, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Marta Galvis: good morning, thank you for the opportunity to speak before you today. my name is marta linda galvis, i'm a youth organizer with the youth justice coalition. we are honored to be cosponsors of assembly bill 1639 today. a month and a half ago my mother juanita sandoval was brutally murdered outside of our housing development in clover city. in those first few days after her death, sorry. the world felt like it had stopped. all my sister and i wanted to do was curl up into a ball and disappear. but for families like ours, without disposable income or a safety net, that was a privilege that simply didn't exist. my sister and i had to immediately face many harsh realities. we didn't have enough money to bury our mother, we had no idea how to handle an lapd homicide investigation, and we didn't know our mother was killed. and we had to figure how we were going to come up with thousands of dollars, a funeral home, of cemetery plot, on top of contacting, feeding, and housing family members. it felt as though we had to put our grief on the side to figure it all out. in the past six years, the youth justice coalition has supported 63 families whose loved ones were killed. so we have learned what victims' resources are available, and how to access those supports. in many ways, we were lucky. what happens to the thousands of families who don't even know this help exists? still, even with this knowledge and experience, we have had to chase down victims' compensation, push for coverage since my mom was undocumented. and answer embarrassing questions about my mom's one past arrest. three funeral homes told us that they saw it all too often, that my mother's previous arrest, not even conviction, and immigration status would most likely get her application denied. the funeral home we chose made us sign a promise waiver, to ensure we accepted liability for any balance in case victims' compensation denied us. ab 1639 would prohibit the california victim compensation board, county district attorneys and city attorneys from denying an application for victim compensation only because the person is undocumented, like my mom. has been convicted, is suspected of being gang involved or is unable to cooperate with an investigation. i'm asking you today to vote yes on ab 1639. not only for those who have already passed, but for families left behind. the ones that have to set up gofundme accounts and throw car washes as they cry. as hard as this has been for me and my sister, i worry even more for my two-year-old niece and five-year-old nephew. what does it do to a toddler when they attend two candlelight vigils, a wake, and a funeral in a few weeks' time? and what will the future hold for them, and all of us, if we don't have access to healing for our family and for yours. please pass ab 1639.
[{'start': 82, 'end': 100, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 252, 'end': 268, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Samuel Nunez: good morning. i just want to acknowledge that this is survivors of violence, victims of violence week. and just really acknowledge all those people and communities that have been deeply impacted by violence in their own communities, perhaps some of your constituencies. my name is samuel marta nunez, i'm the executive director of fathers&families of san joaquin located in stockton. when people hear about stockton, they usually hear about violence, bankruptcy, foreclosures. the city has been reported in the media to be the second most violent city in california, the third most illiterate city in california. zoning laws, red lining, and lack of investment have created entire neighborhoods of poverty where there is easy access to fast food, alcohol, tobacco, and guns. and very little access to quality education, good jobs, parks, and resources. in 2012, stockton's crime rate was more than four times the national average. and young people ages 10 to 24 suffered a murder rate nearly three times the state average in our county. at fathers&families of san joaquin, our mission is to promote the cultural, spiritual, economic, and social renewal of the most vulnerable families in stockton and the greater san joaquin valley. founded the organization 15 years ago as part of my own healing. on february 13th, 1993, i was shot with a 12 gauge shotgun at point blank range. the shotgun entered my upper torso and exited out my back. it shattered my collar bone, punctured my lung, and severed my nerves. i actually lost double my body weight in blood and flatlined four times in the ordeal. i was subsequently discharge. i obviously survived. the doctors saved my life and then discharged me. i was subsequently denied services in 1993. and i think not much has changed, except for the emergence of the trauma recovery centers. and so now we've actually launched our own stockon trauma recovery center that provides access for clinical services for those communities that have the most impact of violence in their communities. it's culturally based, offers healing practices, healing circles, and is grounded in the pedagogy of love. i'd like to just say that race and place matter in determining who gets approved and denied for victim compensation services. locally, we know know about a shooting that occurred on november 19th, 2015 when we had just started our trauma recovery center. the shooting occurred on one of the most dangerous neighborhoods in stockton on california and park street. two children, ages 14 and 15, were hit in the shooting. one of them, the 15 year old, was fatally shot. the family was denied services for their involvement in the events leading to the qualifying crime was the reason why they were denied services. when asked about what we do with families when they're denied services, what can we possibly do to actually offer a dignified funeral and some support to the family that is going through this? the response was have a car wash. i'm just here to report that even in death, our boys and men of color are not treated equitably and i really urge you to vote for healing for all, ab 1639. thank you.
[{'start': 281, 'end': 299, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kim McGill: good morning, mcgill with the youth justice coalition just here in case there's questions.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: ignacio samuel hernandez on behalf of the california attorneys for criminal justice, in support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicholas Gonzales: gonzales for the california civil liberties advocacy.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susan Burton: Susan Burton from A New Way of Life, all of us are not in support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Wanner: linda with the california catholic conference in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Javier Stauring: javier with healing dialogues and action. we are proud to be co-sponsor in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Cruzan: Sarah Cruzan with Healing Dialogue and Action, and we are proud to sponsor this.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Juan Pena: Juan Pena with the Youth Crisis Coalition in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amethyst Ewing: ewing with the youth justice coalition in strong support.
[]
Mar Velez: Mar Velez with Communities United for Restorative Youth Justice in Oakland, and I support this bill and strongly urge you to vote yes on this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Juan Toppiez: thank you. juan ignacio toppiez with the communities united for restorative youth justice and i support this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joseph Muscadine: hello, my name is joseph juan muscadine, age 16, and i'm with communities united for restorative youth justice, and i support this bill.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vanessa De Leon: vanessa joseph de leon from the youth justice coalition, here for all the families in need of healing, in strong support of this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jay Green: good morning, jay vanessa green, youth justice coalition, in firm and strong support of this bill.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathleen Sumacino: good morning. kathleen jay sumacino with youth justice group coalition, and i strongly support. vote yes.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lupita Carvallo: hello, lupita kathleen carvallo from youth justice coalition, and i strongly support.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jose Vaya: Hi, this is Jose Vaya with Silicon Valley De-bug, supporting this bill to the fullest.
[{'start': 12, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stephanie Flores: Stephanie Flores, Silicon Valley De-bug, and I'm in definite support of this bill, also. I hope you guys pass it. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maurice Gomez: Maurice Gomez, Fathers and Families of San Joaquin, 100% in support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Penarvis Harshaw: Good morning, Penarvis Harshaw with the Alliance for Boys and Men of Color. I strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lydia Barret: Yes, hello, good morning. Thank you very much Mr. Chairman and members for the opportunity to speak with you today. And for your consideration of AB 1559. My name is Lydia Barret and I work with Shot Spotter which is a gunshot detection and analysis service in the public safety technology industry. For the past 20 years we have been supporting and working with law enforcement, and cities and counties to address gun violence issues. And there's several things that we find significant in our work with them. Number one the recording of gunfire incidents is severely under reported. In fact it's consistent in most cities well below 20%. So if you could imagine only getting a phone call for gunshot the gunshots happening in 20% or less of all incidents. Secondly we know that there is a very small percentage of folks who are actually doing the shooting. And those worst offenders clearly are not the community at large in these affected areas. What's become in these communities is that gunfire has become normalized. We have found through our years of working with almost 100 cities throughout the country. And expanding to more cities that when they put together comprehensive gun violence reduction programs not just utilizing a gun shot detection system. But also other innovative technologies. Having the right community partnerships, youth services, community services, faith-based services, and organizations as well as federal law enforcement and criminal justice partners. That they really can have an impact in gun violence reduction. Gunshot detection is having a game changing impact. If you don't know the when and where of where gunfire is happening, you'll never have the opportunity to interrupt that in a community most affected by it. Police have the opportunity to be very focused in their response to gunfire incidents by using this type of technology. When you couple that with other technologies like cameras, license plate readers. And you start to engage the community in an entirely new way by showing up to 100% of the gun fire incidents. Making sure that those scenes are safe, finding victims, finding evidence that can be used in prosecutions later, and more importantly, engaging with the community in a meaningful, accountable way and service to them. It can make a tremendous impact. There's many cities in California utilizing gunshot detection along with other innovative strategies and partnerships, and they're having dramatic positive impact in their efforts not only in California but throughout the country. In many cases showing significant reductions in gun fire incident volume over time. Thank you very much, I appreciate your consideration.
[{'start': 166, 'end': 178, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dave Petrocelli: I'm used to just projecting. I'm Lieutenant Dave Petrocelli, Los Angeles County Sheriff, I actually speak on two sides of this issue, both as a deputy sheriff and an advocate for mental health. I've worked in the mental health community for probably about 18, 19, years by now. My position within the Sheriff's Department is to facilitate reforms to our mental health programs for the Los Angeles County Jails as well. As the body is aware, the mental health system is inadequate to the need, both in Los Angeles County and the state as a whole. Our jails have filled the gap, in fact, Twin Towers Correctional Facility is the largest mental health institution in the United States. Los Angeles County jails house over 4,000 persons diagnosed with mental illness, and the population has been expanding since 2009. AB 109 has, of course, changed the stay of many of the inmates to years. So, we currently do not possess the same tools and processes available to state prisons and to state mental health hospitals. The jails are struggling to provide appropriate care, we can't ignore the needs of these patients because they happen to be in a jail setting, we have an obligation, and we are not meeting that at this time. Our only option at this point is to let a patient decompensate to the point where they are strapped down on a table and injected against their will. I just don't see the point why you'd watch somebody slowly decompensate to this state, it's a not an appropriate way to care for anyone. Deputy Sherrifs partner with mental health and medical personnel to care for individuals. And I must be clear that while deputies feed, clothe, and care for these persons, all decisions relative to medications are made by clinical and licensed mental health practitioners. Of course, the courts oversee and provide protections. AB 720 does not abridge the protections built into 2603 in any way, and we intend to work with the courts and mental health professionals to provide the necessary care to individuals with mental illness inside of our jails. Now the jails have been forced into the role of a mental health hospital, we need the tools necessary to complete our obligation to care, Los Angeles County Sheriff urges an aye on 720, thank you.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randall Hagar: mr chairman, i'm randall lupita hagar, i represent the california psychiatric association. and ms. eggman is actually talking about one of our psychiatrists that she met at an event, captain thompson. who, in addition to being one of the chief, one of the more highly regarded forensic psychiatrists in california, has the privilege of having been married, or still is married, to former assembly health committee chair, helen thompson. so, he brought it to our attention the unfortunate conditions under which many inmates in the prisons and, i mean, in the jails where he is a consultant, actually exist for many months at a time without medications. for those people that he treats who are able to accept medication, they do, he provides, they get better, they're stabilized. this is for a neglected population at the pretrial inmates and it is i think a very, very necessary thing to provide them with an opportunity to have access to medications like we do with sentenced inmates. like we do with inmates in prisons. we urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 99, 'end': 105, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 191, 'end': 199, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 421, 'end': 435, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cory Salzillo: Good morning, Mr. Chair and members Cory Salzillo were here on behalf of the California State Sheriff's Association in support of the bill.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Margaret Johnson: Good morning Margaret Johnson with Disability Rights California we are opposed to this bill. We do think that the amendments posed in the analysis do help move the bill along in terms of protecting do process rights. And ensuring that the person won't be prejudiced at all in their trial if they're pre-trial. We do want to point out that these are very different people from those that are sentenced still in prison. These are people that are very temporarily often in jails. So we just want to make sure that people get all the protections that they need. We have concerns about continuity of care if meds are started and a person is released shortly after. We also have concerns that poor people may be more likely impacted by this bill. Because people with more resources would be out of jail probably on bail. And then we're also concerned that ICE detainees may be adversely impacted. because I personally not really sure what the ICE process is like. And if somebody is detained for that process put on medication. And then moved to the ICE process it might be very different. It's unclear if the medications would be continued. And how they would impact the person's immediate ability to participate in the ICE processes. Finally we believe jails are not really for people with mental health disabilities. And resources that should be put towards improving community mental health services rather than trying to serve people in jails. So we request that you vote no on this bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dave Hoseinie: hi i'm dave representing the california association of mental health peer run organizations. we're an organization that represents over 50,000 mental health clients and consumers in the state. and we are strongly opposed this bill and see this as a violation of rights. thank you.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Teresa Drenick: All right. Good morning, thank you for having us here. I'm Teresa Drenick, I'm an assistant District Attorney in Alameda County and I'm here on behalf of our office and District Attorney Nancy O'Malley to support AB 320. Very briefly, as a prosecutor, we know how vital it is to have a solid, reliable, truthful, forensically appropriate interview when we have children who are the victims of child abuse and sexual abuse. These are very complicated and serious felony prosecutions that we do take into court, and the statement and the testimony of the child taken in a forensically appropriate manner is of the utmost importance. This bill is very important to set in our statutes the definition of what a CAC is, so that each and every county and each and every CAC around our state will have a multi-disciplinary team made up of the appropriate professionals, including law enforcement. District attorneys, mental health professionals, health professionals among others. Currently we do not have standardization among CACs, and it's really vital that we do. A, for the the benefit of the children who are being interviewed at these centers. And B, for funding that flows to the centers, there must be this uniformity of definition in order that we in California can keep these vital institutions open and serving our children. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 59, 'end': 73, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 187, 'end': 201, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Lovell: john on behalf the association for los angeles deputy sheriffs. the association of deputy district attorneys. california association of code enforcement officers, california college and university police chiefs association, california narcotic officers association, los angeles county probation officers union, afscme local 685, los angeles professional peace officers association. los angeles police protective league and the riverside sheriffs association all in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
 : Thank you Mr. Lovell.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 20, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Christina Cavanaugh: Hi, Christina Cavanaugh, University of California, San Francisco Children's Hospital Retirees, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amanda Wilcox: amanda randall wilcox on behalf of the california chapters of the brady campaign to prevent gun violence. we support this bill for reasons that were very well stated by my coalition partner here from the law center to prevent gun violence. my husband and i actually did a freedom a public record request with doj a number of years ago regarding gun dealer violations. these are smaller violations that wouldn't be appropriate to revoke a license, but essentially doj was powerless to do anything. some of these were repeated violations by gun dealers. many were related to the firearm and handgun safety certificate issues and making sure that those were compliant. others were related to the drose form and not filling it out completely. others were well one dealer is unable to locate a firearm. i find that of great concern. there are a number of signage violations. in other words, these are laws we have for good reason, but violations of this nature should not cause a revocation, i don't think they could. but there needs to be a way to have incremental accountability and fines so that these laws are better followed. california department of justice clearly needs a better enforcement tool as well as the city jurisdictions to make sure that dealer laws are followed. so we urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 66, 'end': 71, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 309, 'end': 312, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 463, 'end': 466, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sam Paredes: mr chairman, members, sam amanda paredes representing gun owners of california and a licensed gun dealer in the state of california with a federal firearms licence and a certificate of eligibility and a licence from the state department of justice, as a gun dealer. so first of all some of the comments that were made to this committee are now totally inaccurate and obsolete. as a matter of fact any violations of the firearm safety certificates are virtually non-existent in the state of california now because they're interactive with a computer interface with the state of california. so once it's taken, it has to be put into the database and all of that information is now, it's good. the dealer record of sales, it's all automated. if you miss something or if you put something in wrong it goes. you can't do this. we are not going to accept the information. it has to be input correctly. so all of that stuff is gone. we have grave concerns about this because this will now allow local city attorneys, district attorneys, others. how are they going to find out that there has been a violation without actually going out and conducting their own audits of local dealers? in order to find out if they're messing up and they have an opportunity to impose a fine on them. we think that the existing system that is mirrored in the federal system right now, where the federal system doesn't levy fines if you violate, and you violate and you violate, they reject your license. and we think that the department of justice has that authority right now. if there's a dealer who continuously violates the rules and the laws of the state of california with regards to firearm sales, they have the ability to remove their firearms license. that is the biggest tool you can have in order to have compliance. and frankly the amount of compliance with dealers in the state of california is remarkable. there are very few cases where there are, other than really unique technical violations that do not, i mean i've had inspectors come in and say, sam, use your pen and go like that and now it's good. and that kind of stuff. so we're opposed to this measure. we don't think it's necessary. we think that the department of justice already has the tools it needs. and that's why we think this would be a great burden on dealers and again unnecessary. we ask your no vote on this bill. be happy to answer any questions regarding the process because i don't know if anybody else in here is a gun dealer and knows for sure.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2040, 'end': 2043, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Amanda Wilcox: does that mean i go on, or no? go ahead, concisely. amanda sam wilcox, again on behalf of the california chapters of the brady campaign to prevent gun violence. my organization has been working on enacting firearm laws in this state for many, many years, i have been for almost 12 years. i don't do this work as a volunteer, just for the sake of passing laws or for the sake of doing gotcha moments with gun owners. our goal is to reduce firearm injury and death. and, in fact, our strong gun laws in california have helped achieve a 57% reduction in our firearm mortality rate. more than double that of the rest of the nation since 1993. so we are realizing benefits from these laws. i think we can realize even greater benefit and save more lives, to the extent that people have better understanding of the laws and better compliance. and as the assembly member mentioned, the last couple years have been a lot of activity regarding gun laws being enacted in california. some of these laws are very insignificant. i want to make sure gun owners, who want to be law abiding, gun owners know these laws. for example, now if someone is manufacturing a gun or building up a lower receiver in our state, they need to get a serial number from the department of justice. there will be a record that doj will have, and that person will have to require a background check. that is very important for public safety. we passed a law that bullet button type assault weapons now need to be registered. those that are grandfathered need to register those guns. that's important that doj have a record, in case those people later become prohibited, they can take steps to disarm those people. so, i firmly believe that to the extent people have knowledge of the gun, of our laws and with this bill, there's direction how they can gain information about these laws that will encourage better compliance. which will in turn make our state safer. so, i urge your aye vote. thank you.
[{'start': 52, 'end': 69, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 121, 'end': 126, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1294, 'end': 1297, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ari Freilich: i'll be very brief. my name is ari amanda freilich. i'm appearing on behalf of the law center to prevent gun violence, and americans for responsible solutions. we believe public safety is stronger when gun owners all well informed in plain english about the obligations, responsibilities associated with ownership of lethal weapons. we think this bill would go a long way toward better informing new and returning gun buyers about these responsibilities, and we urge your aye vote. thank you.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Craig DeLuz: mr chairman, members of the committee. deluz on behalf of the firearms policy coalition and the california association of federal firearms licensees, in opposition. already we're talking about an industry that is one of the most highly regulated, and a group of individual citizens that are the most highly regulated in the state of california. our concern about this bill, even as it is amended, is that it provides for additional compelled speech on those who seek no other purpose than to help individuals exercise their constitutional rights. there are already nine signs that are required. and so, what we're saying now is we're going to require yet an even additional sign, which includes speech that is not totally supported by, or at least enforced by california law. meaning that, not everything that is in this compelled speech is in fact law. some of it is just a matter of opinion. that, we believe, is compelled speech upon those who are ffls. we believe that this bill is unnecessary, we believe that it is duplicative. and we believe that it is simply nothing more than to provide one more regulation upon federal firearms licensees. i'll hearken back to the old tesla song, sign, signs, everywhere signs. and that just seems to be just one more example of just a concern, undue concern and rhetoric run amok. it is for that reason that we oppose this measure, thank you.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim McMann: Tim McMann, member of National Rifle Association, California Rifle Association, asks for your no vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicki Stallard: Yeah, hi everybody, I'm Nicki Stallard, California Pink Pistols, we strongly support AB 757. Violence against the LGBT community is real and rising, most hate crime attacks occur outside the home. Many hate crime attacks involve multiple attackers. Sadly, victims who may survive attacks often suffer lifelong injuries. When critical seconds count, the police are minutes away at best. Questions we must consider. If a lack of a CCW permit was a deterrent to criminal misuse of guns, then criminal misuse of guns would be rare. Since criminals are armed, how does the current California, may issue CCW laws? That potential victims, that makes the potential victims easier prey for violent criminals, promote public safety? What makes California so special, that most law-abiding Californians are denied self-defense choices that are readily available in 42 other states? Facts from 42 other states show, that CCW holders are overwhelmingly law-abiding, and the misuse of guns by CCW holders are rare events. The public safety argument to deny self-defense equality, it just isn't there. California led with marriage equality, it's time for self-defense equality. Equality under the law is the foundation of our legal system. Equality under the law is carved on stone, on this US Supreme Court building. Our may-issue CCW laws make a mockery of equal rights. May-issue is a Jim Crow relic, that has no place anywhere in America. AB 757 creates an equal issue, objective-standard CCW system that balances self-defense rights and legitimate public safety concerns. Please vote yes on AB 757, thank you.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Frank Huntington: good morning, ladies and gentlemen my name is frank ari huntington. i am the chairman of the board of cali, the california association of licensed investigators. the largest licence investigator association in the world. we are here in support of this bill.
[{'start': 46, 'end': 66, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Craig DeLuz: Craig Deluz with the Firearms Policy Coalition, just like to note that the- I'm sorry, name and organization. Name and organization. Craig Deluz with Firearms Policy Coalition, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 133, 'end': 144, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Steve Wessels: Steve Wessels, I'm a private attorney. I was denied a CCW while I lived in the City of Sacramento, even though my life had been threatened. I moved to the county just for that reason, I've had a CCW permit for 25 years. I strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Timothy Grimes: timothy frank grimes, california citizen and democrat, in full support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sam Peredes: Mr. Chair and members, Sam Peredes representing Gun Owners of California in strong support of the bill, also grateful for the author for bringing this up, hope you will consider it very carefully.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim McMann: hi, i'm tim timothy mcmann. i'm a member of the national rifle association, and the california rifle and pistol association. and this bill would right an injustice where some residents can exercise their constitutional rights, and some can't, so i urge a yes vote. and thank you->>thank you, sir.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eric Ranch: Mr Chairman, my name is Eric Ranch. I'm a member of the NRA, and I am a Democrat, and I come here to support this bill. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amanda Wilcox: Good morning. I'm Amanda Wilcox, I'm here on behalf of the 28 California Chapters of the Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence and we stand in opposition to this bill. California currently is a may-issue CCW state and we support that policy. This bill would essentially make California a shall-issue state whereby essentially with the removing of the standard for good cause any one who want to carry or get a CCW permit could assuming that they meet the other requirements. This, I think the key question before this Committee is whether it is in the public interest to have More loaded hidden guns in public. This isn't about guns in the home. It's a persons choice whether they have a gun in the home or not. But once the gun is carried in public, that puts other people at risk. Consider law enforcement and how much they are trained. And repeatedly trained, and yet making that difficult decision, assessing the situation, deciding whether to shoot or not. Possibly not hitting their target, or hitting bystanders. That's a very difficult situation for law enforcement. I have a hard time believing that the average citizen can handle that situation better than law enforcement. So again I think this does put the public at risk. I understand the frustration of many people that the requirements vary from county to county. It does seem unfair, but rather lowering the requirement I would support a stronger requirement, more strict requirement on all the counties in California. Consistency could be achieved that way. Again, we're opposed to the measure.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 89, 'end': 94, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ari Freilich: good morning. my name is ari tim freilich. i'm here on behalf of the law center to prevent gun violence and i respectfully urge you to oppose this bill. historically, almost every state prohibited or strictly limited the carrying of concealed loaded weapons in public places, these restrictions were among the earliest gun laws ever adopted in the country. though the gun lobby has pushed many states to weaken these licensing requirements in recent years, california has thankfully not been among those states. under california law, local enforcement may issue ccw licenses to residents of their jurisdiction if they determine that the applicant is of good moral character, and that good cause exists for the issuance of a license. and many local law enforcement agencies have, quite reasonably, interpreted this good cause element to require some actual evidence of particularized need beyond a bare general desire to go armed in public. this bill would effectively preempt those law enforcement decisions by requiring local police chiefs and sheriffs to accept applicants', quote, stated good cause without any additional inquiry. if they merely state that they desire a ccw license for general self-defense or crime prevention purposes. this would make a good cause standard effectively meaningless, undermining law enforcement discretion and threatening our resident's right to safely and to peacefully enjoy public spaces. we urge you to oppose this bill.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christy Bouma: mr. chairman, members, bouma on behalf of the california professional firefighters. pleased to be a sponsor of this measure. we thank the chairman and vice-chairman for the time and conversation on this bill. and i'm going to yield my time to our witnesses and we're obviously in strong support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tina Palmieri: I'm honored to address this group, I'm Tina Palmieri, I'm the Director of the UC Davis Burn Center and the Assistant Chief at Shriners. And I'm going to give you the human side of this. So you're saying, okay, a bunch of people who use drugs, they get what they deserve. Unfortunately, when butane explodes the whole house explodes. I've treated children as small as two years of age and adults in their 50s. Innocent bystanders, when the room explodes it knows no difference. In the past, we've actually published this, in the past seven years we had more than a hundred people sustain injuries from these explosions. The average size is about a 30% burn. To put it in perspective, everyone in this room, you've burned yourself, maybe your fingertip. Think how much that hurt. Now think about how much it would hurt if your whole arm. Now think about it if it's both your arms. Now, think about it, if it's both your arms and your chest, that is about 30% of your body. So it's a great deal of pain, the scarring causes a great deal of issues. On the monetary standpoint, a person with a 30% burn has a hospital bill ranging about $300,000. So that's $300,000 times 100 people. And you can see that this problem is escalating. So the cost is both human in terms of the pain, a month of hospitalization, a year off of work, the cost of the therapy, and going back to work. And several people have died as a result of these butane explosions. And California is not alone in states where marijuana has been legalized. This is become an issue. Colorado has noted a marketing increase in this exact same problem. So it is a public health concern that we in the burn center is great for business. But we'd like to be have less business from this cause which is I considered to be primarily preventable with very safe measures.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Fly: mr. chairman i want to thank you for being here today. captain mike ari fly with sacramento city fire department. i'm also the iff, international association of fire fighters 10th district burn coordinator. i'm also a burn survivor. i was involved in an explosion. similar to what happens in these processes. it wasn't one of these, but i suffered burns. dr. palmieri happened to be my doctor. but i want to speak in support of this bill, and thank you for your time.
[{'start': 63, 'end': 71, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 359, 'end': 367, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Stanicia Boatner: Good morning, Chair and members. Stanicia Boatner with the California State Association of Counties in support, thank you.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shawn Hoffman: thank you. morning mr chair, shawn with the california district attorney's association in support. thank you sir.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
James McDonough: mr chairman, vice chair, members of the committee, i thank you for the opportunity to speak here this morning. my names is james mike mcdonough, i am today here on behalf of the lighter association. i am a vice president at the lighter association and also an industry consultant. i've been in the lighter industry for over 30 years, i have over 30 patents on lighters, most of them pertain to lighters and safety and related products. and i've worked extensively with the us consumer product safety commission, addressing lighter safety and child resistance. i also chair an astm american society of testing materials subcommittee on setting standards for lighters and their safety. as well as sitting on a similar committee, in iso, the international standards organization out of geneva. the lighter association represents a number of companies in the united states, including two here in california. that deal with not only lighters, as the title tends to relate to, but also a number of other products related to those types, including, as we're talking about here today, butane. the industry is very committed and supportive and concerned for the safety of its products and especially the unsafe use of its products. butane has been available as a consumer product for a number of decades, and has been used in a very safe way for the intended applications. unfortunately, butane is as well as many other products can be misused and abused and used in unintended applications. butane is used and many intended applications and appliances without issues, they range from lighters to candle lighters, to torches that are used by hobbyists, school labs, jewelers, and also for home repair type of work. so there are millions and millions of these products out there. they're also products used in camping, which also requires significant amount of butane to be put in these devices to be used during a camping trip. one of the other applications that's used by these torches are in restaurants, that are using them in the cooking process in preparing food. as well as they may have lighters that use butane, to light candles and so on, that would consume significant amounts of butane in a short period of time. there's actually a two tiered marketplace for customers in this type of a product. the distribution chain going from manufacturers through to the retailer has many levels, whether it be wholesalers, distributors, what have you. then it gets to the second tier where the retailers are actually selling to consumers. the information that's being required in this bill that's being presented, would make great difficulties and challenges for every step of that distribution channel. and require information that is usually associated, as this bill refers to in the existing law, chemicals that are considered to be hazardous in industrial chemicals, not chemicals that are used by typical consumers. the unsafe process of hash oil, in this case, has other options also to use instead of just butane. such other types of materials, propane, methanol, which is known as wood alcohol, ethanol, which is drinking alcohol or grain alcohol. and even isopropyl alcohol that is used by most people for medical reasons in the home, all are highly flammable and can be used. in fact, there are many segments on youtube and other types of internet media, that actually show these other materials being used including the grain alcohol everclear being used, which again is highly flammable. so with that, i would suggest that the committee seriously consider all the other ramifications involved in this matter.
[{'start': 123, 'end': 143, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathy Sher: kathy james sher on behalf of the aclu of california. we have no objection to the regulation of vendors of butane, however we strongly oppose the imposition of criminal penalties on individuals for purchasing a legal product with many lawful uses. under ab 1120, a person buying butane for a camp stove or other legal purposes could be prosecuted for exceeding a monthly limit that he had simply never heard of. if the intention is to limit the amount of butane a vendor can sell to a particular person in a month, then the bill should be redrafted to state that.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicole Quinonez: Good morning, Nicole Quinonez on behalf of the Consumer Specialty Products Association. We are opposing unless amended, and the author's office has committed to working with us. We represent the aerosol products industry. Butane is a propellant used in a variety of aerosol products, hairspray, dry shampoo, that type of thing. And so we just want to make sure that the limit does not exclude legitimate businesses that are using butane in much larger quantities. Our folks are getting train-car loads of butane and using butane and butane mixtures in these products. So we'll continue to work with the author's office, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Lovell: john on behalf of the association for los angeles deputy sheriffs. association of deputy district attorneys. california association of code enforcement officers. california college and university police chiefs. california narcotic officers. los angeles county professional peace officers association. los angeles police protective league. riverside sheriffs association. we have always felt that private prisons, private detention, have no place in public safety. their duty is a fiduciary duty to their shareholders and not to the public or public safety. we support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joshua Golka: mr. chair and members, golka with the american federation of state and county and municipal employees. for the reasons discussed by mr. lovell as well as those outlined in the analysis, we're also in support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 136, 'end': 142, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jevaughn Baker: Good morning Mr. Chair, and members. Jevaughn Baker on behalf of the California Correctional Peace Officers Association. There were a number of issues that were already mentioned that have been reconciled, so we do intend to fully support this bill. We are greatly appreciative of the members' willingness to engage with us, and also the outstanding staff work as well. Thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ashley Martinez: mr. chair and committee members. ashley kathy martinez on behalf of sciu local 1000, and we're in strong suppoert of this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicholas Gonzales: nicholas ashley gonzales for the california civil liberties advocacy, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Latimer: Mr. Chairman and Members, John Latimer on behalf of Core Civic, the company also known as Corrections Corporation of America. We do not have an opposed position on this bill. But I did feel since the subject matter involves our contract with the State of California that it might be helpful to come up and share some thoughts. We certainly do respect the desires of the author and ultimately the will of the state Legislature and the Governor's office to decide whether or not to contract with any entity, let alone Core Civic. But I do think, again, to maybe help elaborate a little bit on our relationship. So Core Civic does operate currently two contracts for two facilities with the State of California, out of state, approximately housing 4,400 inmates. That began in about 2007 when the state was faced with overcrowding that reached over 175% of our design capacity. Through the course of our contract with the State of California, at one point we were up to 10,000 inmates out of state. And the reason for that was that the court ultimately found that the State of California had to reduce their prison population by approximately 40,000 inmates. Through the course of prison reforms and prison changes. And we were simply a part of that process. We were not the answer to that process by any means. We were a part of that process. And we are proud of that fact. But today, as I said, that number is down to 4,400 inmates as many of the prison reforms have kicked in, like Realignment, Prop 57 and Prop 47. So, as we are at today, two facilities, the Governor's Budget currently intends to reduce that number down to one facility and about 3,200 inmates in the upcoming budget year. And we certainly understand that as the overall need in terms of the population drops, then so shall and so should the contracts with the State of California. So this process that I think Mr. Bonta's bill envisions is happening on its own already organically. In fact, the statute that authorizes these out of state contracts will expire in 2020. The Governor's Budget, in addition to assuming that our contract will go down to one facility, it also stated their intent, that in their belief that by 2020 the state would be out of state prison contracts. And again, that is a proposal and a perspective of the contracting party, the state, that we could not or would not resist. It's a matter of capacity need, and as that capacity need is changing, so is the contracting relationship. And that is certainly understandable in the way that we've dealt with California and any other prison contractor. I would point out some other information just for clarity's sake. Our contracts do have significant transparency in them. We have requirements in the contract. I heard an awful lot about the fiduciary duty, and yes it is a for-profit company. But the duties attached to this contract with the State of California, or any contract, falls under the contract. And the State of California is very explicit in what its expectation is of the for-profit contracts. And we're happy to follow those, and are following the requirements of those contracts. So in addition to the contract, we also have to follow the CDCR's department operations manual. We follow title 15, and we follow all three court orders that govern the states in state prison system as well. Even though none of the facilities that California's housed inmates in, are at or above 100% of capacity. Further, I would also offer that in all of our facilities we offer educational, vocational, and rehabilitation programming. And have the entire time in our contract, and are proud and happy to do so. It's the right way for us to run our system and we've done it successfully in the State of California. I think the final point again, just in terms of the context of where California has been on this issue over 10 years. Is the reality of being able to not build up to four prisons to house those, at the time, 10,000 inmates. Means the state has avoided about $4 billion in debt costs, and the requirement to then build and manage four additional prisons. And instead the state's been able to manage, through their own policies of change and incarceration through realignment, through Prop 57 and Prop 47. That's meant the prison population has come down and now, at the same time, the state is able to correspondingly draw down those out of state contracts. So while we certainly understand the philosophical view here offered by the author, I think it is important to talk about kind of where we've been in terms of our partnership with the state. As the state has not embarked on a desired program of housing inmates out of state, but in dealing with changing the prison culture in California and reducing the overall prison population. So that has been our role in that, and we just wanted to offer those thoughts. We do not have a position on the legislation, but felt, again, since we were the subject of it, it probably made sense to come up and talk to the members, thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1884, 'end': 1889, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: I apologize. I saw that was an in-between, I am late. Ignacio Hernandez on behalf of the California Attorneys for Criminal Justice, actually in support of the bill.
[{'start': 54, 'end': 71, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susan Burden: Good afternoon. I want to thank you for this bill, and thank you all here for listening and considering this bill. My name is Susan Burden. I am the founder and Executive Director of A New Way of Life Re-entry Project. A New Way of Life provides re-entry services for women exiting prisons and jails, and helps them get back on their feet, obey laws, reunite with their children, and become productive members of the community. So, I'm formerly incarcerated. In 1981, my five year old son was accidentally killed, and as a result of his death I drank and it escalated to illegal drug use. For that drug use, I cycled in and out of prison numerous times over a 15 year period until someone helped me. When I found help, I've figured I could pay it forward and help other women receive compassionate services. I bought a little house, I started to invite women into that house and there created in the way of life. We all lived together. Now there's five houses, there's been over a thousand women through those houses. We have a little non-profit. So, through A New Way of Life, through the community, through legal services, I've done everything I can to seek remedies for my felony convictions. And I did expungements for some. I did certificates of rehabilitation. I asked the Governor for a pardon. I've done everything humanly possible. But still I have a felony conviction that is not expungible. The Governor didn't give me the pardon. I did get the certificate of rehabilitation, but I just want to be able to have every opportunity to restore my privileges as a citizen. I mean I pay taxes, I don't break any laws. I help other people not break laws. And I know that our community was really hard hit by the War on Drugs, and we want to restore each one of those individuals in the community. I mean, they have to do their part, but I'm asking you to be a part of that restoration also, by a yes vote. I don't know if you have any questions for me, or for the witness, Hillary. But I'm just trying to do all that I can, the best that I can, to be able to operate within the community, to the highest degree, so.
[{'start': 126, 'end': 138, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1977, 'end': 1984, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Linda Wanner: linda nicholas wanner with the californian catholic conference in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cathy Sure: Cathy Sure with the ACLU of California in support. Thank you
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nicholas Gonzales: nicholas linda gonzales with the california civil liberties advocacy in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jonathan Feldman: chair and members, this will be quick, so i won't take a seat. but jonathan nicholas feldman with the california police chief's association. we are in respectful opposition right now. but i want to thank the sponsors for meeting with us earlier this week to discuss our opposition. give us some clarification about the process, the effects that we've seen post prop 47. and we look forward to continuing those discussions regarding our position as the bill moves forward. thank you.
[{'start': 67, 'end': 92, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeff Rubin: Thank you. Yes, sir. Thank you. Yes, up until a few years ago- You identified yourself? Jeff Rubin on behalf of the California District Attorney's Association. Up until a few years ago, it was routine for warrantless blood draws to take place. And the United States Supreme Court in McNeely said, you can not justify a warrantless withdraw based solely on edging the circumstances. That was one of the exceptions to the normal requirement, that we get a warrant to conduct any kind of search. Then last year in Birchfield, the Court said, you couldn't justify a blood test under the search incident to arrest exception, which is another exception to the warrant requirement. And it also addressed the implied consent laws. Previously we've been able to justify both a breath test as well as a blood test under the implied consent. But Birchfield said look, we heartily approve of requiring breath tests to be taken under the Implied Consent Law. And if someone refuses to do it, you can impose administrative penalties and you can also impose criminal penalties. And what they said was when it comes to blood, while you can potentially impose administrative penalties for someone who refuses to take a blood test, you cannot impose criminal penalties. Well right now, under our laws as they are currently written, you can impose a penalty, either a criminal penalty or a fine, for refusing to take a blood test. But that's not allowed anymore under Birchfield. So what this new law does is comports what we have to do, it comports the statute with the constitutional requirements. Now, blood tests are better than breath tests. The blood tests are a direct evidence of the level of alcohol in the blood. And breath tests are a more indirect level. So because of this law we are going to see fewer blood tests. And that's not good because the more accurate the blood test the better it is in terms of prosecuting individuals who are guilty and exonerating individuals who are not guilty. But what our bill does is by, even though it follows what Birchfield requires, it also imposes an additional way of getting people to take breath tests. Now, breath tests are not going to show people who are driving under the influence of drugs. But at least now under this new bill, someone will not benefit by refusing to take a breath test in juxtaposition to position to someone who agrees to take a breath test. So this is the reasonable and constitutional means of addressing the issue credit by Birchfield and we would urge your support, thank you.
[{'start': 88, 'end': 98, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1449, 'end': 1459, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2045, 'end': 2055, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2489, 'end': 2499, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: Good morning, Mr. Chair and members. Ignacio Hernandez on behalf of the California Attorneys for Criminal Justice, Statewide Association of Criminal Defense Attorneys. We are opposed to the measure. I want to thank the author of the bill for meeting with me and having a discussion. As always, it's always very beneficial. And I think in many ways we wholeheartedly agree with the testimony of the supporters of this bill. This is in response to the Supreme Court decision in Birchfield. You do have to eliminate the criminal penalties for refusal to take a blood test. And most importantly, the Birchfield Court decided that law enforcement cannot draw blood, even after a lawful arrest, absent of warrant. You must have a warrant to draw blood. That was the fundamental anchor of the Birchfield decision. We agree. What this bill is doing is saying every individual who gets a license in California must waive That protection must waive the warrant requirement. As a condition of having the privilege to have a driver's license in California. Now that to be fair up until Birchfield, we did require every driver to give permission to give a blood draw. Breath or blood, I'm focusing on blood. That's the main issue. So you did have to give permission. The difference being as soon as the Birchfield decision came about, it's not permission anymore. It's waiving a constitutional protection under the Fourth Amendment. That is what this bill is doing. We do agree with the first part of it. But their resolution to getting blood as they stated, they think blood is better. Is to say if you're going to drive in California with a license, you have to waive your right to a warrant. We don't ask a driver to waive fourth amendment protections to search a car. We don't ask drivers to waive the warrant requirement for cell phone, which I know all of you dealt with in the last couple of years. We don't ask for constitutional waivers to drive on our roads in California. We think the bill goes too far in that regard. Last thing, in the Supreme Court decision, they took evidence that there are more refusals of blood, when the penalties are only administrative. This bill, rightfully so changes the penalties to administrative which means we can expect more refusals of blood test. Which means more situations where an officer wants a blood draw and the driver does not want a blood draw. That is going to be our problem especially because in North Dakota, which is where this case originated. There is a law in that state that says, there cannot be a forcible blood draw by a police officer unless it's a DUI with injury or death. We don't have that statute in California. We are concerned that individuals may not understand it, they waive their right to a warrant, the warrant requirement, when they get their driver's license. And on the scene of a DUI, they're going to say, no, I don't want blood. And the officer is going to say, well, by having a driver's license, you have waived that warrant requirement. You have waived your protection of Fourth Amendment, and we're going to take blood from you. At that juncture, we're going to run into forcible blood draw, and we're extremely concerned about that. We think there are other ways to deal with this. We think breath is fine for DUI alcohol. And that should be the law in California. We should not ask drivers to waive any constitutional rights simply for the right to drive on our roads. For those reasons, we are opposed. Happy to try to fix the bill, and like I said, I do appreciate the conversation with the author. Thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 596, 'end': 606, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 786, 'end': 796, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1074, 'end': 1084, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1290, 'end': 1300, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Maritza Galvez: good morning. thank you for the opportunity to speak before you today. my name is maritza jonathan galvez, i'm a youth organizer with the youth justice coalition. we are honored to be co-sponsors of assembly bill 1639 today. a month and a half ago my mother juanita sandoval was brutally murdered outside of our housing development in culver city. in those first few days after her death, sorry. the world felt like it had stopped. all my sister and i wanted to do was curl up into a ball and disappear but for families like ours without disposable income or a safety net, that was a privilege that simply didn't exist. my sister and i immediately had to face many harsh realities. we didn't have enough money to bury our mother. we had no idea how to handle an lapd homicide investigation and we didn't know how our mother was killed. and we had to figure out how we were going to come up with thousands of dollars, a funeral home, a cemetery plot, on top of contacting, feeding, and housing family members. it felt as though we had to put our grief on the side to figure it all out. in the past six years, the youth justice coalition has supported 63 families whose loved ones were killed. so we have learned from victims, what victims resources are available, and how to access those supports. in many ways, we were lucky. what happens to the thousands of families who don't even know this help exists? still, even with this knowledge and experience, we have had to chase down victims' compensation, push for coverage since my mom was undocumented, and answer embarrassing questions about my mom's one past arrest. three funeral homes told us they saw it all too often, that my mother's previous arrest, not even conviction, and immigration status would most likely get her application denied. the funeral home we chose made us sign a promise waiver to ensure we accepted liability for any balance in case victims compensation denied us. ab 1639 would prohibit the california victim compensation board, county district attorneys and city attorneys from denying an application for victim compensation only because the person is undocumented like my mom, has been convicted, is suspected of being gang involved, or is unable to cooperate with an investigation. i'm asking you today to vote yes on ab 1639, not only for those who have already passed, but for families left behind. the ones that have to set up gofundme accounts and throw car washes as they cry. as hard as this has been for me and my sister, i worry even more for my two year old niece and five year old nephew. what does it do to a toddler when they attend two candlelight vigils, a wake, and a funeral in a few weeks time? and what will the future hold for them and all of us if we don't have access to healing? for our family and for yours, please pass ab 1639.
[{'start': 82, 'end': 105, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 258, 'end': 274, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Samuel Nunez: Good morning. I just want to acknowledge that this is Survivors of Violence, Victims of Violence week, and just really acknowledge all those people and communities that have been deeply Impacted by violence in their own communities, perhaps some of your constituencies. My name is Samuel Nunez, I'm the Executive Director of Fathers and Families of San Joaquin, located in Stockton. When people hear about Stockton, they usually hear about violence, bankruptcy, foreclosures. The city has been reported in the media to be the second most violent city in California. The third most illiterate city in California. Zoning laws red lining a lack of investment have created entire neighborhoods of poverty where there's easy access to fast food, alcohol, tobacco and guns. And very little access to quality education, good jobs, parks and resources. In 2012 Stockton's crime rate was more than 4 times the national average. And young people ages 10 to 24 suffer a murder rate nearly three times the state average in our county. At Fathers and Families at San Joaquin, our mission is to promote the cultural, spiritual, economic, and social renewal of the most vulnerable families in Stockton and the greater San Joaquin Valley. Founded the organization 15 years ago as part of my own healing. On February 13th, 1993, I was shot with a 12-gauge shotgun at point blank range. The shotgun entered my upper torso, and exited out my back. It shattered my collar bone, punctured my lung, and severed my nerves. I actually lost double my body weight in blood and flat-lined four times in the ordeal. I was subsequently discharged, I obviously survived the doctors saved my life, and then discharged me. I was subsequently denied services in 1993 and I think not much has changed except the emergence of the trauma recovery centers. And so now we've actually launched our own Stockton trauma and recovery center that provides access to clinical services for those communities that have the most impact of violence in their communities. It's culturally based, offers healing practices, healing circles, and is grounded in the pedagogy of love. I'd like to just say that race and place matter in determining who gets approved and denied in victim compensation services. Locally, we know about a shooting that occurred on November 19th, 2015 when we had just started our trauma recovery center. The shooting occurred on one of the most dangerous neighborhoods in Stockton in California and Park Street. Two children ages 14 and 15 were hit in the shooting, one of them the 15 year old was fatally shot. The family was denied services for their involvement in the events leading to the qualifying crime was the reason why they were denied services. When asked about what we do with families, when they're denied services, what can we possibly do to actually offer a dignified funeral and some support to the family that is going through this. The response was have a car wash. I'm just here to report that even in death our boys and men of color are not treated equitably. And I really urge you to vote for healing for all, AB 1639. Thank you.
[{'start': 281, 'end': 293, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kim McGill: Good morning. Kim McGill with the Youth Justice Coalition just here in case there are any questions.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: ignacio maritza hernandez on behalf of the california attorneys for criminal justice in support of the bill. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicholas Gonzales: Nicholas Gonzales for the California Civil Liberties Advocacy.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susan Burton: burton from a new way of life all of us or none in support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Wanner: Linda Wanner with the California Catholic Conference in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Javier Stauring: Javier Stauring with Healing Dialogues and Action, we are proud to be co-sponsor, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Cruzan: sarah ignacio cruzan with healing dialogue and action, and we are proud to sponsor this.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Juan Pena: Juan Pena with the Youth Justice Coalition in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amethyst Ewing: amethyst sarah ewing with the youth justice coalition in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mar Velez: mar with communities united for restorative youth justice in oakland. and i support this bill and strongly urge you to vote yes on this bill.
[]
Juan Toppiez: toppiez with the communities united for restorative youth justice and i support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joseph Muscadine: Hello, my name is Joseph Muscadine, age 16, and I'm with Communities United for Restorative Youth Justice and I support this bill.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vanessa De Leon: vanessa amethyst de leon from the youth justice coalition here for all the families in need of healing, in strong support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jay Green: good morning green with the justice coalition in firm and strong support of this bill.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lupita Carvallo: Hello, I'm Lupita Carvallo from Youth Justice Coalition, and I strongly support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Raj Jayadev: raj of silicon valley debug, deeply honored for the testimony that was share today, and support this bill.
[]
Stephanie Flores: Stephanie Flores, Silicon Valley Debug and I'm in definite support of this bill also. I hope you guys pass it.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maurice Gomez: maurice vanessa gomez, father and families of san joaquin, 100% in support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lydia Barret: yes, hello, good morning. thank you very much, mr. chairman and members for the opportunity to speak with you today, and for your consideration of ab 1559. my name is lydia maurice barret, and i work with shot spotter, which is a gun shot detection and analysis service in the public safety technology industry. for the past 20 years, we have been supporting and working with law enforcement, and cities, and counties to address gun violence issues. and there's several things that we find significant in our work with them. number one, the reporting of gunfire incidents is severely under-reported. in fact, it's consistent in most cities well below 20%, so if you could imagine only getting a phone call for gunshots happening in 20% or less of all incidents. secondly, we know that there's a very small percentage of folks who are actually doing the shooting. and those worst offenders clearly are not the community at large in these affected areas. what's become in these communities is that gun fire has become normalized. we have found through our years of working with almost 100 cities throughout the country and expanding to more cities, that when they put together comprehensive gun violence reduction programs, not just utilizing a gun shot detection system. but also other innovative technologies, having the right community partnerships, youth services, community services, faith based services. and organizations as well as federal law enforcement and criminal justice partners that they really can have an impact in gun violence reduction. gunshot detection is having a game changing impact. if you don't know the when and where of where gun fire is happening, you'll never have the opportunity to interrupt that in a community most affected by it. police have the opportunity to be very focused in their response to gunfire instance by using this type of technology. when you couple that with other technologies like cameras, license plate readers, and you start to engage the community in an entirely new way by showing up to 100% of the gunfire incidents, making sure that those scenes are safe, finding victims, finding evidence that can be used in prosecutions later. and more importantly, engaging with the community in a meaningful accountable way and service to them, it can make a tremendous impact. there's many cities in california utilizing gunshot detection along with other innovative strategies and partnerships and they're having dramatic positive impact in their efforts, not only in california, but throughout the country. and many cases showing significant reductions in gunfire incident volume over time. thank you very much, i appreciate your consideration.
[{'start': 167, 'end': 187, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randall Hagar: Mr. Chairman, I'm Randall Hagar, I represent the California Psychiatric Association. And Miss Eggman is actually talking about one of our psychiatrists that she met in an event, Captane Thompson, who in addition to being one of the more highly regarded forensic psychiatrists in California, has the privilege of having been married, still is married, to former Assembly Health Committee Chair Helen Thompson. And so he brought to our attention the unfortunate conditions under which many inmates in the jails where he is a consultant, actually exist for many months at a time without medications. For those people that he treats who are able to accept medication, they do, he provides, they get better, they're stabilized. This is for neglected population of the pre-trial inmates and it is, I think, a very, very necessary thing to provide them with an opportunity to have access to medications like we do with sentence inmates, like we do with inmates in prisons. We urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 94, 'end': 100, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 178, 'end': 194, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 393, 'end': 407, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cory Salzillo: good morning, mr chair and members. cory lydia salzillo, here on behalf of the california state sheriff's association in support of the bill.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Margaret Johnson: got it? good morning. margaret cory johnson, with disability rights california. we are opposed to this bill. we do think that the amendments proposed in the analysis do help move the bill along in terms of protecting due process rights, and ensuring that the person won't be prejudiced at all in their trial of their pretrial. we do want to point out that these are very different people from those that are sentenced or are in prison. these are people that are very temporarily often in jail so we just want to make sure that people get all the protection that they need. we have concerns about continuity of care if meds are started and the person is released shortly after. we also have concerns that poor people may be more likely impacted by this bill because people with more resources would be out of jail probably on bail. and then we're also concerned that ice detainees maybe adversely impacted. because i personally am not really sure what the ice process is like and if somebody is detained for that process, put on medication and then moved to the ice process it might be very different. and it's unclear if the medications would be continued. and how they would impact the person's demeanor and ability to participate in the ice processes. finally, we believe jails are not really for mental health disabilities. and resources should be put towards improving community mental health services, rather than trying to serve people in jails. so we request that you vote no on this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lizzie Beacon: hi, lizzie margaret beacon with aclu california, we actually do not have a position at this time. we've been working with the author's office to address some of our concerns, so really appreciate how receptive the author's office has been to working with us, and we're hoping we can get to a support position. thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 19, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dave Hosseini: Hi, I'm Dave Hosseini, representing the California Association of Mental Health Peer Run Organizations. We're an organization that represents over 50,000 mental health claims and consumers in the state, and we are strongly opposed this bill and see this a violation of rights. Thank you.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Teresa Drenick: all right, good morning, thank you for having us here. i'm teresa, i'm an assistant district attorney in alameda county, and i'm here on behalf of our office and district attorney nancy o'malley to support ab 320. very briefly, as prosecutors, we know how vital it is to have a solid reliable truthful forensically appropriate interview when we have children who are the victims of child abuse and sexual abuse. these are very complicated and serious felony prosecutions that we do take into court and the statement and the testimony of the child taken in a forensically appropriate matter is of the utmost importance. this bill is very important to set in our statutes the definition of what a cacc is, so that each and every county, and each and every cacc around our state will have a multi disciplinary team made up of the appropriate professionals, including law enforcement, district attorneys, mental health professionals, health professionals, among others. currently we do not have standardization among caccs, and it's really vital that we do, a, for the benefit of the children that are being interviewed at these centers. and b, for funding that flows to the centers, there must be this uniformity of definition in order that we, in california, can keep these vital institutions open and serving our children, thank you very much.
[{'start': 59, 'end': 65, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 180, 'end': 194, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Lovell: thank you. mr. lovell? john lizzie lovell, on behalf of the association for los angeles deputy sheriffs, the association of deputy district attorneys, california association of code enforcement officers. california college and university police chiefs association, california narcotic officers association, los angeles county probation officers union, afscme local 685. los angeles professional peace officers association, los angeles police protective league and the riverside sheriff's association, all in support.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 21, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 23, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ari Freilich: Thank you, Good morning again. Ari Freilich, on behalf of the Sponsor's Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence and Americans for Responsible Solutions. Effective oversight of gun dealers is a critical and an enormous task. Corrupt and irresponsible gun dealers are the leading source of guns on the black market, responsible for nearly half of the total number of trafficked firearms uncovered in ATF investigations. There are also twice as many gun dealers in California as there are McDonald's. And the volume of firearm sales in our state has more than tripled in the past decade. Meanwhile, dealer inspections reveal widespread compliance issues, but little accountability. Among dealers inspected by ETF in a given year, between 38 and 53% are found not to be in compliance with federal law. And yet, just 0.05% lose their license to sell firearms. Multiple agencies in our state, such as the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, are authorized to craft targeted and balance penalties, including graduated fines for licensees who violate the law. But as Assemblymember Gibson explained, existing law provides DOJ with inflexible, all or nothing enforcement authority with respect to gun dealers. When they discover a legal violation, they may criminally prosecute the dealer, permanently revoke the license, or let the dealer continue to operate without real consequence. We're the sponsors but we actually can't take credit for this idea. But the National Sports Shooting Foundation and the NRA have repeatedly pushed Congress to enact federal legislation authorizing ATF to do what this bill proposes, fine gun dealers as an alternative to license revocation. The NSSF explained in an action alert in support of the ATF Reform and Firearms Modernization Act that quote, this bill would allow ATF new powers to issue fines and suspend licenses of licensees, as opposed to current regulations, which only allow for license revocation. NSSF is supportive of this bill, as it will help protect the rights of gun dealers, while giving ATF more flexibility in how they exercise their regulatory authority to encourage enhanced compliance. This bill would similarly authorize DOJ to impose a civil fine on a dealer who commits an offense that would otherwise subject the license to revocation or criminal prosecution under existing law. It would also authorize city or district attorneys to bring these actions in jurisdictions that conduct gun dealer inspections. We believe this would meaningfully improve public safety, I urge your aye vote. Thank you. Thank you.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1075, 'end': 1081, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Amanda Wilcox: Amanda Wilcox on behalf of the California chapters of the Brady campaign to prevent gun violence. We support this bill for reasons that were very well stated by my partner here, coalition partner from the Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence. My husband and I actually did a public record request with DOJ a number of years ago regarding gun dealer violations. These are smaller violations that wouldn't be appropriate to revoke a license. But essentially DOJ was powerless to do anything. Some of these were repeated violations by gun dealers. Many were related to a firearm and handgun safety certificate issues and making sure that those were compliant. Others were related to the DROS form and not filling it out completely. Others were, well one dealer was unable to locate a firearm, I find that of great concern. There are a number of signage violations, in other words, these are violations, these are laws we have for good reason. But violations of this nature should not cause irrevocation, I don't think they could. But there needs to be a way to have incremental accountability and fines so that these laws are better followed. California Department of Justice clearly needs a better enforcement tool as well as the city jurisdictions to make sure that dealer laws are followed. So we urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 58, 'end': 63, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 300, 'end': 303, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 454, 'end': 457, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Gerald Upholt: mr. chairman, members of the committee. upholt again, on behalf of kathy lynch who is in another committee at this point in time. representing the national shooting sports foundation. and we believe that the existing system works fine. the department of justice, if it so desires can give somebody a warning and if they don't correct whatever the problem is, they can then remove their license or impose sanctions on them. there's really no need to have a fine system. one of the big concerns with the fine system is that it's reminiscent of the old days of the asset forfeiture, where we had local governments going in and seizing people's assets for revenue. and one of the concerns here is the local governments will pick little things, picky, picky, picky. and fine little fines here and little fines there, just to raise revenue. it'll amount to just harassment of firearms dealers. and it isn't going to improve public safety, and it's not going to reduce crime. most of the things that we're talking about here are inadvertent clerical errors. they're not intentional errors made by devious people. they're just small businesses for the most part. there aren't that many large gun dealers. trying to make a living and sometimes they make a mistake. they shouldn't have to pay a fine for that. and the current system, from our point of view, works just fine. let doj do it's job. they can give somebody a warning, and then they can take a stunner action if the warnings aren't heeded. thank you.
[{'start': 67, 'end': 78, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Amanda Wilcox: wilcox, again, on behalf of the california chapters for the brady campaign to prevent gun violence. my organization has been working on enacting firearm laws in this state. for many, many years, i have been, for almost 12 years. i don't do this work as a volunteer just for the sake of passing laws or for the sake of doing gotcha moments with gun owners. our goal is to reduce firearm injury and death. and in fact, our strong gun laws in california have helped achieve a 57% reduction in our firearm mortality rate, more than double that of the rest of the nation since 1993. so we are realizing benefits from these laws. i think we can realize even greater benefit and save more lives, if more, to the extent that people have better understanding of the laws and better compliance. and as the assemblymember mentioned, last year, the last couple years have been a lot of activity regarding gun laws being enacted in california. some of these laws are very insignificant. i want gun owners. i want to make sure gun owners want to be law abiding. gun owners know these laws. for example, now, if someone is manufacturing a gun or building up a lower receiver in our state. they need to get a serial number from the department of justice. that gun, there will be a record the doj will have and that person will have to require a background check. that is very important for public safety. we passed a law that bullet button type assault weapons now need to be registered. those that are grandfathered need to register those guns. that's important, that doj have a record in case those people later become prohibited, they can take steps to disarm those people. so i firmly believe that to the extent people have knowledge of our laws, and with this bill there's direction how they can gain information about these laws that will encourage better compliance which will in turn make our state safer, so i urge your aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 60, 'end': 65, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ari Freilich: I'll be very brief. My name is Ari Freilich. I'm appearing on behalf of the Law Centers to Prevent Gun Violence and Americans for Responsible Solutions. We believe public safety is stronger when gun owners are well informed in plain English about the obligations and responsibilities associated with ownership of lethal weapons. We think this bill would go a long way toward better informing new and returning gun buyers about these responsibilities and we urge your aye vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Craig DeLuz: Mr Chairman and Members of the Committee, Craig DeLuz on behalf of the Firearms Policy Coalition in the California Association of Federal Firearms Licensees in opposition. Already, we're talking about an industry that is one of the most highly regulated and a group of individual citizens that are some of the most highly regulated, not some the, the most highly regulated in the State of California. Our concern about this bill even as it is amended is that it provides for additional compelled speech on those that seek no other purpose than to help individuals exercise their Constitutional rights. There are already nine signs that are required and so what we're saying now is we're going to require yet an even additional sign. Which includes speech that is not totally supported by or at least, enforced by the California law, meaning that not everything that is in this compelled speech is in fact law. Some of it is just a matter of opinion. That we believe is compelled speech upon those who are FFLs. We believe that this bill is unnecessary, we believe that it's duplicative. And we believe that it is simply nothing more than a provide one more regulation upon federal firearms licensees. I'll harken back to the old Tesla song, Signs, Signs, Everywhere Signs. And that just seems to be just one more example of just concern, undue concern and rhetoric run amok, it is for that reason that we oppose this measure, thank you.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gerald Upholt: Thank you. Mr Chairman, members Committee I'm Gerald Upholt, I'm here for Kathy Lynch who's in another Committee testifying as we speak. Her client is the National Shooting Sports Foundation, which is the trade Association for firearms manufactures and ammunitions. And the retailers that the bill is directed at are the outlet for their products. As you know manufacturers sell their products through retailers so they have an interest in the protecting the welfare not just for themselves, but of the retailers also. This bill will impose more operating and financial costs on both manufacturers and retailers. Updating, if you want to call it that with us, it's more in addition to than an update of what's already there. But it'll be costly. It'll require in the case manufacturer, special packaging just for California, which is extremely costly for them. They have to watch their distribution. Where's it going? Is this particular gun going to get into California by mistake without the right packaging or the right literature in it? For dealers it's more signage to make and put up and keep track of. Make sure it's accurate. It's just for industry and retailers, it's just not a good business bill. And some are calling it just anti-business. We think the focus and the outlet for this kind of thing is more properly the State Department of Justice. They already have literature, they already have testing that's done at the retailers when a firearm is purchased. They already have a website, all they have to do is make this information as a central distribution point available to the consumer. And DOJ has not been very good when it comes to consumer outreach. And that's the area where they definitely need to improve and we believe the Legislature should focus on that as being a place for consumers to get their information. Most consumers walk into a retail store, they're not reading all that signage and when they get their firearm home, if they're looking at the literature, it's the instruction manual on how to operate it. But they don't read all of the stuff that's in there. But if it's on their exam, and they have to know the answer in order to buy their gun, it'll make an impact on them. So we think a bill like this should focus on the Department of Justice, not on manufacturers and not on retailers. And therefore, we respectfully request a no vote, thank you.
[{'start': 46, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 74, 'end': 85, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tim McBain: Tim McBain, a member of the National Rifle Association, California Rifle and Pistol Association, ask for your no vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Frank Huntington: Good morning, ladies and gentlemen, my name is Frank Huntington. I'm the Chairman of the Board of CALI, the California Association of Licensed Investigators, the largest license investigator Association in this world, we are here in support of this bill.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 63, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Craig DeLuz: Craig DeLuz with the Firearms Policy Coalition, just like to note that the right- I'm sorry, name and organization? Name and organization, Craig DeLuz with Firearms Policy Coalition, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 139, 'end': 150, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Steve Wessels: thank you. steve, i'm a private attorney. i was denied a ccw while i lived in the city of sacramento, even though my life had been threatened. i moved to the county just for that reason. i've had a ccw permit for 25 years. thank you, sir. i strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Timothy Grimes: timothy, california citizen and democrat, in full support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sam Peredes: Thank you, sir. Mr. Chairman and members, Sam Peredes representing Gun Owners of California in strong support of the bill. Also grateful for the author for bringing this up. Hope you will consider it very carefully.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eric Ranch: mr chairman, my name is eric john ranch, i'm a member of the nra, and i am a democrat, and i come here to support this bill. thank you very much.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amanda Wilcox: Good morning. Good morning. I'm Amanda Wilcox. I'm here on behalf of the 28 California chapters of the Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence. And we stand in opposition to this bill. California currently is a may issue CCW state, and we support that policy. This bill would essentially make California a shall issue state. Whereby essentially with the removing the standard for good cause anyone who wants to carry or get a CCW permit could, assuming that they meet the other requirements. I think the key question before this Committee is whether it is in the public interest to have more loaded, hidden guns in public. This isn't about guns in the home. It's a person's choice whether they have a gun in the home or not, but once the gun is carried in public, that puts other people at risk. Consider law enforcement, and how much they are trained and repeatedly trained. And yet making that difficult decision assessing a situation, deciding whether to shoot or not. Whether they can possibly not hitting their target, or hitting bystanders. That's a very difficult situation for law enforcement. I have a hard time believing that the average citizen can handle that situation better than law enforcement. So again, I think this does put the public at risk. I understand the frustration of many people that the requirements vary from county to county. It does seem unfair, but rather lowering the requirement, I would support a stronger requirement, more strict requirement in all the counties in California. Consistency could be achieved that way. Again, we're opposed to the measure.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 103, 'end': 108, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ari Freilich: Good morning, my name is Ari Freilich. I'm here on behalf of the Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence, and I respectfully urge you to oppose this bill. Historically almost every state prohibited or strictly limited the carrying of concealed loaded weapons in public places. These restrictions were among the earliest gun laws ever adopted in the country. Though the gun lobbying has pushed many states to weaken these licensing requirements in recent years, California has thankfully not been among those states. Under California law, local law enforcement may issue CCW licenses to residents of their jurisdiction if they determine that the applicant is of good moral character and that good cause exists for the issuance of a license. And many local law enforcement agencies have, quite reasonably, interpreted this good cause element to require some actual evidence of particularized need beyond a bare general desire to go armed in public. This bill would effectively preempt those law enforcement decisions by requiring local police chiefs and sheriffs to accept applicants, quote, stated good cause without any additional inquiry. If they nearly state that they desire a CCW license for general self defense or crime prevention purposes. This would make the good call standard effectively meaningless, undermining law enforcement discretion and threatening our resident's right to safely and to peacefully enjoy public spaces. We urge you to oppose this bill.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christy Bauma: Mr. Chairman, Members, Christy Bauma on behalf of the California Professional Firefighters, pleased to be sponsoring this measure. We thank the Chairman and the Vice Chairman for the time and conversation on this bill. And I'm going to yield my time to our witnesses who are obviously in strong support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tina Palmieri: i'm honored to address this group, i'm tina eric palmieri, i'm the director of the uc davis burn center and the assistant chief at shriners. and i'm going to give you the human side of this, so you're saying, okay a bunch of people who use drugs. they get what they deserve, unfortunately, when butane explodes the whole house explodes. i have treated children as small as two years of age and adults in their 50s. innocent bystanders, when a room explodes, it knows no difference. in the past, we've actually published this, in the past seven years we've had more than 100 people sustain injuries from these explosions. the average size is about a 30% burn, to put it in perspective, everyone in this room, you've burned yourself, maybe your fingertip. think how much that hurt, now think about how much it would hurt if your whole arm, now think about if it's both your arms. now, think about it if it's both your arms and your chest, that is about 30% of your body. so, it's a great deal of pain, the scarring causes a great deal of issues. on the monetary standpoint, a person with a 30% burn has a hospital bill ranging about $300,000. so that's $300,000 times 100 people and you can see that this problem is escalating. so the cost is both human in terms of the pain, a month of hospitalization, a year off of work. the cost of the therapy, and going back to work, and several people have died as a result of these butane explosions. and california's not alone, in states where marijuana has been legalized, this has become an issue. colorado has noted a marked of increase in this exact same problem, so it is a public health concern that we in the burn center, it's great for business. but we'd like to have less business from this cause which i consider to be primarily preventable with very safe measures. thank you.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Feyh: Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you for being here today, Captain Mike Feyh with the Sacramento City Fire Department. I'm also the IAFF International Association of Fire Fighters 10th District Burn Coordinator. I am also a burn survivor, I was involved in an explosion similar to what happens in these processes, it wasn't one of these but I suffered burns. Dr. Palmieri happened to be my Doctor, but I want to speak in support of this bill, and thank you for your time.
[{'start': 64, 'end': 73, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 360, 'end': 368, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Denisha Boatner: good morning chair and members, denisha tina boatner with the california state association of counties in support, thank you.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sean Hoffman: Good morning Mr. Chair, Sean Hoffman with the California District Attorney's Association in support
[{'start': 24, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
James McDonough: Mr. Chairman, Vice Chair, Members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to speak here this morning. My name's is James McDonough. I am today here on behalf of the Lighter Association. I am the Vice President at the Lighter Association and also an industry consultant. I've been in the lighter industry for over 30 years. I have over 30 patents on lighters, most of them pertaining to lighters and safety and related products. And I've worked extensively with the US Consumer Products Safety Commission, addressing lighter safety and child resistance. I've also chair at ASTM, American Society of Testing Materials Subcommittee on setting standards for lighters and their safety as well as sitting on a similar Committee, and ISO, the International Standards Organization, out of Geneva. The Lighter Association represents a number of companies in the United States, including two here in California, that deal with not only lighters as the title tends to relate to, but also a number of other products related to those types, including as we're talking about here today, butane. The industry is very committed and supportive and concerned for the safety of its products and especially the unsafe use of its products. Butane has been available as a consumer product for a number of decades and has been used in a very safe way for the intended applications. Unfortunately, butane as well as many other products can be misused and abused and used in unintended applications. Butane is used in many intended applications and appliances without issues. They range from lighters, to candle lighters, to torches that are used by hobbyist, school labs, jewelers, and also for home repair type of work. So there are millions and millions of these products out there. They're also products used in camping, which also requires significant amounts of butane to be put in these devices to be used during a camping trip. One of the other applications is used by these torches are in restaurants, that are using them in the cooking processes in preparing food. As well as they may have, lighters that use butane to light candles and so on, that would consume significant amounts of butane in a short period of time. There's actually a two tiered marketplace for customers in this type of a product. The distribution chain going from manufactures through to the retailer has many levels, whether be wholesalers, distributors, what have you. Then it gets to the second-tier where the retailers are actually selling it to consumers. The information that's being required in this bill that's being presented would make great difficulties and challenges for every step of that distribution channel and require information that is usually associated as this bill's referred to in the existing law. Chemicals that are considered to be hazardous and industrial chemicals, not chemicals that are used by typical consumers. The unsafe process of hash oil in this case has other options also to use instead of just butane. Such other types of materials, propane, methanol which is also known as wood alcohol, ethanol which is drinking alcohol or grain alcohol, and even isopropyl alcohol that is used by most people for medical reasons in the home. All are highly flammable and can be used. In fact, there are many segments on YouTube and other types of Internet media that actually show these other materials being used including the green alcohol, Everclear, being used which again is highly flammable. So with that, we suggest that the Committee seriously consider all the other ramifications involve in this matter.
[{'start': 123, 'end': 138, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicole Quinonez: good morning, nicole denisha quinonez on behalf of the consumer speciality products association. we're opposed unless amended, and the author's office has committed to working with us. we represent the aerosol products industry. butane is a propellant used in a variety of aerosol products, hairspray, dry shampoo. that type of thing. so we just want to make sure that the limit does not exclude legitimate businesses that are using butane in much larger quantities. our folks are getting train car loads of butane and using butane and butane mixtures in these products. so we'll continue to work with the author's office. thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Leahy: Good morning, Kimberly Leahy with the Department of Finance. The Governor's Budget includes $21.7 million Teacher Credentials Fund, $4.3 million test development and administration account funds, and $308,000 in reimbursements for a total operating budget of $26.4 million for the Commission in 2017-18. This funding supports 153 authorized positions at the Commission. Specific adjustments in the Governor's Budget include an increase of $277,000 to address an increase of $221,000 in rent and an increase of $56,000 for contracted accounting services. It also include an increase of $310,000 to provide ongoing funding for new system software, data services, and web hosting for the data warehouse and dashboard systems. This system supports the accreditation of the teacher preparation programs and makes that data publicly available on the Commission's website. A shift of $509,000 from the funding scheduled for representation by the Attorney General in teacher discipline cases to the Commission's general operating budget. Of this funding, $222,000, would support two permanent positions and $287,000 in temporary funding, which support temporary help. The Office of the Attorney General has indicated that the cases referred by the Commission have needed additional investigative work to meet the higher evidence requirements of an administrative hearing. These positions will assist the Office of the Attorney General and the Commission's existing staff investigate and prepare educator discipline cases for administrative hearing. The temporary help is intended to assist until the backlog is eliminated and the ongoing positions will continue to assist with the increased number of educator discipline cases received annually by the Commission. Because this proposal is a shift of funding between schedules, it does not increase the overall funding of the Commission. That concludes my presentation. I'd be happy to answer questions.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dan Kaplan: dan jonah kaplan with the legislative analyst's office. we don't have any concerns with two of the governor's budget proposals, but we would recommend modifying the proposal that relates to providing ongoing funding for the accreditation dashboard. at the time, back in 2015-16, when general funds were first approved for the commission to develop the dashboard, they stated that the new dashboard would streamline its accreditation activities, reduce its workload, and therefore generate savings. we do note, though, that the dashboard is not yet fully functional and so the ctc in '17-'18 is likely to still need to continue to operate its old accreditation processes. though we do feel that the dashboard will generate savings over time, and as such, we recommend providing the funding on a one-time basis to support both the dashboard as well as the existing accreditation processes but that, as the ctc moves to the new system, savings will be realized and they can cover the costs of this dashboard through the savings that they've realized.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert Sumner: Yes, Robert Sumner with the Department of Justice. I'm happy to just elaborate a little bit. Previously, the Commission on Teacher Credentialing was represented by our Health, Education and Welfare Section because of the education nexus. But largely the rest of the work done by the attorneys within that division is more of a civil litigation defense practice. They represent CDSS, Department of Public Health, other state entities that are sued in a defense capacity. So really, the work of representing a licensing entity wasn't something that was within their wheelhouse. What we did, middle of last year, is we actually affirmatively shifted that casework over from the Health, Education and Welfare Section to the Licensing Section, which traditionally represents entities under the Department of Consumer Affairs but is now encountering a very analogous type of casework for the Commission on Teacher Credentialing. In the process of doing that, obviously, we have shifted the attorneys over and are largely hiring new licensing attorneys because that section is better at recruiting and retaining attorneys that are experts in disciplinary prosecution and appeals cases. So, at this point, we've actually filled, I think, 11 out of the 14 DAG positions, which is the basic Deputy Attorney General level attorney, and we are also in the process of promoting three supervising attorneys. And so we're just about at the end of that hiring process to complete the shift over into the new Licensing Section. And in the meantime, when we talk about backlogs, it's always important to understand that there will always be something of a working backlog of cases that are being actively referred to the Attorney General's Office as we work through them, and the life of any case can vary significantly based on the nature of the discipline being taken, and the complexity of the case and also the decisions made by the defendant. So as we continue to work through the backlog that existed under the former section, with increasing resources throughout the hiring process we're continuing to get referrals. And as was mentioned, we're getting more referrals, which is fantastic. The more cases that we can be working through with investigatory efficiencies, the better. But in the meantime, the fact that we have around the same backlog actually reflects the fact that we're continuing to do case intake as we resolve cases that have been leftover from the Health, Education and Welfare Section. So I would say that, while numerically it looks as though the backlog hasn't changed too much, considering that we haven't even completely staffed up the new representation yet, we're actually working through those cases at a faster rate. And like was mentioned, the goal is equilibrium. So once we're taking in about as many as we're adjudicating in any given calendar year, we're going to call that the complete reduction of the backlog.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dan Kaplan: Yes, Dan Kaplan with the LAO. To comment on one other thing the Commission currently engages in, the way you traditionally become a teacher in California is largely a two-stage process. You first obtain a preliminary credential, which you obtain after going through your credentialing program. Then you have several years to complete a new teacher induction program, and these are operated at the local district level. But those programs do indeed need to be approved by the Commission, so the Commission is, in some regards, involved in the teacher preparation or in the teacher support arena currently. We used to operate a grant program, a categorical program, for new teacher induction through BTSA. However, with the adoption of LCFF, this was rolled into these based grants and now the expectation at the state level is that districts allocate some of these funds for these new teacher induction activities.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dan Kaplan: i'm kaplan with the lao. i've been asked, well first of all you should all be receiving a copy of a handout entitled teacher workforce that i'd be speaking to today. i've been ask to cover some numbers behind what the current teacher workforce.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Patrick Shield: Morning I'm Doctor Patrick Shields, I'm the Executive Director of the Learning Policy Institute in Palo Alto to California and have been working with teachers supply and demand issues here in California for the last 20 years. So we handed out a little folder and in the front of that is a set of slides on the right side that I am going to be walking through. The first line on the first page just simply refers to what Mary had pointed out before, that the increase in credentials of the state has barely ticket up in the last couple of years. Somewhat, but still small, relative to the demand for teachers. Now as Dan pointed out, it's very difficult to sort of project exactly what the supply of teachers is going to be like. There are individuals like Senators Chavez and O'Donnell who have credentials and who could theoretically go back into the classroom tomorrow morning, you may or may not. I was a teacher once. So we have this Reserve pool that's very difficult to analyze. We have people moving in from out of state, etc. But when you cut to the bottom line and you ask districts, do you have any problems hiring enough teachers. On the next page we see that 75% of the districts in the state say yes, we're having trouble hiring a sufficient number of teachers. And 80% of those say that that problem is worse this year than it was in previous years. So that's sort of one factor that we have. On that same page, we have data on teacher enrollment that Mary pointed to earlier having decreased by 73% over the last decade. And just again barely reaching up. This rather complex chart at the beginning of page three though is again one of those bottom line questions which is sort of, do we have enough teachers? Do we not have enough teachers? Well 10,000 teachers that's out of about 300,000 approximately in the state as a whole. We have 10,000 teachers in our classrooms today who have not finished their preparation because districts have not been able to find teachers to fill those positions. And, as Mary said, the largest group of those are ones that we used to call emergency credentialed teachers who teachers who haven't had much preparation at all. As Dan pointed out, the next slide refers to the special education issue. These are first time special education hires, which now- Where are you at? I'm sorry page three at the bottom. Page three at the bottom, okay. So now as we look at new special ed teachers coming into the profession, almost two thirds of them have not been trained and these are not to say, it's hard enough to be a first grade or third teacher, to those of you who've worked in the schools, but imagine being a special education teacher dealing with students with autism and other challenges, and not having had sufficient training. So this is one of the areas that Dan pointed out that we have some real challenges in. I'm flipping to the next page four, at the top there, that just shows the issue of mathematics and science where we have a decrease in credentials being issued, and a corresponding increase in emergency permits and that like in those areas. So we have special education, we have mathematics and science, where we see this pattern of an actual decrease in the number of regular credentials being issued. And consequently, an increase in the number of teachers being hired on some kind of substandard credentials. There's the fourth area that the practitioners are concerned about. And that is after this last election, and Prop 227 sort of fading away, and school districts now being able to more easily implement bilingual education programs. There's a question of the table, we don't know, because we don't know how many districts are going to create bilingual programs. We don't know yet whether or not we're going to face any shortages in this area. The little data that we have just on the bottom of page 4, we compare the number of bilingual authorizations we had prior to Prop 227, which was 1,249, to how many we have currently. So if one were to make the argument that we would expect, the demand for bilingual education to go back to where it was before Prop 227, this may turn out to be a shortage area. Now the the problem that we have is we don't have the infrastructure in the state to support the expansion of bilingual education at this moment. There's only 30 programs across the whole state who actually offer bilingual authorizations. And so that's something that may be an issue as we move forward. We don't know yet, we just wanted to raise it. Dan and Mary had also mentioned the point now, I'm on the top of page five, that when we have shortages of teachers, they always, unfortunately, impact the students who need a strong teacher the most. That is students in poorer schools, in schools with high proportions of minority students. And in schools with high proportions of English langauge learning, and as you know Post 227, the primary way that we support English learners in this state is through sort of a structured immersion program. And so those kids really need teachers who are well prepared and they're the least likely to get them. This rather complex graph at the bottom of page five can be summarized very simply. And that is, of the 4400 sort of emergency type credentials that we have in the state, about half, a little over half, are in the special education, mathematics, and science areas. And so as Dan pointed out, targeting those areas with proposals would probably be our biggest bang for our buck. And then finally, I just want to offer the recommendations from the Learning Policy Institute. I'll point out, as Dan mentioned, that the investments that you made last year, while very good, were, almost by definition, not going to pay of for a number of years, right? I mean, the undergraduate program, you might convince someone who is a freshman, hey, I can get out in four years with my credential. So we're going to see an impact in four years. The classified, depending on whether or not the person has a bachelors degree or not and also will take a number of years. And so we're not going to see any real hit from those programs in the immediate future. And so a council again, just waiting to see that and to look at some efforts and some policy efforts that might be able to have an impact right away, that is within a year, okay? One of those is loan forgiveness and scholarships. There's a piece of legislation related to that this year. Those have proven both in education and other areas to be very effective if structured appropriately. Thinking about ways of supporting teacher preparation candidates within one year, teacher residency programs which have been proven to be very strong, both in terms of their impact on getting teachers from those communities who are interested in staying in those communities, this is your Compton point, right, and also having some impact on student achievement, and we have some data on that that we'd be happy to share. And then the third thing we just wanted to talk about was, in this large pool of re-entrants, of people who could come back into the profession, our recent retirees, who may have retired, because at some point their payout from being retired is sufficient, they're able to live on. But who actually would be willing to come back and work if there weren't limits on how much they could earn? And we can talk about the details of that, but that's something that a number of other states have started to address, thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 34, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 420, 'end': 424, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 616, 'end': 619, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 765, 'end': 771, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 776, 'end': 785, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1466, 'end': 1470, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2020, 'end': 2024, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2177, 'end': 2180, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2814, 'end': 2817, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4533, 'end': 4536, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4541, 'end': 4545, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5410, 'end': 5413, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5627, 'end': 5630, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brent Malicote: Good morning. Brent Malicote with the California Department of Education, on behalf of Superintendent Torlakson. And I'd just like to say that I'm a product of the teacher shortage that happened in 1996 when class size reduction happened, an out of state teacher. And there were a few things that really stood out as I moved to Delano, California in Kern County and stayed there for 14 years, many of which you've heard from panelists here. One of which was new teacher induction through the BTSA program, and not only that new teacher program, but then the opportunity to work with a master teacher in an ongoing way. Terrific school leadership, that's one of the things that I really wanted to bring up today as a former school principal. The work that principals are doing in schools lead to the the kind of climate that you find within schools, and it's important that we think about school leaders and all of this, and just the ongoing professional learning opportunities. And Delano helped me stick around for 14 years. And I found that to be a really, just a professional place to work, and to live, and fell in love with the community and the kids, but it was the district that really helped with that ongoing support. I did want to take some time to talk a little bit about educator effectiveness this morning. Which was a $500 million, one time, Prop 98 fund that was sent out to districts for the following uses, beginning teacher and administrator support and mentoring, professional development, coaching and support services for teachers who have been identified as needing improvement, professional development for teachers and administrators, there's a line to the state content standards. And finally to promote educator quality and effectiveness in the areas of training, and mentoring, and coaching. So the funding was distributed in an equal amount of approximately $1,466. Per FTE, around 334,000 teachers. The CD issued the first apportionment in December 2015 and a second apportionment of 20% in March of 2016, funds to be expended in the 15-16 through 17-18 school years. Additionally, on or before July 1st of 2018, a report with detailed expenditure information will be submitted to the California Department of Education. To list out specific purchases made, and the number of teachers, administrators or para-professional educators that receive professional development. Because that reporting won't come back to CDE until July 1, 2018, we don't have specifics on this, but we do have some anecdotal information on how districts are using these funds to support teachers and school leaders in their districts. Some of those include coaching and mentoring for teachers and school leaders, teacher induction and peer assistance and review. One district cited the support of English learners and ELD instruction by the hiring of a coordinator to support and coach principals and teachers. Professional development on culturally relevant teaching. And standards implementation to support the areas of Common Core and the next generation science standards. My colleagues, I think, did a really nice job of talking about many of the talking points that I was going to discuss, too. So I'll conclude my presentation with that, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 102, 'end': 111, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ron Rapp: good morning, mr. chair, members of the committee. rapp on behalf of the california federation of teachers. i know we all know the critical shortage that we have in the state of california related to teachers. unfortunately the governor's proposal does not include dollars or solutions to address the problem. i want to thank you, mr. chair, for your leadership particularly on the classified school employee credentialing program, as well as other proposals to address the shortage. one of the things that we're working on currently is the fact that 12% of providers for btsa are making new teachers pay up to $3,350 according to a ctc report released in 2015. we have to address that problem and we need to require these districts to pay. if the money's in lcff, then they should be paying for btsa. teachers start teaching at $38,000 a year. that's a huge disincentive for new teachers to continue in the classroom or prospective teachers as well. thank you so much.
[]
Andrea Ball: Thank you, Mr. Chair and members. Andrea Ball here on behalf of the Central Valley Education Coalition, a coalition of five county superintendents in the districts from the Central Valley. Want to thank you for this discussion and point out that the rural schools issue that was pointed out, our districts are telling us that it's really the homegrown efforts to get teachers from the community. Whether through the Classified Credentialing Program or other efforts, teacher residencies that really work. Because it's really hard to get people who come and may stay for a few years. But if they're from a large urban area, it's really an adjustment to come to some of these small, rural communities. So, really appreciate you thinking about that. And also wanted to point out, Tulare County, the Superintendent, the county got the grant to do the teacher recruitment center and is very pleased to be working on that, and working with regional partners around the state. Thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Rivas: mr. chairman and members, brian dan rivas on behalf of the education trust west. as was noted, low income communities have had a chronic problem recruiting and retaining effective teachers. latest data indicate that the current shortage may have exacerbated that issue. so we would ask that if additional funding is available in the may revision for prop 98, that you prioritize strategies for the recruitment and retention of teachers. and also ask that you place equity front and center in your evaluation of potential strategies. and so by that i mean, have a careful analysis of whether or not the strategy would result in hiring of teachers in what we call hard to staff or low income communities. and also look at whether or not, we want to avoid exacerbating strategies by bringing teachers into other communities but leaving the low income communities behind.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeff Hackar: Thank you Mr. Chair and members, Jeff Hackar, I'm representing the Riverside County, Superintendent of Schools, and the 23 school districts in Riverside County. Like many other areas of the state, the 23 school districts in Riverside County are suffering from teacher shortages, particularly the districts located in the outer desert areas near the Arizona border. We are supportive of many of the efforts that people on this dais are undertaking and have undertaken to address this shortage. We were a grantee on behalf of the county for the classified teacher grant program. We had more than 400 applicants for the 100 slots for which we were funded. So we believe that may be an area where an additional investment may be a good investment. We are also supportive of Mr O'Donnell's bill on teacher grants and very intrigued by Mr Chavez's comments about a systematic approach of support for teachers, because we believe that's an essential component of our ability to solve the crisis as well. Thank you.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 773, 'end': 782, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 833, 'end': 839, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sarah Lillis: good morning, lillis with ed voice. we really appreciate the conversation this morning and dr. sandy and shields really talking about how this is a very acute issue, particularly for those students who are in low income communities and particularly for those students who are in the classrooms of the permanent and waivers teachers. i was very excited, we've been saying 6,138 permits and waivers, when i went to the upto date ctc dashboard yesterday, it was 6,137 so we're down one. that's exciting, so now we're at 154,000 and change, that's too many students with teachers who haven't been trained, teaching them everyday. so we think it's a really serious issue that needs a structural approach and structural investment from the state. and we also think there's another issue that hasn't really been discussed that is required by the reauthorized essa, which is the equitable distribution of teachers. we're now talking not just about qualifications, and being in an appropriate field, but also effectiveness and that's an area that we hope the ctc and the cte can work on together about what that system of oversight and support looks like.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 95, 'end': 100, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 105, 'end': 112, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Liz Diane: Good morning, Liz Diane with Public Advocates. It's baffling to have our different experts say that there may not be a shortage and there may not be enough in supply and the demand is really fueled by funding. Well the impact is on lowest performing students, which tend to be students of color, English learners, students with the greatest needs. And those students received additional funding under LCFF, our first priority for the LCAPs is basic services and the short hand for it is called Williams, The Williams Standards. In 2004, we settled with the state because of this issue of predominantly low performing students, immigrant students, student of color being provided substandard teachers, including intern teachers, emergency credential teachers in short term permits. The standard Is, for your first priority in your LCAPs, is to provide fully credentialed teachers, teachers that are not mis-assigned, in other words teaching in their field, including teachers of English learners, teachers with the proper authorizations. If we're not providing enough funding in LCFF for that, then we need to, and we really need to look at where that funding is going and of course, the state isn't tracking that funding. This is one example of how important it is for the state to own this issue of transparency, not letting it just fall onto districts, and also to own the teacher, the workforce responsibility, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 494, 'end': 502, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 508, 'end': 516, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dan Kaplan: Yes, Dan Kaplan with the LAO. I'd just like to add one thing. If I understand your question correctly, you asked what is more effective? Is it a grant program or a loan forgiveness program? A lot of studies are often somewhat challenging because they look at each of these programs in isolation. Now, there was one study that looked at law student enrollment at NYU. And I know this differs from the teacher workforce, but it basically randomized those individuals entering the program and offered some a loan forgiveness option, and some an upfront grant to pursue a less lucrative public sector career. And what it found was those students who were given the upfront grant model where they did have to repay the funding if they chose to leave the public service within a certain timeframe were more likely to go into the public service route. So, from this, the design of the program was somewhat interesting because it does allow us to see what kind of nudges can be most effective.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeremy Smith: Thank you, Mr. Chair and Members of the Committee. Jeremy Smith here on behalf of the State Building&Construction Trades Council. This is another example, also entering our support. This is yet another example of bad underground economy contractors doing all they can to use a loophole in the law to not treat workers the right way or the public. So for those reasons, we're happy to support, thank you.
[{'start': 51, 'end': 63, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Janice Hosted: good afternoon i'm janice jonah hosted with operating engineers and we're in full support of the bill.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 31, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ryan Spencer: Thank you Mr. Chair, Ryan Spencer on behalf of the bill sponsors the California Podiatric Medical Association. I think the Chairman kind of summed up the bill quite well, but I will just kind of reiterate a couple points. It does focus on two primary issues, one is the allowance of Podiatrists to treat leg ulcers, especially those that move from the ankle up to just below the knee, and also allows them to perform other procedures that are directly related to the foot and ankle if they're given the appropriate privileges by the hospital medical staff. This bill was developed in a very thoughtful manner to acknowledge the years of improvements in education of training of podiatrists. This includes four years of medical school, and now three years of residency, which is up from the one year from decades ago. That is vastly similar to that of an MD and a DO. We do recognize that there are still some stakeholders that have interest in the bill and we'll continue to work with them as the bill moves forward, and so, I'd appreciate your aye vote, and thank you for your time.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brice Dockerty: thank you, mister chair and members. dockerty on behalf of kp public affairs. but the california orthopedic association as a sponsors accurately indicated. we've been working on this issues for quite sometime, the committee announces actually points out that the california medical association, did form a task force to work an issues between orthopedic surgery and podiatry. those discussions are ongoing. as a matter of fact, the practitioners had gotten together last week. we are, we don't have an official position or a letter into the committee, but i did want to indicate that there are some concerns about the broad, open-ended nature of the way in which the language is written. but we are going to continue to work with the author and sponsors, and hope to get to a very good place on the bill. thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lauren Michaels: great, thank you and good afternoon. michaels on behalf of the california police chiefs association. really happy to be here in support of ab 64, and i apologize for the late nature of our support. ab 64 includes a number of priorities for cal chiefs that are critical to protecting the health and safety for our communities. i'll focus on two, advertising and drug impaired driving. proposition 64 included the number of advertising restrictions, upon which ab 64 builds off. first, ab 64 applies these restrictions to all entities, not just licensees. this ensures that those protections will apply to ancillary businesses and ensure that they are not exempt from provisions aimed at keeping cannabis advertising outside of the eyes of minors. the bill also expands upon provisions in prop 64 to completely prohibit billboard advertising on highways and freeways. ab 64 also includes a number of impaired driving provisions. a few years ago, we reached out to our colleagues in colorado for recommendations on how to best prepare for marijuana legalization, should it come to california. and one of their first points was to begin collecting data as soon as possible to study the real impacts of legalization. ab 64 will create a data reporting process for those found to be under the influence of marijuana or a combination of marijuana and alcohol. furthermore, although prop 64 allowed for- prohibited open containers of marijuana in a vehicle, it failed to provide a definition of marijuana open container. ab 64 clarifies that marijuana products must be stored in the trunk of a vehicle out of the reach of drivers and passengers. lastly, prop 64 provided an annual allocation to the chp of $3 million to adopt protocols to determine if a driver is impaired from marijuana. ab 64 would begin this funding allocation immediately, ensuring that the chp can begin their work right away rather than wait a year until legalization. overall, ab 64 includes a number of provisions that meet our priority issues of advertising and drugged driving and we're happy to be be here in support today.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Quintana: david janice quintana, on behalf of the california cannabis courier association. currently, over 50% of all cannabis transaction in the state are conducted by delivery services. this trailer bill contains a license type for non-store front delivery services. we believe that's necessary with an industry that has such a large part of the market and we support the bill. thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marvin Pineda: Marvin Pineda on behalf of the United Cannabis Business Alliance representing the dispensaries out of the City of Los Angeles in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nathanael Bradley: nathanael david bradley with the the california cannabis industry association. while our board hasn't taken an actual position on this bill yet, we are very supportive of most of the language in this bill, and we look forward to working with the authors as they move forward on this bill. thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nick Ocampo: hello, nick nathanael ocampo, president of the california cannabis courier association, in support of ab 64.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nina Parks: Hello my name is Nina Parks, and I am a delivery service operator out of San Francisco, Mirage Medicinal is my delivery service. I'm also a cofounder of SuperNova Women, which is a women of color organization in cannabis and also with the Bay Area Cannabis Couriers Association. So I am also in support of the non-storefront language of this bill and we look forward to working with you guys further.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nurit Raphael: Hi, my name is Nurit Raphael, and I'm a delivery service owner in Marin County called Ona.life and I also represent Marin Gardens as a community manager and have founded the Marin Cannabis Courier Association as well, and we're in support, thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Darren Gadeau: darren with the citadel, up in sacramento, founder of a delivery service, and i'm here to support the bill, also on the board of the ccca.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Justin Vincenzo: Hello, Justin Vincenzo. I'm part of the California Cannabis Couriers Association, delivery owner here in Sacramento. Appreciate your support of AB 64.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jay Johnson: Hello, I'm Jay Johnson here with the CCCA. Owner-operator of Silver Streak solutions, a local delivery service. We support this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Hezekiah Allen: Hezekiah Allen on behalf of the California Growers Association. Don't have a letter to you, but we do have a support position on the bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Meciah Polanski: Meciah Polanski, apart of the CCCA. I'm a delivery service operator and I want to show my support for the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shane Gusman: mr. chair and members, shane on behalf of the teamsters. the teamsters has members in the distribution part of this industry, and we strongly support this bill. we believe that it will have accountability and prevent tax evasion in this new industry.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Hezekiah Allen: hezekiah nick allen on behalf of the california grower's association. though not with a formal position in support yet, we do appreciate the line of thinking. applaud the author and the sponsor for where they're headed with this with this. i think we would like to see the bill moved today, so we can continue working on the solution. we have a similar bill that approaches the problem, sort of same solution but different pathway. and so feeling positive about the bill, haven't quite got to a formal position yet, but applaud the author and the sponsor for their work on it, and encourage support today, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anna Ferra: Good morning Chair Hueso and Committee. I'm Anna Ferra Executive Director of the School Energy Coalition. We're made up of K-12 school districts, county offices of ed, school construction professionals and energy consultants. Our membership is focused on energy efficiency and renewable projects for California students. I'm also representing the Coalition for Adequate School Housing, who's members are facilities, directors, CFOs, superintendents and assistant superintendents, with facilities under their purview. We are here in support of SB 518 because it seeks to continue a program that's transforming the way that schools look at their facilities. After teacher and employee salaries, electricity bills are one of the costliest items in the school district's budget. The Legislature and Governor wisely choose to focus the funds deposited into the clean energy jobs fund on K14 Energy and Efficiency Installations and wisely chose, to have them show a return on investment for those energy and cost savings.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 24, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 29, 'end': 38, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 44, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eric Bakke: eric jonah bakke, the los angeles unified school district in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rick Brown: Rick Brown, Terra Verde Renewal Partners. I just want to make a quick comment that we're working with some of the lowest income school districts in the state in the Central Valley, Fresno county, Tulare county, and with Prop 39 these very low income districts have not only been able to reduce the pollution effects of energy to meet the classroom requirements, but they're saving money for the taxpayers. Between Prop 39 and the solar projects that our company has done in Fresno, Tulare, and other counties around the state, these schools are saving $15 million a year and I'm glad to provide that data whenever you want to see it. So Prop 39 is not just about jobs. It's not just about clean environment, it's about saving taxpayers money, and I encourage you to support his bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barrett Snider: morning barrett eric snider on behalf of the small school district association in support for all the reasons mentioned.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Curley: curley on behalf of the community college facility coalition and the county school facilities coalition in support.
[]
Larry Sweezy: Larry Sweezy, Sunpower Corporation in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Janice Lin: thank you, thank you, senator skinner, thank you committee members. my name is lin and i'm the cofounder and executive director of the california energy storage alliance, we're a 501c(6) representing approximately 65 companies here in california and our mission is to advance the role of energy storage for the purpose of achieving a cleaner, more efficient affordable and reliable power sector in california. cesa strongly supports senate bill 338 ... is in transition, and we need laws to guide us to meet our clean energy goals. without this bill, our planning exercises may select for resources that don't fit us with our long-term needs and goals. this bill will ensure that our electric portfolio planning efforts focus on both meeting our grid needs and our state's clean energy goals and specifically, this clean peek concept ensures that we're contracting for resources to meet our challenging grid ramping needs, and peaking needs, with energy storage and preferred resources. in essence, what it would do is, help us address the belly of the duck and the head of the duck, and turn it into a halibut, which is good for everybody. thank you very much. i welcome any questions. thank you.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 37, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 79, 'end': 82, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tiffany Fan: My next witness. Good morning, thank you. Good morning, Chair and members. Tiffany Fan, on behalf of the California Energy Efficiency Industry Council, also in support, thank you.
[{'start': 75, 'end': 86, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rick Brown: rick barrett brown terraverde renewable partners, support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrea Deveau: Good morning, Andrea Deveau, on behalf of Tech Nut, in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lynne Lyman: good afternoon committee members thank you for hearing our testimony. my name is lynne i'm the state director for the drug policy alliance we're sponsors of this bill and we were proponents of proposition 64. i'm also here as a mother, as a medical cannabis patient, and as advocate for criminal justice reform and reparative justice. ab 1578 is intended to prevent federal government overeach in the trump era. we do not want the federal government harassing, intimidating and prosecuting people who are operating lawfully under california law. we believe that this is clearly within california's rights under the 10th amendment as up held by the supreme court in the prince case. while we cannot fully control what the trump administration does, we can prevent the misuse of california's public dollars and resources for jeff sessions' misguided war on marijuana. we know that strict regulation is smarter, that it's safer for kids, for communities and that tax dollars can be used for critical services. regulation is safer than prohibition. and finally, ab 1578, upholds the will of the voters. 57% of californians voted in favor 40 of 58 counties voted in favor, 70 of 80 assembly districts voted in favor, and over 75% of california cities voted in favor or prop 64. marijuana is now legal in california, and we do not want any tax supported services used to undermine our vote. we don't want our police and regulators sucked into federal actions that are dumb, cruel and costly. instead, we'd like to see california law enforcement work with communities to establish fair, sensible and just cannabis regulations and policies. 92% of drug enforcement is done at the local level. ab 1578 would dramatically limit federal interference in our state marijuana laws. i urge you to pass ab 1578.
[{'start': 81, 'end': 86, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 823, 'end': 837, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Etienne Fontan: good afternoon, committee members. thank you for hearing my testimony. my name is etienne jonah fontan and i am the co-owner of berkley patients group, the nation's longest standing medical cannabis dispensary in the united states. as a combat veteran of a foreign war and a patient of medical cannabis for the treatment of gulf war syndrome as well as my ptsd, i have deep personal experience with this medicine as a means of treating my condition and improving my life. for nearly two decades, i and my colleagues have fought to keep berkeley patients group open, and continue serving our community. we have and continue to be a model dispensary, an employer of over 80 of the most talented people in this industry. i am honored to be able to create these opportunities for my members, my staff, and my community at large. we've repelled numerous federal attacks over the 17 plus years of operation. our sister location in los angeles, named california patients group, was destroyed by federal agents in 2007, forcing me to layoff 25 californians. i had my bank account seized and no one was charged. five years later, us doj forces to shut our doors at our original location in berkeley. i was forced to layoff over 50 californians were most were my workforce and slow our operations. this impacted safer access and our community suffered greatly from this impairment to our organization. i know our entire community is cared for and supported by our work. from the patients who access our medical cannabis to the berkley police and fire departments who are funded by our tax dollars. and may i add greatly respect the work that we do. we have been able to achieve all this because we have had to will and the means to fight for what we believe to be right and just. i implore you to vote to prevent the use of local, and state funds to perpetuate a failed ware on patients and responsible adult users of cannabis. i urge you to pass ab 1578
[{'start': 82, 'end': 102, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tiffany Lang: Tiffany Lang with the Service Employees International Union, I'll just associate, my comments with my colleagues from the Drug Policy Alliance and ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sam Rodriguez: mr chairman and members of the committee, sam etienne rodriguez legislative director for united food and commercial workers. the premier union in the country representing cannabis workers. what mr reggie jones-sawyer's is doing here is not just for california, this is a signature bill that will be replicated in states where they're regulating cannabis, colorado, oregon, washington and others. we ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 63, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 197, 'end': 216, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Holly Misher: Mr. Chairman, Holly Misher, on behalf of the California Association of Alcohol and Drug Program Executives in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert Harris: mr chairman, members, robert sam harris on behalf of the california society of addiction medicine. in support, because if there's treatment money for kids finally going to be available, and it won't be available if the feds shut this down. thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
James Hinton: James Hinton from the Vallejo Patients Coalition, I want to thank the author from the bottom of my heart. This means the world to me I have psoriatic arthritis. I use this and-
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Quintana: David Quintana on behalf of the California Cannabis Manufacturers Association, and the California Cannabis Courier's Association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cory Salzillo: okay, i'll start. mr. chairman, salzillo on behalf of the california state sheriffs association, in opposition to the bill. marijuana is a controlled substance on the federal schedule one. it's illegal under federal law. you can pass all the laws you like here in california to say that marijuana is lawful you can use it here, you can't use it here. the fact of the matter remains. marijuana is an unlawful controlled substance under federal law. to preclude local and state law enforcement from working with federal partners is problematic. we teamed, we partner with law enforcement at the federal level all the time on task forces. we deal with severe drug problems, with multinational cartels. and to put this standard in place, this notion that there is some lawful marijuana commerce and other unlawful marijuana commerce disregards the fact that federal law keeps marijuana as a controlled substance, so for those reasons we're opposed to the bill.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lauren Michaels: Thank you, good afternoon, Lauren Michaels on behalf of the California Police Chiefs Association. Our organization is in a unique position here because we were proud supporters and collaborative partners on Medical Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act that this body passed in 2015 and saw the need to bring a regulated model for cannabis in California acknowledging that the lack of regulation was problematic. Unfortunately, we think that AB 1578 will create problems between local law enforcement and our federal partners and that it will make it more difficult for the federal government to enforce federal law by saying that local law enforcement cannot even reply to a request made by a federal agency without a court order for those who have cannabis licenses in California. This is problematic for a number of reasons. First, just because someone has a license doesn't mean that they're operating legally or following the law either state or federal law. And second, there are a number of federal laws that are also California laws when it has to do with cannabis regulation. Diversion, access to minors, cartel activity, all illegal under both state and federal law. So the federal government could be investigating activity that is illegal under state law and it would preclude us from assisting or providing any information without a court order. So we're concerned that the bill will actually make it harder to ensure that our new legal cannabis structure keeps out those who want to take advantage of the structure and engage illegally. With that, we urge a no vote.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Lovell: John Lovell on behalf of the Association for LA Deputy Sheriffs, the Association of Deputy District Attorneys, California Association of Code Enforcement Officers, College and University Police Chiefs, California Narcotic Officers, LA County Professional Police Officers, LA Police Protective League and the Riverside Sheriff's Association. First of all, I'd like to incorporate by reference the comments made by the State Sheriffs and the California Police Chiefs Association. But folks, here's another irony with this bill. I understand the author's intent, I have enormous respect for this author. But the irony of this bill is that it in fact may result in the outright intervention by the federal government. And simply to say, hey, we don't care what you're doing in California. We're going to enforce federal marijuana laws here, here's why. The Cole Memorandum in 2013, this is now during the Obama administration, outlined the federal government's posture, vis a vis, states that legalized recreational marijuana. And they indicated a number of factors that were priorities and were important. And First, implicit in the Cole Memorandum, implicit in that memorandum, is that there would be ongoing exchange of information between the state and the federal government to make sure that those priorities are in fact honored. Under this measure, that communication could be outright prohibited. For example, Prop 64, unlike any other marijuana legalization measure in the country, has language in it that specifically says, you can advertise and your advertising market can be as much as 28.4% children, okay? So, if the federal government says, hey, wait a minute we want to see, make sure because one of our priorities is access to children. We want to make sure that this is being honored under this measure. Arguably the state would have to say, well, we're not going to tell you. You going to have to try and find that out for yourself. Similarly, Prop 64 has provisions in it that says the mere fact that you have been convicted of a drug trafficking offense, cannot be used by itself to deny you a license. Well, if the state licensing agency wants to find out other circumstances of that conviction in those circumstances reside, which some federal agency that dealt with that particular conviction. Does this bill prevent that interaction? I mean, I think, and I have actually said this to some of the proponents of this bill, this is a be careful what you wish for, because what you might wind up if this gets enacted juxtaposed on top of the Cole memorandum issues, you could find that this bill could be the engine that brings in federal intervention.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 853, 'end': 857, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 901, 'end': 906, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1130, 'end': 1134, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2559, 'end': 2563, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Leyvo: john robert leyvo, the sponsors to this bill are the la county professional peace officers association, the la police protective league and the riverside sheriffs association. it's a very narrow crafted bill, deals only with the discrete facts situation involving allegations of false and misleading statements. i would be remiss if i didn't single out your staff for a commendation for their hard work in the development of the language of this bill. here to answer any questions.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Perry: randy john perry with reed and associates on behalf of ... in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lizzie Buko: Good afternoon, Lizzie Buko with the ACLU California. Unfortunately, we are in opposition of AB 1298. We do think that this bill would impose a barrier to holding officers accountable for dishonesty. We acknowledge that the consequences for officers who have a sustained finding of dishonesty can be serious and they should be. The consequences for victims of officer dishonesty are far more severe. There are known incidents of innocent people who have been prosecuted, who have been convicted, who have been sentenced to prison and even death row based on testimony from an officer with a known history of dishonesty. There's no reason to believe that the current standard of preponderance to the evidence has resulted in any erroneous findings of officer dishonesty from an officer who is innocent. We do hear and know of many situations in which officers have repeatedly lied and not been held accountable for their actions. We have all, I imagine, seen videos that directly contradict officers' police reports, officers' testimonies and these are officers with a known history of lying, who have not been held accountable and certainly not accountable to the extent where they have not been able to continue making false statements that are endangering people's lives. And this is all with the current standard of preponderance of the evidence. This bill, by raising it to clear and convincing, would shield officers even further from accountability, raising the burden of proof far out of line with what is used in similar situations. Preponderance of the evidence is the standard burden of proof used in administrative hearings and disciplinary hearings and in court, in civil cases. There are very specific exceptions to that. Clear and convincing is really only used for situations where there are severe consequences for an individual's liberty. So examples are permanent termination of parental rights, involuntary commitment, really very specific and serious situations, not for administrative hearings, not for disciplinary hearings. Even disciplinary hearings that can ultimately result in termination. So again there's no demonstration that the current standard is not sufficient. But it is very likely that increasing the burden of proof would result in more guilty officers failing to be held accountable for dishonesty. As it is, the lack of accountability for officer dishonesty has resulted in severe damage to trust between communities and police and this bill would move in the opposite direction, so we are opposed, thank you. Thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cory Salzillo: mr. chair and members, salzillo on behalf of the california state sheriffs association in opposition to the bill. as miss buko said, installing a higher standard of proof bottom line will make it more difficult to discipline an officer who makes a false statement. that's what this bill does. the current standard is preponderance of the evidence or basically more than half. clear and convincing evidence is a higher standard. it will make it more difficult to discipline an officer who has made a false statement. it also prohibits testimony by electronic means. okay with those amendments. if those amendments are not in print or in the analysis then, but that's fine, we're still opposed to the bill on the creation of the higher standard of proof and again, as i mentioned before on a previous bill, law enforcement agencies are routinely criticized for not dealing with officers who break the law or who violate policies and this bill, at the same time as that happens as law enforcement agency gets called out, why don't you deal with problem officers? why don't you deal with this mistrust of law enforcement that exists in our communities? and then these bills keep coming and make it harder for us to deal with officers when they do violate standards or violate policies or break the law. i understand this is limited to false statements, there's an integrity issue there obviously, and so again to make it more difficult for management to deal with an officer who falls in this consideration, we're opposed to the bill. thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 122, 'end': 126, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nicholas Gonzales: nicholas randy gonzales for the california civil liberties advocacy, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barry Broad: Thank you. Mr, Chairman and members, I'll be very quick because I know it's been a long day. Barry Broad with the Teamsters. We were approached by this gentleman here, Steve Simpson from San Joaquin Foods with an idea which we thought this was a great idea and that an employer that's willing to hire ex felons. In our union, we've over many years had a commitment to try to help people who are coming out of incarceration to normalize their lives and support their families and we think this is a partnership that can work and can work in conjunction with the states, so we would urge an aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 93, 'end': 104, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 168, 'end': 181, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Stephen Simpson: Sure. Again, my name is Stephen Simpson, I'm with SDI Industries, San Joaquin Foods. We've been producing food and supplying food and food service supplies to the State of California for 30 years. In that time we have made the effort to reach out to those that have been incarcerated and other groups. And to provide employment for them. We've been successful although we do have as you can imagine a revolving door a lot of times. This bill would provide a way for us to provide a living wage for them and benefits that would give them incentive to not re-offend and be able to provide for their families. So we're in support of, I hope you're in support of this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Judy Mancuso: Hi I'm Judy Mancuso, sponsor of AB 1199, my group is Social Compassion and Legislation. And what we are doing is we are bringing this training to you because it has worked in the State of Texas and Colorado. In Milwaukee, they had hundreds of cases and after implementing this training, it went down to the 20s. Officers don't want to shoot your pet, but they have no training on how to deal with them. A police officer encounters an animal in one out of every four homes. This is based on this Department of Justice report. The reason why the DOJ came out with this report is because they said that it's epidemic. So we come to you today with something that is tried and true from other states, and we would like to implement this for California, so that our police officers are safe, our beloved K-9s are safe, and they get the training that they need and also there are cases being brought forward to the local jurisdictions that are in the $100,000s after there is a shooting, so we ask for your aye vote and we thank you very much.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Lovell: john nicholas lovell los angeles county professional peace officers association, los angeles police protective league and riverside sheriffs association all in support
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susan Riggs: Thank you Next. Good afternoon. Susan Riggs with the ASPCA, in support, thank you.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katie Cleary: Hi, Katie Cleary, President of World Animal News and the documentary Give Me Shelter on Netflix and Peach for Animals. We're in support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Halligan: Dr. Karen Halligan, UC Davis graduate, veterinarian, in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amity Seriano: Thank you. My name is Amity Seriano. I'm here on behalf of Social Compassion in Legislation. I'm a lawyer and I'm in support of this bill. I think it benefits everybody.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lauren Lewis: i am sorry. lauren john lewis i am with social compassion and legislation and with world animal news in supportive this bill. thank you mam.
[{'start': 12, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 136, 'end': 139, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Randy Perry: mr. chairman and members randy lauren perry on behalf of ... and associates. we're opposed to the bill because it's mandatory. i mean peace officers already do almost 700 hours of training and training is very expensive, our state commission on post has been cut $20 million this year in the budget. so we are trying to figure out at this point, we are working with management folks on just where and what training modules that we are going to cut based on this $20 million defecit. so in order to figure out on, both in the academy and continual training. that the chiefs and sheriffs or the management of each department has to make a decision. what's most important to that department and what is the key training for a rural county for example, versus an urban city. that is management's decision. they make a decision based on their staffing who should get what kind of continual training. but to mandate this type of training we've been working with dogs on the street since 1850. we love dogs, the president of porac is a dog handler and has been for 30 years. but to mandate this type of training in lieu of other training. additional cultural awareness training, a training that's in a piece of legislation that you have right now. what gets kicked out? because we can't send officers on and more, and more, and more training because then they'll never be on the street and it's a very expensive price tag thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rachel Sur: I'm just going to field any questions that the Committee Members have later on, my name is Rachel Sur.
[{'start': 91, 'end': 101, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicholas Gonzales: nicholas randy gonzales with the california civil liberties advocacy in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cory Salzillo: Mr. Chair and members, good afternoon. Cory Salzillo on behalf of the California State Sheriff's Association, here in opposition to the bill. First, most agencies have protocols and policies in place that have outside agencies investigating deadly force incidents or officer involved shootings when they do occur. Second, the Attorney General retains the authority to step in on any criminal prosecution when they think there's a problem or a deficiency in a prosecution or the lack of a prosecution. And given the fact that there are policies in place, the AG retains this authority. And there are other things that the AG should be working on rather than investigating these cases based on this notion of a lack of transparency or bias on the part of the District Attorney, we are opposed to the bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Perry: mr. chair and members, randy nicholas perry, aaron read and associates on behalf of and high patrol association. we've been working with the author on this issue for a few years now. generally, intent of this legislation has been that there is, like the sheriff said, mistrust with the district attorney because they work, and state in our meetings on previous legislation. there is a distrust of district attorney because they work closely with local law enforcement, therefore maybe they can't be, there's a bias. but we argued in that meeting, and argue here today that we work closely with the attorney general's office. and then we looked at, well, what about the fbi? well, we work closely in a task force with the feds. that's not the issue here. the issue is, and on the previous legislation was similar to this. the previous attorney general spoke out against it and said, no, it's not my job to come in. well, unless there is some type of malfeasance and it's specifically designated when the attorney general should step into a local investigation. the district attorney's jobs, and i won't repeat what the sheriff's just said, but we completely agree with him. the district attorney's jobs are to do this work. they do it independent of the department. and the ag coming in will not take care of any of the concerns of citizens who may have a distrust. because, like i stated in a previous legislation here today, if the answer doesn't come back what some of the members of the community feels the right one, they're angry. it doesn't matter. or they'll argue that there was a bias. it doesn't matter who is doing the investigation. the key for exposition on this whole issue is that the key is bringing the community into the process. showing them how investigations are done. what are the rules, the laws? the investigations are completed when you get an answer. hopefully, even if they still don't like the answer, they're not as angry. and they understand how the process works so we can all work on the process itself.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 45, 'end': 55, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Chanelle Temple: chanelle randy temple, blacks in sanctuary states, i support ab 1252.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cindy Gison: Hello, my name is Cindy Gison, I'm a private citizen. A 40 year taxpayer of Sacramento County. And, I support our federal government's effort protect us. I support the $280 billion that they give-
[{'start': 18, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Betty Robinson: thank you. betty chanelle robinson, a member of we the people rising and the remembrance project and i strongly support ab 1252.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Patrice Lines: Hi, Patrice Lines, member of We the People Rising and the  Remembrance Project, and I support AB 1252.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Veronica Berubio: and i'm berubio, i'm with the russian and slavic community of san francisco and sacramento and i support ab, thank you.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paige Gore: my name is paige betty gore, i'm from tehama county, and i strongly support ab 1252.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stacy Pierce: My name's Stacy Pierce, and I represent Californians Against the Sanctuary State, and I strongly support AB 1252.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Evelyn Drinker: my name is evelyn paige drinker from sacramento county.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Snoke: i'm karen evelyn snoke, sacramento resident, and i strongly support ab 1251, america first.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carol Beldin: Hi my name is Carol Beldin and I strongly support AB 1252, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rob Cantrall: my name is cantrall, president of the poverty party. i am a resident of oregon and i support ab 1252. stop sanctuary cities and states.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ronald Coleman: good morning mr chair and members my name is ronald the director of government affairs with the california immigrant policy center. also here respectfully in opposition that ab 1252. also very sorry for the tragedies that families have experience but not only does this bill see to authorize a practice which federal courts have declared unconstitutional it also jeopardizes local jurisdictions right to state funding for public safety, education, health and human services. this bill does nothing more than peddle the anti immigrant rhetoric and belittle our california values and undermine the public's safety and economy's of our cities and county's. ab 1252, is contrary to existing law that sets these reasonable limits on the local law enforcement's participations with deeply flawed detainer programs. california's trust decked ensures that people with low level non violent misdemeanor offenses are not necessarily held for deportation. and provides local discretion to not use scarce tax payer dollars to detain immigrants beyond their scheduled release time. it was a response to secure community's program under the obama administration which ultimately ended up being cancelled because of its challenges. local tax payers in california actually wasted about $65 million as a result of this program annually. earlier this year, trump restart this controversial program to executive orders but at time that ice agents are targeting people near schools, near courthouses, immigrants are living with increased fear and anxiety. and these sanctuary policies actually do play a key role in enhancing public safety and the well being of our communities. recently, we heard from charlie beck, los angeles police chief, that said that the increased fear of deportation has resulted in reports of sexual assault and domestic violence in 2017 dropping dramatically, both 25% and 10% respectively among latino resident compared to the same period of last year. other ethnic groups do not see the same way it declined, it is premature to attempt the respond president trump really questionable threats against santuary cities. we right now have san francisco county, santa clara county, and the city of richmond suing over these threats. we also believe that at the end of the day the la times found, or excuse me, the bill's requirement to wait state funds to essentially shame local jurisdictions is also very problematic. this is a very similar tactic used by the department of homeland security right now in publishing crimes of undocumented immigrants and when our local law enforcement officers are actually not holding people in detention. but at the end of the day, la times found that no sheriff in california's 58 counties is willing to hold inmates right now, because of the liabilities. sheriff jones right here in sacramento, actually had to pay out because of these illegal, unconstitutional detentions holding people passed their time. disentanglement with federal immigration enforcement agents is well within the rights of california local law enforcement under state law. it saves us all a ton of money, and is protected under federal law. for all of these reasons, we ask you to vote no on this bill.
[{'start': 45, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1127, 'end': 1132, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1339, 'end': 1344, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1683, 'end': 1695, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2067, 'end': 2072, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2806, 'end': 2811, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Griffin Long: griffin karen long for california civil liberties advocacy, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Harms: harms, on behalf of the national association of social work, california chapter, opposed.
[]
Gregory Kramer: Mr. Chair and members, Gregory Kramer on behalf of Planned Parenthood affiliates of California and our 115 clinics in strong opposition.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tristan Brown: Thank you Mr. Chair and members. Tristan Brown of the California Federation of Teachers in strong opposition.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Rattigan: michael on behalf of the board of supervisors santa clara county, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Daniel Silva: thank you, good morning ladies and gentlemen. first, i'd like to thank you for the opportunity to speak with you in support of 1448, a very important bill. my name is daniel and i'm a member and intern of the anti-recidivism coalition. when i am not in the office at arc, i spend my time going to those local schools and juvenile halls to speak with the young people to engage them in the kind of introspective and healing work that will help them turn their lives around. i also go into prisons in several california. or the prisons here in the northern region to prepare incarcerated men to become facilitators of the self awareness and recovery program. the sar program is model and a program that helped me turn my life around during my 39 consecutive years of incarceration. i was first incarcerated in 1976 at a young age of 18. when i first entered the prison system as a teenager, i was angry and hopeless. and i lived very destructively, made a lot of bad choices that led me straight to prison for life. in prison, i fully embraced that destructive lifestyle. i knew nothing else, and for many years lived it. and as far as i and all other lifers felt, we would know no other life. for many years we actually felt that even with the opportunity of going to the parole board. we thought that we were going to die in prison and never make it home. even the angels weren't getting home back in those days. then one day in 1999, 23 years after i entered prison. i decided that i was done submitting to life in prison and being self-destructive. i had hit rock bottom and desperately wanted to change and transform my life. unfortunately, i didn't know how, until i joined a program called the houses of healing. this program help me turn my life around, and i can honestly say that it saved my life. this program encouraged me to look deep into my core self and face the root of my destructive behaviors. after participating in this program, i was inspired to start my own program to help dispose to other prisoners. in particular the young men to the same life changing opportunities that i found. because of the work that i was able to do on myself and for others while in prison, i was found suitable for parole in 2015. i was then 57 years old, today there are many older incarcerated men and women who have had similar experience to mine. who are starting and leading programs in prison across the state. these men and women have transformed and matured into role models and leaders. in my experience, older prisoners have done the difficult work to transform their lives. they've gotten college degrees, they've participated and now lead the important healing programs like sar, houses of healing and criminals and gangs anonymous. they are completely different men and women from when they walked into the prison in the beginning. and i believe that they should have a chance to go home before the parole and present themselves, their new, transformed, healed selves. ab 1448 is not a get out free card, it is an opportunity to demonstrate that you have changed, transformed. and that you are now no longer a danger to society. this bill will also bring hope, there are men and women who have spent decades in prison and have given up on life that will now believe they have reasons to improve themselves. so that they can return to their communities as changed, healed fathers, mothers, grandfathers, and grandmothers. ab 1448 will inspire change in older and young people. so i respectfully ask that you vote in support of this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 167, 'end': 173, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lizzie Buko: thank you, lizzie griffin buko with the aclu in california, we are also in strong support of ab 1448. the elderly parole program is a very common sense and humane program. that gives people who have grown old in prison an opportunity to go before the parole board to have an opportunity to be considered for release. this a population whose continued incarceration does not serve the goals of public safety. so a few points on that, age, i recognize that to a lot of people, 60 does not seem elderly or geriatric. but for the prison population, the correctional experts, health experts, academics all agree that people physiologically age much faster than they do in the general population. so that's why the national institute of corrections actually uses 50 as a threshold for elderly. the national commission on correctional healthcare uses 55 as the threshold. this bill goes, and the current program goes beyond that using 60 as the age to be considered for parole. and so this is a population who physiologically is going to be more similar to someone who's 70 or 75 in the general population. so this is an elderly population that we're talking about. second this release is conditional on the board of parole hearings. this is not a lenient body in any way. the current elderly parole program, 25% of the people who have gone before the board for elderly parole since 2014 have been found suitable. so the majority of the people who go before the parole board under this program are not found suitable. and then third, the 25 years is an extremely long period of time. it is far out of line with what people serve in other countries, regardless of the crime. certainly other countries that we like to compare ourselves to, so that is an extremely long period of time. and this population as a whole, the data show they have a very low likelihood of recidivism. so people who are over 50 and leaving the prisons have the lowest recidivism rate of any other age group. people who have served longer than 15 years have the lowest recidivism rate of any other population. and people who are released by the board of parole hearings have a minuscule likelihood of recidivism. in the most recent data from the cdcr, the 400 people who have been released by the board of parole hearings, only 3 have been convicted of new crimes. so this is the population that accept the inner section of these three categories. and so they really, the likelihood of recidivism is practically nil. i also just want to bring up the enormous fiscal cost of this population. the lao has found that people's medical costs for those who are elderly is two to three times greater than the regular population. and i also want to mention the human cost of the continued imprisonment of people who are geriatric in a place that is not designed to provide chronic care for people who are old and infirm. and, of course, people who are separated from their children, their grandchildren and their communities. i do want to acknowledge that many of the people who are eligible for this program have done things that have resulted in serious harm to other people. i acknowledge that that is true, but 25 years as i said, is a far more draconian punishment than what we see in other countries. and also, many of these offences are situational and they are singular events that are not representative of people's characters. so ab 1448, recognizes not only the lack of justification for continued incarceration of the geriatric prisoner population. and also the very circumspect parole board, but also people's capacity for change. so for these reasons we support, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kalifasa Guy: I am, Kalifasa Guy on behalf of the California Public Defenders Association, in support.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 14, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Erica Rincon: erica lizzie rincon on behalf of the alliance for boys and men of color in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bikila Ochoa: Bikila Ochoa, Anti-Recidivism Coalition, happy to cosponsor. I'm very happy for Mr. Daniel Silva, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 84, 'end': 96, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Rizo: rizo with the anti-recidivism coalition in full support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Corby Sergeant: Corby Sergeant, Anti-Recidivism Coalition, support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Aldo Romero: Aldo Romero with Self-Awareness and Recovery and Anti-Recidivism Coalition, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sean Hoffman: Good morning Mr Chair and members, Sean Hoffman with the California District Attorneys Association. I would echo the comments of Mr. Salzillo, we are opposed for all those reasons. I did want to point out two things. It was mentioned during the initial presentation that this hearing is conditional. We're not automatically letting anybody out. This is a conditional sort of a thing. They have an opportunity. However the bill does direct the board to give special consideration to the person's age, the length of time that they've served which we believe sort of tilts that playing field a little bit in favor of release. Additionally we have some concerns with the exclusions in the bill, certain categories of offenders are excluded under the bill. However, if for example this would not exclude someone who's been convicted under Chelsea's law of particular sex offenses committed against minors for which they received a long punishment for particular circumstances surrounding that offense. So we think that if this were to move forward, a closer look needs to be paid to the list of excluded offenses, the excluded categories. But generally, we believe this is unnecessary to continue this in perpetuity while it currently exists under the three judge panel. And in light of the broader parole provisions of Proposition 57, we fail to see the need to put this into statute in perpetuity, for those reasons we're opposed.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 133, 'end': 141, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alissa Bjerkhoel: Thank you. Alissa Bjerkhoel from the California Innocence Project, a co-sponsor of AB 1128. Thank you so much for allowing me to testify. I just want to point out that we do have a couple cases that have resulted in exonerations from life sentences based on evidence that was fortunately so preserved by the courthouse. People who had spent substantial amount of time for crimes and even with cases where the type of DNA technology was not available at the time of trial. For example, I've just recently done a case where we did DNA testing off spent shell casings, a court exhibit, which may lead to an exoneration, as well. So it's very important for our work and obviously to preserve the integrity of the justice system to make sure evidence is preserved and that we can get it right.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Tanney: good morning. members of the assembly, i'd like to first thank, sorry, laura on behalf of the san diego county district attorney bonney demanis. first i'd like to thank assembly woman weber for carrying this important legislation and also the innocence project for co sponsoring this legislation with us. in light of the motion i want to keep my comments very brief. this is very important in moving our case exhibit retention policies into the 21st century. and in anticipation of the comments of judicial counsel, we did take effort in the bill to mitigate the space requirements by offering digitization of evidence in the majority of other bills, as opposed to expanding the length of retention for the the very narrow crimes that we're specifying here. we request your aye vote.
[{'start': 71, 'end': 76, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 129, 'end': 143, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 184, 'end': 189, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sean Hoffman: sean erica hoffman, with the california district attorney's association in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa O'Connell: good morning. melissa sean o'connell from the northern california innocence project, we're a proud co-sponsor of the bill.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lizzie Beacon: lizzie melissa beacon with the aclu of california in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7, 'end': 14, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Khalif Assagai: Khalif Assagai, California Public Defenders Association in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: ignacio lizzie hernandez on behalf of the california attorneys for criminal justice in support. and i appreciate the work of the sponsors of the bill working with us on amendments and it's a great opportunity to stand not only with assembly member weber but my prosecutor colleagues to stand in support with them on the same bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 248, 'end': 253, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sharon Riley: Good morning, Mr. Chair and Members of the Committee. Sharon Riley on behalf of the Judicial Council. The Judicial Council is regretfully opposed to AB 1128. And the basis of the opposition has to do with the significant new burdens. The Council is concerned that the bill will place on the courts by extending their required retention periods for certain exhibits. The unfortunate reality is that courts lack the resources to store and manage these records. Especially in light of continued new burdens placed on criminal courts by legislation. And by recent initiative measures passed in the November 2016 general election. And, in addition, many courts simply lack space capacity for storage of records as contemplated by AB 1128. So the effect of the bill could be that courts would be required to obtain additional space to meet its mandate. However, the bill does not provide any funding for courts to do so. There are a number of courts who routinely follow the existing destruction practices authorized by law. Which means that they would have to change their practices. Again, redirecting resources to, though, maintaining those records and exhibits for extended periods of time and also obtaining additional space. Finally, the Council is concerned that AB 1128 would undermine the efficiencies gained by the passage of AB 1352 in 2013. Which was an omnibus records retention or reorganization bill. Which allowed courts to obtain cost savings by reducing record retention periods. Thank you.
[{'start': 54, 'end': 66, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marissa Montez: good morning, my name is marissa ignacio montez. and i'm the co-director of loyola law schools immigrant justice clinic. the work clinics work, we have integrated ourselves into the community of loyola heights in east los angeles. and have witnessed first hand how mislabeling of gang membership can cause immigration consequences. for this reason, i am here to testify in support of ab 90. this bill not only addresses the concerns highlighted in the california state auditors finding, but also adds safeguards to limit the misuse of information that unfairly targets immigrant and low income communities. first, ab 90 replace a moratorium on the use of calgang until the audit concerns are addressed. it found that children younger than a year were labeled as gang members, demonstrating either that law enforcement categorize individuals based on family and community ties, that the data and entered was inaccurate. this misinformation is detrimental as it was for my psi community college student in the course of his green card interview with accused of gang involvement due to his older brother, though he himself had never been gang related. uscis had no access to any evidence regarding gang affiliation except for inaccurate information through calgang. matias' case is ongoing, but is an example of one of the many young adults in his community who are similarly stigmatized. second, ab 90 prohibits the sharing of information with any federal agency. in the case of matias, information from calgang was shared with the uscis. many more incidents has have involved other federal agencies accessing calgang to wrongfully target immigrants for enforcement. heavily relies on the sharing of information between state and federal agencies to target immigrants such as the fbi, doj, and dol. unlike sb 505, that only limits sharing with immigration authorities, ab 90 would prohibit the sharing of information between all federal agencies to ensure that inaccurate information does not result in wrongful removals. lastly, ab 90 creates an oversight committee of law enforcement and community leaders to ensure the proper administration of calgang and other gang databases. as the audit's finding indicated the lack of oversight has led to one, an abuse of law enforcement resources in power. and two, has severely impacted low income communities' ability to access benefits, not limited to immigration. a diverse oversight committee is needed to ensure accountability and to repair community relations. for these reasons, i stand in support of ab 90, and ask for your support too.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1149, 'end': 1154, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1263, 'end': 1269, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1477, 'end': 1483, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Deandre Brooks: members of the committee, my name is deandre. i'm 30 years old, i'm from san diego and i'm documented as a gang member. i was raised in a historically black and brown neighborhood of stockton. and my community has had a long tumultuous relationship with the san diego police department. through a public records act request submitted in san diego this past year, we discovered that while blacks only make up 5.5% in san diego. county. they make up 28% of the gang documentation list. and latinos are 33% of the counties population, yet they represent 59%. and while we know there are white gangs in santiago county, they are not represented in the database. out of 6,451 individuals that are documented only 176 were white. data shows us time and time again that there's stark and painful racial disparities in who ends up on this list. and unfortunately the consequences of being on this list can be grave. i had a traumatic and painful childhood. when i was 10 years old, i was taken out of the state's custody and put into a foster home. being separated from my family of origin and siblings drove me into the streets. when i was 16 years old, i was arrested for being an accessory to a non-violent robbery, while i had numerous contacts with gang suppression officers. and they had taken photos of me as a young child, it wasn't until this case that i understood the legal implications of being seen as a gang member in the eyes of the law. it was a hard surprise when i realized all those interactions with officers, all those photos they took could add time to my charge through a gang enhancement. ab 90 is important because it addresses the horrible inaccuracies of the data base by moving its oversight and administration under the state department of justice. a state audit released on august 2016 exposed that the law enforcement agencies that use the system have not maintained accuracy or safeguarding individuals rights. because i was a documented gang member, the judge never questioned the database accuracy. he said i must have acted in consent with the gang to commit the crime, even though the victim testified that i did not participate in the robbery. instead of facing 18 years for this charge, my lawyer suggested i take a plea for probation and a strike. a year later i was right on a trolley, my only motor transportation at the time coming from my high school football game. i got off on my stop and i was immediately arrested for a beating that had taken place prior to me arriving there. because of the strike and my documentation from the first case, the judge saw me not as an individual, not as a young man, not as a person with life, with a family but as a gang member. at 17, i was sent to adult prison for 10 years. but most kids were thinking about who to take to prom or how to fill out a college application. i was trying to survive in a 11 by 11 foot cage. my body of years were spent trying to raise myself, educate myself, turn my life around without family or community support. since my release in 2013, i have completed my social degree and i am currently pursuing my bachelors in sociology. i work full time as a youth counsellor and volunteer at local non profits and in my community. not everyone who is a documented gang member loses their youth, but everyone who is documented is relegated to second class citizenship. being documented can impact where you can live, what services can be provided to you, where you can travel. educational opportunities, who you can associate with, and put you at a much greater risk for deportation. and remember you could be documented as a gang member without ever having committed a crime. ab 90 is needed to increase fairness and accuracy of the database, and to create accountability for how the gang lists are used. i'm a real life example of the distressing that documentation can cause on a person's life, so i urge you all to vote yes on ab 90.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kim McGill: kim from the youth justice coalition we're just here for technical support we're proud to be co sponsors of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sharmayne Cher: Hi, Sharmayne Cher from the National Immigration Law Center, proud to be a co-sponsor of this bill.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Josh Green: Josh Green, Urban Peace Institute proud to be a co sponsor on this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Griffin Long: long, california civil liberties advocacy in support.
[]
Melvin Harshaw: harshaw, nsaw in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Bartholow: Jessica Bartholow, Western Center on Non Poverty in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Juan Pena: Juan Pena with the Youth Justice Coalition in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erica Rincon: Erica Rincon with PolicyLink and the Alliance for Boys and Men of Color, proud co-sponsor.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Samuel Nunez: samuel marissa nunez, fathers & families of san joaquin, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maurice Gomez: Maurice Gomez, Fathers & Families of San Joaquin, in full support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Daniel Silva: Daniel Silva, Anti-recidivism Coalition, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gilberto Flores: Gilberto Flores, a resident of South Central, Los Angeles in full support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: Ignacio Hernandez on behalf of the California Attorneys for Criminal Justice, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Caliph Assagai: I'm a little late Caliph Assagai on behalf of the California Public Defenders Association, in support.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sean Hoffman: good morning, mr. chair and members, sean samuel hoffman with the california district attorneys association unfortunately here in opposition to ab 90. we don't dispute the suggestion that reform and better oversight of the calgang system is necessary. certainly we read the audit, read the recommendations by the state auditor. and they raised a number of issues that i think do need to be addressed. unfortunately ab 90 goes in our view too far beyond the recommendations provided by the state auditor. if the bill were amended to simply reflect the recommendations made by the state auditor in that report. i think we not only would remove our opposition, we'd probably support that bill. unfortunately, things like the two year purge versus the five year purge that was recommend in the audit. it's too short a period of time individuals who are incarcerated for a gang offence or probably going away for more than two years. so if they come out, they are already off the database under two year purge, that's problematic to us. the expansion of the technical advisory committee to include individuals who are themselves, documented gang members. we see that as a problem when we're talking about the operation of a criminal intelligence data base. sharing that information with individuals who may be on that data base. again, we acknowledge that changes need to be made to the system. and we would support a bill that more closely reflected the recommendations made by the auditor. but at this time, we are opposed to ab 90 as currently drafted.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Lovell: john sean lovell, association for los angeles county deputy sheriff's association of deputy district attorneys. california association of code enforcement officers, college and university police chiefs, california narcotics officers, la county professional peace officers, la police protective league riverside sheriffs' association. our position on this bill reflects spot on the position of california district attorney association. we believed in its current bill does go to far. but if something that were conforming with the audit recommendations we would remove our opposition. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Daniel Candle: Thank you, and good morning Chairman and the Assembly members. My name is Daniel Candle, representing the Greenlining Institute and at Greenlining where multi-ethnic policy organization committed to advancing racial and economic justice and we support AB 1344. We also support AB 149 which passed in 2013 which requires the County Probation Officers to pose the link of the California Voters guide for people with records on their website. And having notice of that link in each probation offices. But we need to further implement this bill. For example, Alameda, San Joaquin and San Diego County have accessible and working links on their website. On the other hand, Los Angeles, Kern, Stanislaus County do not. We need to take steps further beyond an internet link and we need honest and direct forms of raising awareness for civic engagement, this is where AB 1344 comes in. Given that people of color make up the state's majority, voting demographics should reflect that. But there's the challenge. People of color, particularly, boys and men of color, disproportionately are victims of the carceral state. And misinformation about their civic engagement further marginalizes an already disenfranchised population. Requiring the Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation to provide the most updated version of a voter's guide to parolees will clarify when and how they can vote. And research shows that reintegration reduces resividism. Voting rights is tied to housing, it's tied to health, it's tied to jobs, it's tied to empowering folks with records to fully contribute to their community. And in Alameda County we have worked with community departments to develop strategies on how we can give folks with records healthcare jobs. And that work exists because we have elected officials who have prioritized the rights of formerly incarcerated. And for me this work is very personal. My uncle is a former felon and I called him recently to ask what did he know about his voting rights. And the probation officer at the time told my uncle that he can never, ever, ever vote again, this is incorrect. He has been, it's been 20 years since he's been on parole and he expressed to me how much he would love to vote because what the government does affects him and affects his family. And this is why providing a voter guide and having probation officers give accurate information is important. Because the real cause here is not letting someone who is able to vote to fully participate in democracy. So in Greenlining we endorse the 1344 and we respectfully ask for your aye vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 74, 'end': 87, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lizzie Beacon: lizzie john beacon with the aclu of california in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Erica Rincon: Erica Rincon with the Alliance for Boys and Men of Color in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Josh Green: Josh Green, Urban Peace Institute in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kim McGill: mcgilly, justice coalition in strong support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Melvin Harshaw: Melvin Harshaw, NSAW, in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maurice Goans: Maurice Goans, Father of Families of San Joaquin and Boys and Men of Color, full support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: ignacio lizzie hernandez on behalf of the california attorney's for criminal justice in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bikila Ochoa: Bikila Ochoa, Anti-Recidivism Coalition, strong support, thank you. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Bauters: John Bauters, Californians for Safety and Justice, support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Daniel Silva: Daniel Silva with the Anti-Recidivism Coalition in full support. Thank you, any witnesses in the opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Sanchez: Good morning Mr. Chair and members, Danielle Sanchez on behalf of the Chief Probation Officers of California. Regrettably in opposition today. I do want to thank Dr. Weber and her office for working very closely and having some very productive discussions with us on this bill. Probation is very supportive of fostering civic engagement for our social activities and that's really at our core and mission so we absolutely agree on those aspects of this bill. I think the challenge for probation is we're looking at how the bill is structured. And thinking through the key solves that we have probation in 2015 had nearly 400,000 persons under our supervision. And when we look at those numbers and the requirements to obtain, potentially print out and provide the voters guides and the affidavits, there's certainly a significant cost and work load. And we think there's an appropriate role that county elections personnel has historically played in this, and should continue to play in making sure that we are getting those that we work with the information they need on this. So that they do have the facts and the accurate information as to what their voting rights are. We worked very, very closely with Dr. Weber and her office in 2014 on AB 14 49 and actually, we're able to find some middle ground on that. Probation departments would post in our departments into our website, information on how to access this because of the nature I think of the importance that we see this playing. But for a probation, I think it's important and we're certainly mindful of whether that should be provisions responsibility, or continuing to work with local county elections, and other partners to make sure that these persons are getting the information they need. So we look forward to continuing those discussions but for those reasons, we are opposed today.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 166, 'end': 171, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1212, 'end': 1217, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Joe Micheals: Good morning. Mr. Chair and members, Joe Micheals for Equality California, we're proud to be the sponsor of this bill, and I'll just add a few things to what the Assembly Members said to introduce this. Unfortunately, hate crimes are on the rise in California and in the United States. In this Report by the Southern Poverty Law Center that the Assembly Member mentioned, there was a total of 1094 bias-related incidents nationwide, and in California, there were the most reported in the country at 125, followed by New York with 94, and Texas with 71. So California is a large state and unfortunately has a large problem in this area, particularly after the election. I'd also like to particularly state that the impact of hate crimes on the LGBT community specifically is highlighted in the attorney general's report that the Assembly Member mentioned, as well. Hate crimes with a sexual orientation bias have been the second most common type of hate crimes in California over the past 10 years and accounted for nearly a quarter of all hate crimes reported in 2015. Tragically, hate crimes in many communities go unreported because of cultural. And linguistic barriers or because victims fear or distrust local authorities. As the Assembly Member mentioned, nearly two in three hate crimes go unreported nationwide because victims believe that the police could not or would not help. Establishing a hotline at the state level would provide a safe and anonymous way, if necessary, for people to come forward and report hate crimes and incidents. We respectfully urge your aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Umina Casillas: Good morning Chair and Committee, my name is Umina Casillas and I'm with the Council on American-Islamic Relations, CAIR. We are the nation's largest Muslim civil rights group and here in California we represent approximately 800,000 Muslims. So as Assembly Member Chiu was mentioning, the Muslim community is one of the communities that's been targeted and actually Surprisingly since 9/11, these past few years have actually seen an increase of hate crimes. Not only to the Muslim community, but those perceived to be Muslim. Our Sikh brothers and sisters who wear turbans, who often are mistaken and get targeted for being Muslims, have been attacked and killed, and for us at CARE, there is a lot of under reporting, and the community often times either chooses not to call or if they do call, they call us directly or if they're not in an area near us, they often times leave us voicemails, and there's no way to get immediate support or help, and in particular, from personal experience, I am new to Sacramento, and I have been here for about five months. And when I was here for two weeks, I actually was out wearing my head scarf. I was doing a few errands and I was wearing my head scarf and I was actually profiled, followed and cornered in a parking lot here in Roseville and although I am an advocate, I did not call the police immediately. I actually called our Executive Director because I was just flustered and startled and then I proceeded to work with the police, once I knew that we actually had a good relationship with our chapter here, with the local police in Roseville, and they took care of it. And we have many instances, as well here.There was a woman she was the wife of the Imam, she was almost run over by a person in a parking lot. She didn't say anything and we have many individuals in the Santa Clara area that we've just been speaking to who have actually restraining orders based on previous hate crimes that are not being followed, and when they call the police, nothing is done, so they actually end up calling us, and we actually had a woman recently do an intake where she called the police because this man was harassing her of hate incidents. And the police actually ended up informing somehow the perpetrator of the alleged and she was ended up being attacked by that perpetrator. So the interim of trust with law enforcement, this hotline will just allow more of a partial and objective way of dealing with this and we strongly urge your vote.
[{'start': 45, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 265, 'end': 269, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Griffin Long: griffin with the california civil liberties advocacy in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Welspokee Yang: Good Morning Chair and Committee. Welspokee Yang, member of the green part of California in support of this bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Beverly Upton: upton, san francisco, domestic violence consortiums we support.
[]
Nicholas Gonzales: sorry, gonzales for the california civil liberties advocacy in opposition.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tom Domingo: Tom Domingo, Association of Orange County Deputy Sheriffs in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David McStagy: Thank you. David McStagy and we represent public safety employees and their organizations in support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Level: level, association for los angeles deputy sheriff's, association of deputy district attorneys, california association of code enforcement officers, california college and university police chiefs association, california narcotics officers' association, los angeles county professional peace officers, la police protective league, riverside sheriffs' association all in support.
[]
Cory Salsa: thank you mr. chair and members. cory ignacio salsa here on behalf of california state sheriff's association.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Liz Beacon: liz cory beacon with the aclu in california, unfortunately we are also opposed to ab 887. we do think that this bill would indeed effective investigations and make it more difficult to hold officers accountable for misconduct under current law at a questioning officer. when they provide information on the nature of an offense prior to investigation, they can use their discretion to provide the information that they think would be helpful in providing a fair and effective investigation. there's nothing that precludes them from providing information that would be included in this bill. if they think that that would lead to a more effective investigation. this bill would undermine that process by requiring specific information to be presented before any questions are asked. this is not how one does investigations. in a criminal investigation, when an officer is questioning a person, they do not provide the facts of the case before they begin questioning. they provide as little information as possible in order to elicit the most truthful version of events from the person and i understand that this is not for criminal investigations, but the same logic does apply to these investigations. when the community has raise concerns about an officer's integrity or misconduct or honesty, it is critical to that person has things that that concern is taken seriously. they currently had the perception that it is rushed through a process where all the conditions are waited in favor of the officers. as it is, only a small percentage of complaints are sustained. it's in the single digits and many cases is at 5% of complaints are sustained. we had the situation with the lapd where they received almost 1,400 complaints of biased policing between 2012 and 2014. zero of those complaints were sustained, so this is not a system where civilians, the community members feel like their complaints are taken seriously, and we do think that this bill would erect more of a shield, would undermine more the faith of the community should have in the law enforcement, so for these reasons we are opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kalhif Vastagon: Kalhif Vastagon on behalf of the California Public Defenders Association, also in opposed. I'll align my comments with those of the ACLU and also add that police officers are individuals who are fallible just like anybody else and giving somebody the information prior to the investigation prior to questioning just simply means that, that person can fabricate a story that comports with the series of events or the facts that were presented to them at that time. Criminal defendants do not have this luxury or this right for a good reason, it's to illicit the most accurate portrayal of the story as it occurred to that particular person. Public trust will be eroded tremendously. If every single time there's an investigation, an officer can look at all the information and say, okay, well, this is the story that makes sense out of this information. This is the story that will look best for me based on this information. It's unfortunate that we have to do this, as Cory mentioned, that there are maybe a small number of officers who actually have complaints set against them, or made against them in the all police forces, however that small number is hurting a large number of people. And we need to have adequate safe guards in place to protect the public against those few bad corrupt cops who are out there breaking the law under the color of law while wearing a badge and a uniform. So this would be unreasonable protection and benefit to them in evading appropriate punishment and evading appropriate sanctions and evading potentially losing their badge which many of them deserve to do. So for that reason we ask for your no vote on this bill.
[{'start': 970, 'end': 974, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Erika Legoma: Erika Legoma on behalf of the Alliance of Boys and Men of Color, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Griffin Long: Griffin Long for the California Civil Liberties Advocacy, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maurice Gowans: Maurice Gowans, Fathers and Families of San Joaquin, in strong opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cory Salzillo: thank you, mr. chair and members. cory liz salzillo here on behalf of the california state sheriffs' association. i know you have a lot of bills on your calendar today and in light of the motion, we'd like to show our appreciation for the committee. for working with us on the bill to come up with something we hope we can all agree on that does identify the danger that peace officers face but that also does not implicate any more controversial provisions. so for that we'd ask for your aye vote. happy to answer any questions if you have them.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Lovell: john cory lovell, association for los angeles county deputy sheriffs, association of deputy district attorneys, california association of code enforcement officers, california college and university police chiefs association, california narcotic officers association, los angeles county professional peace officers association, los angeles police police protective league, and riverside sheriffs association, all strongly in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Perry: randy john perry with aaron read&associates on behalf of porac and higher patrol and porac's 980 associations, which i won't name in support. just kidding, john.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 156, 'end': 160, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Danielle Sanchez: danielle randy sanchez on behalf of the chief probation officers of california in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sean Randall: good morning. sean with the california peace officers association in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erica Rincon: erica danielle rincon on behalf of the alliance for boys and men of color in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Treva Kelly: hi, my name is kelly, and i am an incest survivor. when the molestation started, it felt wrong and i hated it. but i couldn't stop my brother. he would say that he would do bad things to me if i told, and i had to stay quiet. this taught me to not tell the truth. and it reinforces my lack of credibility if i did tell anybody. it is here that seems to be where the exclusion of megan's law fails children. this is unfortunate. in my case, this is where the sexual abuse started but definitely not where the sexual abuse ended. my brother started molesting myself and then my friends and then strangers. so he got comfortable and moved out toward strangers, and it begins in the home. i was always sick and then had grand mal seizures. once my brother moved out of the house, the epilepsy went away. and, i was able to start getting on with my life a little bit better. but the bad thing about this is that anyone of you could allow your children to go spend the night at a friend's house. and you might check megan's law and think, okay, it's a safe place. but if that perpetrator molested their child, grandchild, sister, or stepchild, they would not have to register as a sex offender through this exclusion. and that does not keep our streets safe. i need ab 558 to pass because i need to know that something is being done to stop the incest. my voice is strong because of all the angels on the other side that were murdered by the incest. and when i say murdered, either they were murdered or they eventually killed themselves because it was so horrible. and they saw no other option.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Catherine Campbell: yes, campbell. i'm here from california protective parents association and i thank you for having us. i'm here to remind everyone, sexual abuse of children gets invalidated more than we realize. and many children can't even tell what happens. and it is said that one in four females by the time they're 18, and one in six boys are actually molested. 90% of the children know their abuser, and only 10% of the abused children are abused by a stranger. so when you have a neighbor, a teacher or a coach, it could be anyone who is a good person, who does good things but also does bad things. and when we have someone who has molested a child, it seems to be minimized. and we want to make sure that people can have further protection. 70% of the child sexual offenders have between 1 to 9 victims, while 20% have 10 to 40, meaning that there are many. some have up to 100 victims. non-family members account for 77% of the abused children from age 12 to 17. we need to remember this, we have had sexual abuse in my family. and it has been minimized to the point where children are allowed to come and spend the night with this abuser. and as we already heard, if they are not on the megan's law website, you assume that our government is taking care and protecting their children and putting them on the site. the site becomes less valid if we don't have all the abusers on the site. we need to make sure that we understand every molestation matters. every child matters. it shouldn't happen once. if it happens once to a person, and usually it's more than once. but if it happens once, and it stays with the child for their whole life. and we have learned through the a study that we know that they have lower self esteem, higher chances of substance abuse, teen pregnancies, suicide, emotional and mental problems that can last a lifetime. the pain to watch this preventable action happen and the consequences to a family are unspeakable. we can prevent this. awareness is the first action that we can take and making megan's law website as strong as we can prevents child sexual abuse, thank you.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Natasha Minsker: Good morning, Natasha Minsker with the ACLU of California. Regrettably, we do remain opposed. We appreciate that the bill has been substantially narrowed and improved. The core problem that continues with the bill lies in the fact that California continues to be one of only four states with lifetime registration for a vast array of sex offenses. As a result, our registry and our website listing are actually not effective tools for either law enforcement or the public. We all agree that we want to keep communities safe. And the best way to do that is actually to make our registry and our website listing more focused on offenders who actually pose a risk of reoffending, rather than simply continuing to expand the website listing. One core problem with this bill is that it appears to require people to be added to the website and listed no matter how old their conviction is. So these are already low-level misdemeanor offenses that we're adding to the website. According to the experts I've consulted with, this bill would require listing for the first time individuals who may have convictions from literally 50 years ago, who have had no other intervening criminal offense. And this simply doesn't improve public safety. What we need to do is narrow our registry and our website listing, so that it applies to the people who truly are at risk, so that it can be an affective tool both for law enforcement and for the community, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Herin: I am David Herin. I live in El Dorado County, I represent myself and I strongly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dan Herin: good morning, my name is dan erica herin from el dorado county. i also oppose this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Blaza Lozanos: Good morning, my name is Blaza Lozanos, San Mateo County and I strongly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert Reed: Robert Reed from San Bruno, and I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Abby Breet: Good morning, I'm Abby Breet from San Francisco, and I very strongly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Morrow: my name is jason, i live in elk grove, i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julio Oriana: hi, my name is oriana, and i oppose this bill, los angeles county.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alexander Stewart: My name is Alexander Stewart, I live in Citrus Heights, and I very much oppose this bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Aaron Binecher: binecher, i'm from sacramento, and i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Howard Rook: Howard Rook from Sacramento, and I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Verby: i am mark dan verby from los angeles and san jose, and i humbly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Justin Gladding: my name is justin, i'm from sacramento county, and i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Perry: Mr. Chairman and members, Randy Perry with Aaron Read & Associates on behalf of PORAC and the California Association of Highway Patrolmen, co-sponsors of the bill. Again, this is our attempt to just try and bring the community into the system of investigations, helping them with complaints against officers, keeping them notified of the progress of their complaints. And we have some groups who think we go too far on the bill and other groups who think it doesn't do enough, so I think we are on the right track. So we'll continue to work with the bill and concerns of the folks and move forward if we can.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 43, 'end': 55, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Lovell: john mark lovell on behalf of the association for los angeles deputy sheriffs, association of deputy district attorneys, california association of code enforcement officers, california college and university police chiefs association, california narcotic officers association, los angeles county professional peace officers, los angeles police protective league and riverside sheriffs association, all co-sponsors of the bill. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Elizabeth Buchen: elizabeth john buchen with the aclu california, we do not have a position on this bill. however, we are troubled by the way that this bill has been characterized by the sponsors as increasing transparency when it doesn't actually provide greater public access to information that the public does not have access to, but we do not have a position on this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erica Rincon: Erica Rincon on behalf of the Alliance for Boys and Men of Color in opposition, thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Astra Zenega: Good morning everyone, I feel terrible because my back is to a couple of the members here. Again, my name is Astra Zenega and I'd like to start off by saying thank you to the Assembly Member for taking on this very important issue as well as a thank you to the Chairman and the Members of the Committee for allowing us to provide testimony today. See, this issue is near and dear to my heart due to the fact that, and I'm pretty sure that the majority of the people in this room, everyone's lives have been touched by someone with disability whether its a mental, physical, developmental or intellectual disability. For me, it's because I have a son named Manuel, he's 18. He's a severe autistic who is non verbal. A tendency to be aggressive as well as zero fear of water, heights, cars things of that sort. I've always worried since he was little and the first time he ever got away from my home he was 4 years old. Fortunately then we were able to find him in our neighbor's backyard. However, since then and as he's aged, I have found him as far away from my home as the middle of a bridge and for me that is terrifying. That very night things started going through my head and I would worry about what, the what ifs. What if a law enforcement agent came into contact with him and they didn't know that maybe because of his sensory issues that it would trigger, their flashlights might trigger a seizure. Their blow horns or their aggressive tone might trigger behavior, and because of the neighborhood that I live in, being that I live in probably one of the worst neighborhoods in Modesto, that they would just figure he's one of those homeless people or drug users and use excessive force and tase him or shoot him and he would be one of those circumstances that we've heard about across the nation. And I couldn't just sit back idly and allow my son to become one of those headlines that you hear where police shoot autistic young man and I wasn't just going to sit back and allow those things to happen. And that's when back in 2012 I decided that I was going to seek out like minded individuals to ensure that we are doing all that we can as public servants and as a society to create safer interactions with people who have disabilities and law enforcement, and other first responders. We've seen all too many of it across the nation in the last couple of years from as far away as Florida, with the caregiver who was shot with this autistic young man who ran from the home and was following their commands. However, the autistic individual was not. To most recently in Bakersfield where a man with dementia was shot and killed. And had we had things in place, more tools and education and training, and things of that sort in place, we will lessen the circumstances where people are hurt and in the long run we are not only saving the lives of our law enforcement and our first responders but we're also saving our communities most vulnerable lives and in the long run millions of dollars of in law suits. However, this is the reason why I'm here today. Is to ask you guys to support me in my mission to ensuring that the interactions between first responders and people with disabilities are safe ones. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 109, 'end': 121, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 656, 'end': 662, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Christopher Moreno: This is my first time testifying, whether it be church or court or in a setting like this. My name is Christopher Moreno. I'm an IHS provider, I live in Modesto, I work for the Stanislaus county. I have a great grandmother I take care of now for seven years, so don't let the age or the hair for you I've been in this specific job for quite some time and I've seen the good things come out of it so I'm here to support AB 437 for that reason. One of the things I'd like to discuss is what is important to me and what is important to me is process. And my definition of process is obejectivism and no subjective matter in the process. So with that said, like Astrid said this is a tool or resource this AB 437 and we're resources are I thinks like water and air and water and air are things we need to sustain life. Resources are things like municipal services and health service agencies that we need to sustain life. So with that said this is a resource and this is needed to make sure that the process is fulfilled in a- the way it should be, and we're not using subjective authoritative manners.
[{'start': 102, 'end': 120, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 658, 'end': 664, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Christine Champion: Thank you. My name is Christine Champion and I am a home care provider in Placer county for my son with autism and I stand in support for AB437. Thank you. Thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katrina Bugel: Hi I'm Katrina Bugel I'm from Del High, this is my brother Lotus Suthers he cannot talk and we really need this bill passed.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 59, 'end': 72, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
 : sharon elizabeth nuchessy elizabeth of elizabeth placer elizabeth county, elizabeth udw, elizabeth in elizabeth support. elizabeth thank elizabeth you.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 25, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 26, 'end': 35, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 74, 'end': 87, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 89, 'end': 98, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 102, 'end': 111, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 121, 'end': 130, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 137, 'end': 146, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Christine Pretty: hi, christine  pretty from sutter county in support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 20, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Albert Localist: albert christine localist, a ciu retired member in support of time. not to take away what's already there. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Griffin Long: Thank you sir. Hello, my name is Griffin Long for California Civil Liberties Advocacy and I support this bill.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 40, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Greg Degiere: degiere with the arc and united cerebral palsy california collaboration. we do not oppose the bill, we're support if amended and i just wanted to say, we've been talking with the sponsors and i'm sure we can work out our concerns and i hope the bill goes forward today.
[]
Emily Harris: Good morning, my name is Emily Harris and I'm here on behalf of the Ella Baker Center for Human Rights and we are one of the proud cosponsors of the legislation, and we have lots of people in the hallway who'd like to get in.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anita Wills: Hi, my name is Anita Wills and I'm with the Essie Justice Group and we are proud cosponsors of this bill.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kalifasa Guy: Thank you. Kalifasa Guy on behalf of the California Public Defenders Association, and we're cosponsors of this bill, and we're in strong support. Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melvin Orashaw: melvin, representing nsaw, and we support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Will Matthews: will, californians for safety and justice, proud co-sponsor of this bill. also representing crime survivors for safety and justice. this bill is in the best interest of public safety. thank you very much. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Young: young of the california labor federation also here in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Lynch: Danielle Lynch, on behalf of the California Association of Local Conservation Corps, in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erica Rincon: Erica Rincon, on behalf of the Alliance for Boys and Men of Color, in strong support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kim McGill: kim albert mcgill from the youth justice coalition, we're in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Deandre Brooks: deandre kim brooks, san diego pillars of the community, we're in strong support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Akil Ochoa: akil deandre ochoa anti recitivision collation, proud co-sponsor, strong support, thank you. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ron Pena: Ron Pena with the Youth Justice Coalition in strong support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Josh Green: josh, urban peace institute in los angeles, strong support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tracy Bell: tracy akil bell, oakland and i support the bill, extremely support the bill. thank you
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jenny Cogan: Jenny Cogan, Ben Erica Jewish Partnership for Justice, resource generation- strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeremy Smith: Mr. Chair, Members of the Committee. Jeremy Smith here on behalf the State Building and Construction Trades Council, we are the sponsors of this bill. Mr. Low did a very good job. I know I have a motion and a second I'll be very brief. This is extending a program that many of you on this Committee voted for in 2015. Under the Gomez bill, AB 1431, to community colleges throughout the store. LAUSD has had a report that shows tremendous success with this program. Lots of small business enterprises getting hired. Lots of local hire. It's been a success. We want to extend it everybody for your aye vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 155, 'end': 158, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 328, 'end': 333, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark McDonald: Thank you Chair and members. Mark McDonald, on behalf of a number of local community college districts. The Los Angeles Foothill De Anza Peralta and San Francisco community college districts and I would echo what my counterpart from the Billing Trade said. This is a program that's been successful at the K-12 level. We believe that it also ought to be extended to community colleges. It provides another tool in the toolbox for project delivery, that has been proven to streamline projects and cut costs. We would urge your support. As he mentioned, been successful at LAUSD, be good at community colleges, thank you.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Young: Michael Young with the California Labor Federation also here in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Markeson: I'll save the time, sir. Richard Markeson on behalf of the Associated Builders and Contractors, the American Fire Sprinkler Association, the Independent Roofing Contractors of California, the Plumbing-Heating-Cooling Contractors of California and the Western Electrical Contractors Association, all in opposition, and it should be no surprise, my Merit Shop Contractor clients are opposed to project labor agreements, but we think it's particularly atrocious that a measure that is purported to provide cost savings to community colleges, and we're not opposed to job order contracting, but the bill holds hostage these community college districts. They must adopt a five year project labor agreement in order to even benefit from the benefits from job order contracting and none other than the governor's own Department of Finance on 1431 observed two years ago, that whatever potential cost savings there could be from job order contracting could be obviated by the requirement that they enter into the Project Labor Agreement. Finally, we think that Project Labor Agreements that the supporters typically refer to as being beneficial. When you are using multiple crafts on extensive long term projects where there are potentials for labor disputes. It is completely antithetical to job order contracts. Which are supposed to be small projects, routine maintenance and repair of small dollar quantities. That there should be a mandate that these community colleges enter into a five year project labor agreement. For all projects that the community college seeks to pursue. We think that a measure that truly respects that independent decision-making of community college trustees and I know that there are probably some of you in the room that have been in that position. That it should be left to the discretion of the community colleges to decide. If they want to adopt exclusionary discriminatory project labor agreement in order to facilitate their school construction projects. We are opposed to the measure. We do appreciate the removal of that $25,000 fee that was in this bill in 1431 that improves, but we are still very opposed to the measure. Thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lillian Taiz: thank you, assembly member weber. yes, my name is lillian jonah taiz, and i'm a professor emerita at cal state los angeles. when i started at cal state la in 1992, 62% of the csu faculty had full time, permanent jobs. today only two in five faculty members have permanent positions. over the years i have been both a lecturer, a part time faculty member, and a tenured faculty member in the csu. as a lecturer in addition to preparing and teaching my courses, much of my time was spent traveling to other campuses to teach, or trying to figure out where i would be teaching next term. i taught at times at san francisco state, csu hayward, holy names college, and uc davis. teaching under these circumstances made becoming part of the campus culture and developing strong mentoring relationships with my students extremely challenging. when i became a tenure-line faculty member at cal state la, the nature of my work changed radically. the long-term nature of my position allowed me to build ongoing relationships with my students. to be part of a larger teaching community developing curriculum and research projects for students. and to work on many projects that address student success and closing the achievement gap. sadly, over the years, the university failed to replenish the ranks of tenured faculty. relying instead on legions of talented, non-tenure track faculty. university work historically shared among 60 to 70% of us who are tenure line is now being carried by dwindling numbers of tenured faculty who are left. faculty keep trying to do it all, but something has to give, none of us has superpowers. we knew back in 2001 and 2002 that our situation needed to change but over the last 15 years things have only gotten worse. this bill, ab 1464, will stop and reverse a trend that has resulted in more than 15,000 csu faculty working on temporary, usually part time contracts. thousands of these lecturer faculty are well qualified by education and experience for permanent tenure line positions, but they are hindered by virtue of their temporary appointments. already a fair number of incumbent csu lecturers apply for and are hired into tenure track positions. this bill would encourage the expansion of this practice by opening up more opportunities. it's really a no brainer for the university and for our students. thank you for the opportunity today. i respectfully urge your aye vote on this important piece of legislation.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 32, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 50, 'end': 68, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Henderson: Good evening, Mr. Chair and Members of the Committee. My name is Michelle Henderson and I am a part time lecturer at CSU Los Angeles. I am also here on behalf of the Californian Faculty Association as one of the 60% of CSU faculty working on a part time temporary contract. When I was hired as a temporary non-tenure-track lecturer at Cal State Los Angeles in 2012, I had aspirations of obtaining a full-time tenure-track position within the CSU. Unfortunately, what I have found is that due to my temporary status, I may never be considered for a tenure-track position. Because I have not held a full-time or a tenure track position previously. It is disheartening to know that although I play such an important role in providing my students with high quality educational experiences, both in and outside of the classroom, that this accounts for very little when seeking a more stable position. Every semester of my now four years of teaching in the CSU, I am fearful of the loss of my job due to budgetary cutbacks, and the vicarious nature of my employment status. Students' success outcomes are dependent on the consistent availability of faculty and the establishment of trusting relationships that are cultivated over time. A direct result of the inconsistency of employment for part time and temporary lecturers, such as myself, is that we are prevented from becoming vested in the long term growth of our respective campuses and in the CSU. The decline in tenure-track density is yet another example of the CSU's blatant disregard for its lecture faculty and students. As the decline in tenure-track faculty steadily reduces the CSU's capacity to effectively serve its students. Temporary lecturers have few opportunities to participate in program development, student advising, shared governance, and the implementation of University initiatives. As these opportunities and responsibilities are reserved for tenure line faculty. Several of my temporary lecturer peers have left the CSU for K-12 and other outside employment opportunities, seeking positional stability, wage increase, and greater opportunity for career advancement. AB 1464 is important because the CSU loses 10% of its part-time lecturer faculty annually. Over the course of a five year period, about half of the part-time temporary lecturers employed by the CSU will leave. For students, this means that 50% of the professors that they have during their freshman year are no longer on their campuses by the time that they graduate. And this is unfortunate. Building relationships with professors enriches students' educational experiences. For underserved students and students of color, these relationships are most often based on ethnicity and a cultural connection with their faculty and peers. These relationships are even more critical because they often mean the difference between a student dropping out of college and obtaining a degree. CSU part-time and temporary faculty are not just classroom teachers, we are mentors, we are trusted confidants, and we, as well as our students, deserve the opportunity to build and foster these relationships. More important, our students need and deserve the comfort of knowing that their teachers will be around for more than just one semester. This bill will not only increase the number of full time tenure track positions available to part time and temporary lecturers, it will reduce the cost of hiring, and afford greater parity in the recruitment and retention of underrepresented faculty and faculty of color such as myself in the CSU. AB 1464 is essential to me, as a temporary, part-time faculty lecturer. Because it will provide the opportunity for me to obtain the job that I have trained for, as I continue to teach the students that I love. Thank you for this opportunity.
[{'start': 65, 'end': 83, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chelsea Guerrero: chelsea lillian guerrero, a student at cal state east bay, and i strongly support ab 1464. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Rosenberger: kimberly chelsea rosenberger with service employees international union in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Young: michael kimberly young with the california labor federation, also here in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jairo Barba: jairo michael barba, csu east bay student, and i'm in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erica Jimenez: Hi, Erica Jimenez, a student at Cal State East Bay, and we're in strong support as well.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Evan Wood: Hi, Evan Wood from Consumnes River College, a student, and I support this bill as well.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrew Martinez: Andrew Martinez, California State University. We are opposed to the measure, and as noted in our letter, we do believe that a faculty tenure is an important part of the CSU's mission and purpose and that is why we were part of the executive plan in 2001 to ask money from the Legislature to make that goal a reality and we have consistently, up until about 2008 and 9 when the bottom fell out, continuously asked for that appropriation from the Legislature to get to that goal. We still believe that faculty tenure density is important. Its part of our graduation initiative goal, is to increase the number of faculty tenure-track, faculty that are hired on our campuses. I think the reason why we were opposed to the measure is because frankly, this is an 8 year plan that mandates us to hire about 750 employees a year, assuming that no one leaves during that period of time as well. That we don't replace our lecturers because of this bill. And so there is not going to be a funding mechanism tied to this bill for that between now and 2026 to get to this goal. And we, every year, have to come to the Legislature and present our proposal as part of our budget ask of how we're going to get to this goal using existing dollars I would take. For those reasons, we must repose to the measure and thank you so much.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Murphy: good afternoon, mr. chair and members, jason, on behalf of the university of california, this is our sponsored bill this year. this is the fourth bill the legislature has seen on uc best value, with contracting authority, we've been doing this pilot now for over 10 years. it initiated in 2006 with the carol migdon bill, you looked at it as recently as last year in sb 1214, we've had great experience and success with the program, we're getting buildings built on time, on budget, and without change orders and claims and so forth, we ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeremy Smith: Thank you Mr. Chair and Members of the Committee, Jeremy Smith here on behalf of the State Building and Construction Trades Council. I would like to thank the UC, Senator Allen's office, Senator member Levine's office, for working with us on this over the last couple of years, I appreciate your support.
[{'start': 50, 'end': 62, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 171, 'end': 176, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 202, 'end': 208, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Melanie Martinez: Okay, so my name is Melanie Martinez, actually, I graduated from American River College. Yeah, that's fine. So, now I'm a current student at California State University Sacramento. So I do want to say thank you to the fellow legislators for AB 2017. That's also, last year that was a mental health bill as well. So basically, what I'm going to state is some experience that I had even asking for mental health services in the community college. Because there is some protocols that are dehumanizing and we really need to have protocols for mental health services. Because last semester I know that we had three people from American River College who passed away through suicide. So I'll just do my little whatever. So during the summer course of American River College, I needed help because I was highly suicidal and I struggle from mental health issues and I suffer from major depression and PTSD. The way to get help is to bring in campus police and to be handcuffed. I was cooperative. There was no defiance or anything. But I had to be handcuffed. I pleaded with the policemen that the handcuffs weren't necessary and I didn't want to be in them due to childhood trauma and abuse. I felt dehumanized and also a criminal with the handcuffs on. I also felt like it was hard to go back on campus due to fear and embarrassment of the experience from the handcuffs. And that is because where I was handcuffed at, where there's a lot of professors and I worked with a Professor as well and so you walk down the hall and you're in handcuffs, but I'm not a criminal. All I did was ask for help because I suffer from mental health issues and I just needed help and mental illness is not a crime. I mean, we all have issues. We all have things that we go through and some of us are diagnosed with things, other people aren't. But you shouldn't treat those people differently. Everyone needs to be on the equal playing ground as somebody else. And then I plead with you that we do need funding for mental health services for our college students so that we all can be successful in life and in our school studies, thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anna Hasselblad: Good evening now, Anna Hasselblad with the Steinberg Institute and I'll try to shorten some of my comments, but I do want to highlight a few points. I want to start with making one thing very clear, suicide is preventable. We know that there are successful models of prevention and intervention that really help a person in a mentally health crisis or even earlier on in their condition. It helps them remain safe, supported and connected. We also know, as was pointed out by the Assembly Member, the rate of suicide in California per every 100,000 students, the rate of suicide is 7.5 annually. So that does equal, even just in the public college sector, nearly 200 students every year. That does not account for private colleges at this time. That is 200 lives cut short, 200 families forever changed and hundreds of college communities left wondering why this ever happened in the first place. What could we have done to help? AB 917 is a start to answering those questions. Currently in California, there is no universal expectation or requirement for higher education for suicide prevention policies to be in place and while there are a number of universities that do have policies in place, they're not consistent across the board and that just seems like a glaring missed opportunity. And I want to make a quick parallel between our colleges and the opportunity that is before us and the recent Golden Gate Bridge suicide prevention safety net that was formally announced just last week. When a safety net is present, two things happen. One, people who are intending to die from suicide change their minds and walk away from the risk, and oftentimes to care. Two, the community around the bridge is taking real and tangible action to show individuals at risk that we care about you, we value you, and we want you safe. This is a powerful action that we can also take on our college campuses. AB 917 ensures that we build a comprehensive safety net for students to rely on as needed, as well as opportunities for them to participate in creating and maintaining that safety net. So at the Steinberg Institute, prevention and early intervention is one of our primary focuses and we believe AB 917 is just a key opportunity to further those efforts, and we ask for your support, thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Evan Nguyen: I, Evan Nguyen from Cosumnes River College, and I also support this bill.
[{'start': 3, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessie Ryan: Jessie Ryan on behalf of the Campaign for College Opportunity, sponsors of this bill, in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Myra Snell: My name is Myra Snell, I'm a Professor of mathematics, at Los Medanos College, and I wanted to share quickly that LMC has eliminated equity gaps for placement into. And completion of transferable level math for a first cohort, using placement and corequisite remediation, support that is synergistic with AB 705.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barbara Baron: I am Barbara Baron co-director of the California EDGE Coalition, the coalition of business, labor, and social justice organizations. We have been working for years to bring about the kind of change that this bill would provide and we'll be working with the author, to do little tweaks to just make sure there's not negative unintended consequences.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Miguel Guerrero: my name is miguel jairo guerrero, i am a student attending sacramento city college and i am in support of this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Gonzales: My name is Michelle Gonzales and I teach English at Las Positas College and I am the basic skills coordinator. I am also a former community college student at Las Positas College our English department instituted on use of multiple measures and we also eliminated the equity gaps, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melody Jimenez: my name is melody miguel jimenez, i'm a student at sacramento city college and i support this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joshua Feegen: my name is joshua melody feegen, i'm a student at sacramento city college and i support this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Moises Ramirez: my name is ramirez, i'm also a student at sacramento city college and i also support this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Evan Nguyen: my name is nguyen, and i'm a student at cosumnes river college, and i also support this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeannette Sinaptine: sinaptine, legislative attorney for maldef, the mexican american legal defense and educational fund, also a former community college student and strongly support this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 36, 'end': 42, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kerry Marx: kerry, english faculty at sacramento city college also in support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lisette Vilirio: vilirio on behalf of the community college league of california. we're actually a tweener, we have a support of amended position on this, and thank the author's office and the committee for really working with us to address some of the concerns that we've had. as you may know, the community colleges have the multiple measures assessment program that has been piloting at many of our colleges. and we've seen great success, but there is something that the legislature can do to really help us improve this pilot and that is sharing cd data with our community colleges. data sharing on high school performance is voluntary and it goes through cal-pass, right now there's no requirement, that's done. not having that accessible to students when they try to enroll becomes a barrier for them, they have to pay for the cost of that transcript, they have to cover the cost of finding, if they've moved around, if they're a veteran student, if they're a homeless student, they don't necessarily have access. so, we know that this would mean that it would be key to fiscal, but this is, if you're really trying to reform this effort, we suggest that that be one of the elements that be really considered as kind of stronger language on that item. and then, we think that the system is poised to really make improvements by continuing the multiple measures assessment program, thank you.
[]
Julie Bruno: Julie Bruno, President of the Academic Senate for California Community Colleges, we are actually in between as well, we haven't taken a position. We'll entertain one at our plan recession. We have been in contact with the author's office and they've been very receptive to some of our concerns. So, we do have just sort of a watching and seeing how this goes and we're happy to help, and making sure that we're crafting a bill that actually works. We're very supportive of multiple measures, the Academic Senate has a long history of providing professional development, papers, assistance to our faculty to really instituting those. And, in fact, we just completed a survey, we received 82 responses out of 113 college. 85 percent are using high school courses to do placement, 80 percent are using high school GPA, but they're also using some other measures such as military experience, and foreign degrees, and years of formal education, and prior work experience, and EAP, and SAT, and ACT. So, we know that our faculty are using a number of things, and we want to make sure that they have that flexibility to continue because they need to serve all their students, not those that are just directly out of high school. We've got our returning folks as well who come with experience. So, we very much appreciate the intent of the bill and we look forward to continuing working with the author to help craft it, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Austin Webster: Austin Webster on behalf of the Faculty Association of California Community Colleges, we would like to thank the author and we're in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Hines-Shaikh: Amy Hines-Shaikh. I'm a mom and I'm with the University Professional and Technical Employees, CWA Local 9119 in strong support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
David Balla-Hawkins: mr. chair and members, balla-hawkins representing the community college independent faculty union. we're also in support and want to thank the member.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Rosenberger: kimberly joshua rosenberger with service employees international union in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jorge Quintana: Jorge Quintana, SQE at Sac State in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carlos Moreno: Carlos Moreno Soriano, I'm a student at Cal State East Bay, I strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Esma Nasher: esma kimberly nasher, i am a student at csu stanislaus and i strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Young: Michael Young with the California Labor Federation, also here in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Gramatico: John Gramatico, current graduate student at CSU Stanislaus, working on my master's in social work. This tuition increases affect graduate students more, so it's even more pertinent that graduate students and credentials speak up. I'm in strong support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Evan Nguyen: hi, my name is nguyen from a california community college, cosumnes river college. i support. just seeing how me and the students from my demographic are going to be coming into the csus or the uc systems, it's something that i would like to address. and also, i wanted to just quickly interject the board of trustee has a student, maggie white, has voted no on trying to increase the fees as well, and she represents all the csu students, thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 332, 'end': 344, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Chelsea Guerrero: chelsea, student at california state university east bay and i strongly support ab 393. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nadia Leal-Carrillo: chair and members, nadia esma leal-carrillo with the university of california, we have an opposed position. the committee analysis did a great job of really trying to describe the dilemma here, so i've really appreciated a lot of the analysis that went into the funding sources and the impacts of the tuition increase. i think for uc, the main point is that absent to any mentioned of a guarantee of state funding support for the university, we believe a tuition freeze would really reduce, not improve, affordability at the university for students. the revenue associated with the uc's predictable tuition adjustment is meant to really go towards finding financial support for students who are most in need. and so we want to also point out that tuition has remained flat for the last six years and that's really because of the partnership between the segments and the state. the state's specifically 4 to 5% planned that allowed for tuition to be kept flat but also has resulted in the enrollment of additional california residents for uc, that's up to 6,400 now. so again, i think that we want to just voice our concerns that when we're looking at tuition freezes, that also impacts the availability of funds to really help students cover the additional costs beyond tuition and fees. and so with that, we need to remain opposed, and would like to encourage the committee to help the university partner with the state to identify predictable and sustainable funding. thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nichole Munoz-Murillo: Okay. Good afternoon Chair and members. Nichole Munoz-Murillo with the CSU. First, I just want to say thank you to the Assembly Member, we've had a good dialogue with her so far on this bill. And I want to say thank you for your statement about wanting to commit to a higher education funding investment. I also wanted to say thank you for the Committee analysis. Like Nadia said, we appreciate the thoughtfulness of the issues raised and also in the analysis, it talks about, for this issue, our budget is made up of two equal parts, tuition fees, and General Fund revenue. And we understand that the Legislature faces many difficult choices in making budget, difficult choices in budget deliberations. And it makes it uncertain whether the state will be able to provide the funding necessary to meet the needs of students for course offerings, to attract faculty, and academic support services. We need to ensure that the trustees have the tools necessary to maintain academic quality and ensure access and success for our students. Therefore we regrettably oppose this bill.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 369, 'end': 374, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kimberly Cowart: Good afternoon, Chairman Medina and members. Thank you for this opportunity to testify on Assembly Bill 508. My name is Kimberly Cowart. I'm the Chair of Bargaining Unit 17, I'm a registered nurse, and I represent over 5,000 registered nurses that work for the State of California. In 2009, during the peak of the housing crisis, my family along with many other families in California, experienced financial hardships. My husband who was also a union carpenter, lost his job, and I became the main provider for a family of six. Each month for approximately the next four years, we had to decide which bills every month that we would pay, and which ones that could wait a little longer to be paid. And during that period of time, we've had to decide between the mortgage, car payments, car insurance, student loans. All the other bills that come along with running a household. And also, from time to time, I actually had to decide when my IN license, it became time to renew it. I also had to decide to renew my RN license, as well. During that period of time, and for a short period of time, I actually defaulted on my loan. I'm not proud to say that, but that's just a fact that happened in my life in that particular time. Many other things besides my husband being unemployed occurred as well. But as I look back on that time and I think about if I weren't able to renew my license, what kind of livelihood and income we would've had. I would've had to look for a job in order to support my family, and also to bring my loan up to date so I could renew my license. And just saying that you could tell that that actually really doesn't make much sense. I would hate to imagine what my life would've been like if I weren't able to renew my license, if it was revoked or suspended. Where my family would've been at that time. But the story doesn't end there, thank God. I am repaying my load, my husband has had a job for the last few years. And I'm proud to say that I take great pride in meeting my financial obligations. That time in my life is nothing that I chose. It was just thrust upon me and we dealt with it the best way that we could. So that's why I'm sitting here before you in support of Assembly Bill 508. Thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 31, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 120, 'end': 135, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kurt Ho: honourable chair medina and esteemed committee, my name is ho and i work for ussf for about three years as a systems administrator. i was laid off on february 28th, after being forced to train my own replacement, an hel employee from india. who returned to india to do my job after the knowledge transfer was completed. ab 848 is about patient, privacy and patient care. one of my coworkers and i had the job of developing and maintaining fetal habit monitor software. the software connects a baby to a feeder habit monitor for transmission of data in real time. if it's not working, the baby must be in the arms of a registered nurse, who can confirm the patients' condition. there are no mistakes that can be made in this technology or very negative patient outcomes are possible. one of my co-workers had a job of developing and maintaining the software for surgeons to navigate the brain during brain surgery. in a typical modern brain surgery there's a very small window cut in the skull. the rest of the surgery is conducted through the surgeon relying on effectively functioning software on the computer screens that navigate the brain. again, no mistakes can be made in this process or very negative outcomes are possible. on december 16, there was a data breach when a hel contractor click on a link that was very clearly not from within ucsf. had he had been a ucsf employee he would have led to his termination because the blunder was clearly against protocol. this link had a very vicious malware embedded within it and caused the entire system to have to be rebuilt by my coworkers. the complete extent of the malware incident has not been evaluated. ab 848 is about student success and our economy. as of february 28, 2017, there are help desk, think that should have been turned around in one week still pending since december. it appears the hcl help desk staff returned tickets that say request received and do not complete the help desk ticket. many uc faculty and staff are unsatisfied with this level of services, compared to the service my coworkers and i have provided. uc contract with hcl allows them to lay off it workers from any of the 10 campuses of five medical centers. at ucsf, 17% of the workforce was laid off and replaced. if 17% of all uc it jobs are offshore, an estimated about 613 jobs will be lost across the state. i urge you to vote in favor of ab 848. thank you.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 23, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 59, 'end': 61, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Elizabeth Milos: Honorable Chair Medina, and esteemed Committee, my name is Elizabeth Milos. And I have worked for UCSF for 10 years as a medical interpreter. At UCSF, we have four in-house languages, Spanish, Mandarin, Cantonese and Russian. And UC also contracts with several outside agencies for both in-house and other languages. Language Line is the agency use for phone and Video Remote Interpreting, VRI. In VRI, the patient and provider are at one location while the interpreter is at another, interpreting in front of a screen. When VRI was first rolled out at UCSF in 2013, UC stated that video remote interpreting and in-person were equal in quality, but that is not the case. They assured us that in-person interpreting would be the default and that vendor interpreters used would be nationally certified. Language Line is using interpreters from outside the US, from the Dominican Republic, Costa Rica, Peru, Panama, and the territories of Puerto Rico. The job requirement listed on their website is a high school diploma, not national certification. Local interpreters are familiar with the California patient population, both linguistically and culturally, and are exposed to issues that are relevant to the communities we serve. We have knowledge of the US medical system, which helps spot potential healthcare navigation problems. Communication mistakes cost money and lives. Interpreters from the US have training and a national certification that is vetted and verified. It includes privacy, ethics and protocol standards. There are two national certifications available to be considered competent to interpret in the medical field. UC prides itself on excellence, equity and diversity. Yet it has single out only the Spanish language, video remoting interpreting to offshore, the most common certification language among interpreters in the state. State and federal funds should not be used to offshore interpreting jobs, especially if it lowers the standard of care for our limited English proficient patients. Medical interpreters at UC are dedicated professionals who have a stake in upholding the reputation of UC as a place that provides equitable quality care and in maintaining the integrity of this prestigious medical institution. Please vote in favor of AB-848. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 22, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 59, 'end': 74, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Brooks: brooks, spectroscopist, retired from uc berkeley in support of this bill. university professional technical employees.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Cohen: Sarah Cohen, of DCWA from Davis in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kenneth Gargis: i'm kenneth, system administrator from uc santa cruz, also part of upte, asking for your support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Young: michael nadia young on behalf of the california labor federation also here in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anna Smith: Anna Smith, from DCWA, UC San Diego, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cindy Kimick: Cindy Kimick, I and my husband, a 25 year programmer analyst at UCLA, and UPTE members.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Rosenberger: Kimberly Rosenberger, with Service Employees International Union, in support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Murphy: Good afternoon Mr. Chair and members, Jason Murphy on behalf of the University of California. We do not have a position on this bill at this point in time either. Prior to the conversation about the amendments, it had been my expectation to rise today and describe some concerns that we have with the bill. Notably, the degree to which the bill could have impinged upon the University's ability to contract with what would probably be considered bona fide vendors and so forth, that weren't the intent of the bill. Now, that the bill has been amended, I would like to take an opportunity to take those concerns back and review the bill continually with my counterparts at the office of the President. I would point out with regard to the language about displaced workers. I do think the question will remain as to how we operationalize that question within the context of our bidding procedures. Whether or not the University of California is required to acknowledge, or so forth, the displacement prior to putting DNR or so forth, but those could be for further conversations. No position at this time, but would be coming back with more thoughts in the future. Thank you.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian McClelland: brian michael mcclelland of the community college league of california testifying on california 72 community college districts we have, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Cohen: Sarah Cohen from Davis, California, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Evan Nguyen: evan, california community college of cosumnes river college, i support, too.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Versace: Chris Versace with CHIRLA, The Coalition for Humane Immigrant Rights, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Szabo-Kubitz: good afternoon chair medina and members of the committee. my name is laura brian szabo-kubitz and i'm here today on behalf of the institute for college access and success, an independent non-profit organization based in oakland that works to make higher education more available and affordable for people of all backgrounds. i'm here to voice our strong support for ab 1178 by assemblymember calderon which would require that colleges annually notify students about their student loan balances to help inform future borrowing choices. students should always take advantage first of financial aid that does not need to be repaid before turning to student loans, however, when grants and scholarships do not fully cover their financial need, loans, and much safer federal loans in particular, can help ensure students stay enrolled and on track to graduation without working excessive hours that can harm academic success. while care must be taken to ensure that letters do not serve to deter students from re-enrolling or from borrowing what they need, research suggests that reminding students of their loan balances encourages them to seek more information or assistance from their college financial aid office and may influence some students borrowing decisions. and by deepening students engagement with their colleges students can learn more about the financial supports available to them including other scholarships and grants and the consumer protections like public service loan forgiveness unique to federal loans. for these reasons we strongly urge you to vote in support of ab 1178 to ensure that student loan borrowers receive key information to help them make wise borrowing decisions that keep them on their path to graduation. thank you for your time.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 69, 'end': 93, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 392, 'end': 400, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rafi Sands: rafi, i'm an undergraduate at ucla, and a board member of the uc student association.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Victoria Sulkowicz: Victoria Sulkowicz, an undergraduate at UCLA.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Samantha Weese: Samantha Weese, an undergraduate at UCLA, I support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Scott Governor: Mr. Chair and Members of the Committee, Scott Governor on behalfthe University of Phoenix. I'd like to thank the consultant for doing a very thorough job with the analysis. As it correctly points out, students have this information today. Without asking for a show of hands in this room, how many people have done online banking, checked their credit cards, car leases, enrollment in courses? Students today have access to a personalized log on so they can check their own loan information to ensure that it's current. We don't understand what the problem is.  The reference to the other states was loan counseling which is a completely different thing which our institution provides. Again we welcome students having input but the most comprehensive and current information they can get is done by logging on to their own personalized web page which is offered by the federal government, private lenders, et cetera. They have access to the information. We've seen nothing as evidence in the analysis which suggests they aren't doing it. So for these reasons, we must oppose the bill.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matt Back: back representing the california association of private postsecondary schools. we have about 200 schools throughout california. and i associate my comments with mr. governor. i mean, we do this today. i mean, the federal government requires that we do entry counseling, so the students are informed of this when they take on the debt or when they enter the school. they're also given counseling when they graduate. and, of course, they have access to all of this information today via the website, ether through their lenders or especially through the federal government. actually the senate banking committee last month had a hearing on student loans and there was approximately 9 billion taken out in 2015-16, was the last information. over 90% of that is in federal loans. the federal loan program provides the students access to all of that information updated. they can log on whenever they want. so for us as schools to have to regurgitate all of this information to them at our expense, does not seem to make a whole lot of sense. furthermore, we don't always have the updated information. so we may not know what their private loans are. we may not know when they made their last payment.  so the information that we're going to be sent to the students actually may not be as up to date as they could get from their own financial institution or the federal government. and also the bill ignores how our schools operate. the bill requires we provide this information from june to august. we have cohorts starting multiple times in a year. so the same program can have a start date in april, july, september. it's not a convenient, we stop in june and we start again in august. so the challenges for us not only to comply, or, don't, they're not in sync with how our schools operate. but also, again, this information is already out there for the students and it would just be an extra burden on us to regurgitate it for them. so, for these reasons, we're opposed.
[{'start': 165, 'end': 173, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kim Geron: hi, thank you, mr. chair and members of the committee. my name's kim laura geron. i'm a faculty member at cal state east bay. i've been a faculty member for almost 18 years in political science. i'm a professor and vice president of the california faculty association. i'm here on not only my organization, but many of our faculty around this issue who care deeply about our students, and are really excited to hear about this bill 1038. the state's public universities and college have gone increasingly out of reach, as we've just heard from many of the students testifying, for many in our communities. but particularly for those historically underrepresented. african-american undergraduates are underrepresented throughout csu, the uc, and private non-profit universities. many asian americans, native hawaiians and pacific islanders are part of the fastest growing ethnic group, but only 37% of native hawaiians and pacific islander students are even eligible for admissions to uc or the csu. california's spending less for each student today when nearly three out of four are students of color, than it did in 1985 when the majority of csu students were white. in many ways, today's more diverse students are being cheated out of the education that they deserve. and that their predecessors of 30 years ago, including myself, enjoy. this crisis is deeply systematic and it's an issue that will require a legislative action to increase access to a college education. cfa strongly believes in a deliberative discussion and plan for the future of higher education and communities of interest in california is essential in this context. it is almost hard to put into words to overstate, in many ways, the lack of adequate resources that, as somebody who works on a campus, i see it daily. i see the challenges that our students go through, just to be able to come to class, to be able to afford books, sharing books with five students, it's really crazy. and when you think about all the additional cost the students have to pay today with books and lab fees, transportation to campus, as we've heard, and just the regular cost of living and high rent areas around the state, we really have to figure out a better way of doing this, and so the state's approach to higher education must become more equitable and affordable. according to the lao's office, a public agenda should be developed and we really strongly believe that to define and address the state's higher education needs. at this time, california needs a coordinated and a well-articulated goal for higher education and all of its students. ab 1038 is a good first step in that process.
[{'start': 65, 'end': 80, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jose Santana: good afternoon mr. chair and members of the committee. jose kim santana with the california asian and islander budget partership and we are the sponsors of the bill and in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 55, 'end': 71, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gena Desolo: Gena Desolo with the California Immigrant Policy Center in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Masso: mark jose masso, asian pacific policy and planning council.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jerry Catavala: jerry mark catavala with special service for groups apait in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lee Lo: Lee Lo, with the Southeast Asia Resource Action Center, in strong support of AB 1038.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sang So: Sang So for Boys and Men of Color, and we support this bill.
[]
Yolanda Adams: Yolanda Adams, Children of Politics and SCAO in California, in support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anna Kazim: Anna Kazim, SEAU Committee of in-trans residence LA county.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rodney Bellamy: bellamy, sciu a strong international in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bella Fissil: Bella Fissil, children of our politics under SCIU and we support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 45, 'end': 49, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Anna Smith: anna jerry smith, producer and director and at the cwa representative from uc san diego, we're in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Hineschite: Amy Hineschite, I'm a mom and I'm with UPTE-CWA Local 9119, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Brooks: paul anna brooks, retired spectroscopist from uc berkeley, in strong support for this bill. elizabeth milos, medical interpreter at ucsf, member. i'm in strong support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 92, 'end': 107, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sarah Cohen: Sarah Cohen, UC Davis, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vincent Pan: Vincent Pan, Chinese for Affirmative Action, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anne Marie: anne, good afternoon. i'm representing sciu 99 in strong support, former high school teacher and now a child care provider. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Natasha Penestera: good afternoon. my name is natasha. i'm from los angeles, california. i'm here representing sciu and i'm also a child care provider and i'm in strong support.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dion Jones: Dion Jones, I am a childcare provider. I am supporting this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melanie Martinez: My name is Melanie Martinez and I'm a current student at Sacramento State University and I support this bill as a current student.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cindy Kimmock: cindy, i'm a ucla employee and mom to two college aged kids and an active member in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kenneth Gorgias: gorgias, an employee of uc santa cruz in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kurt Hoel: Kurt Hoel, a former UC employee and a concerned citizen and parent and strong supporter of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alice Selagarza: I'm Alice Selagarza, a family daycare provider from Tulare County and a member of SEIU Local 521 and we support this bill.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Penny Cunningham: Hello, my name is Penny Cunningham, I'm a childcare provider in Los Angeles, California and I support this bill.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Rosenberger: kimberly paul rosenberger, with service international union state council. as you can see, this is an issue that cuts across all our locals, and we're in strong support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jorge Quintana: jorge kimberly quintana, sqe, undergrad at sag state. i also have a petition with 100 other csu students that i will forward over to the author and it's growing. so thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Radika Kitaria: radika, chico state, students for quality education and i'm in strong support of this bill.
[]
John Grammatico: Hello, my name is John Grammatico. I am an MSW student at California State University Stanislaus. I am with Students for Quality Education and the Master of Social Work Student Association and I am in strong support of this bill.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Esma Nasher: hello, my name is esma jorge nasher. i'm a sociology major at california state university stanislaus and i'm in support of this bill.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chelsea Guerrero: chelsea esma guerrero, a student at cal state east bay and i support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jairo Barba: Jairo Barba, a student at CSU East Bay and I support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erica Jimenez: hi, this is erica. i'm representing the chapter of students for quality education at east bay and we're in support of this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 12, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anthony Nguyen: hi, i'm nguyen and i'm from the california community college and i too support this bill.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dana Carrera: Good afternoon everyone, my name is Dana Carrera, I am a senior at UCLA. I'm from a small town in Riverside County called Perris, California.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Daniel Nagey: Good afternoon, folks. My name is Daniel Nagey, and I am the Legislative Director for the University of California Davis and a member of the UC Students Association. Growing up in single-income household with two younger siblings, I knew what it was like to save each penny. Coming into college and having my tuition covered entirely by need-based financial aid and loans granted me the chance to start anew and foster hope that I could one day provide for my family. Yet now, I struggle to work four jobs to pay my rent, not knowing where or if each meal will come, and I haven't even started repaying my loans yet. I'm faced with the reality, despite my copious credentials in managerial economics and psychology, that I may be forced to take a minimum wage job after college just to avoid going in debt and to assure that I have basic needs security. While I want to go into business, I'm well aware that a working, entry job level while searching for a career that actually fits my skill set will be an arduous process. The California Kickstart My Future Loan Forgiveness Program would help mitigate my financial issues. If I don't have to worry about paying my student loans, I can focus on using my time to apply for jobs that align with my skill set and interests, which is why I chose to pursue a college education in the first place. Student's are bogged down by a myriad of issues, and as is, academic challenges, mental health, basic needs security and education should be an equalizer. It should not plummet us into further debt, which is why, as a student concerned about the prospects of my future, I urge you all to vote yes on AB 379.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rafi Sands: rafi chelsea sands, i represent the undergraduate student body at ucla.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Samantha Chang: samantha rafi chang, the undergraduate student body at uc davis.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carrie Schulze: carrie, the undergraduate student body at ucla.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Victoria Sulkowicz: victoria samantha sulkowicz, the undergraduate student association at ucla.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paula Nazario: paula victoria nazario, the undergraduate student association at ucla.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Evan Nguyen: Evan Nguyen, a community college student at Cosumnes River College.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Gonzales: Rebecca Gonzales, National Association of Social Workers, California Chapter, in support of these students. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nadia Sanko: Hello Chair and members. My name is Nadia Sanko and I'm representing the United Professors of Marin, AFT Local 1610, the Faculty Union for the College of Marin in Kentfield, California.  I'm a member of the executive council, the collective bargaining team and I'm also the treasurer of the union. Our faculty union wholeheartedly supports this very important legislation, Assembly Bill 568. I think it would be helpful for you to hear some of the feedback that our Union Executive Council has been receiving from our members regarding this very issue. One of our faculty members wrote, quote, I find it shocking that we are not offered any type of paid maternity leave. It's very sad and frustrating that as a full-time faculty member at the College of Marin, all I have available to me is sick time. As a fairly new employee, I have not accumulated enough sick time to take adequate quote maternity leave. I would love to have another child, but I would need to exhaust my sick time and take on paid time off. God forbid one of my kids does actually get sick, because I would have zero time left to use. It is unfortunate that my work place does not support women in this manner, end quote. Later on she continues quote, I have a coworker that recently had a beautiful baby boy. Having only her sick time to use she was forced to come to work up until the birth so that she could save that precious sick time to heal and bond with her child. She was at work seeing students while she was three centimeters dilated and having intermittent contractions. No woman should be put in this position. End of quote. We at the union hear other stories like this from our faculty and they are disturbing. I know as a full time faculty member myself this is one of the main reasons I personally have delayed having a child. Several faculty members who have had children while teaching at the College of Marin said the stress of not having paid maternity leave has negatively affected their health, their children, their families, and even their students long-term. They have emphasized the importance for the baby and the mother to be able to take time off before and after delivery, because a woman will be in no physical or mental state to provide quality instruction to students in those weeks before or after delivery, yet many women have no other choice because of financial necessity. According to the United Nations, the US is one of two countries in the world that does not offer government mandated maternity leave. California has often taken the lead on for this country, in terms of legislation, and it has the opportunity to help this country, slowly catch up to other countries in the world, and California has the opportunity to be the leader on this issue for other states. As a country, as a state, as educators, as human citizens, we can do better, we should do better, we must do better. This important legislation, Assembly Bill 568, would benefit our children, mothers, families, communities, as well as students at California Community Colleges, and would be a significant step forward. I hope we will be able to meet the challenge with Assembly Bill 568. Thank you for your attention.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Molly Brewnie: hello, my name is molly paula brewnie and i'm representing aft san diego. thank you. chair and members for your time. it's exhausting, having a baby. six weeks is just not enough time for a woman to fully recover from giving birth and take care of a newborn. planning is something i like to practice in my professional career. it's much harder as a parent. planning for my pregnancy didn't work. i didn't plan for my son to be in the nicu. being a parent is hard and worrying about losing part of your paycheck isn't a good practice for school districts. teachers and classified staff give so much of themselves to their professions and students at all of our campuses. school districts should not be allowed to discriminate against women. in this unfair practice of making them deplete their vacation and sick leave. because so much of my sick leave was depleted after the birth of my children, i live in fear that one of them, when they get sick, not even if they get sick, that when they get sick, my family will lose out on part of my paycheck. please stop this discriminatory practice, and give paid leave to women.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bryan Ha: Mr. Chair and members, Bryan Ha with California Federation of Teachers. We're a proud sponsor of this bill, and in this interest of time, I will keep it short. Thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Seth Bramble : Mr. Chair and members, Seth Bramble here on behalf of more than 325,000 members of the California Teachers Association in strong support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 35, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Christopher Castrio: Thank you, Mr. Chair and members. Christopher Castrio on behalf of the California Faculty Association, in support.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Young: mr. chair and members, michael on behalf of the california labor federation, also here in support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dean Murakami: hi. dean molly murakami with the los rios college federation of teachers and cft, in strong support of this bill. thank you very much.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 23, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Gabriel Torres: hello. gabriel dean torres with the los rios college federation of teachers, in support of this legislation.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Austin Webster: austin on behalf of the faculty association of california community colleges, in strong support.
[]
Jesse Aguiar: Good afternoon Committee Chair and members. My name is Jesse Aguiar and I'm here representing Journey House as the proud sponsors of AB 1567. We have been working with current and former foster youth in the Pasadena community for the last 35 years. And as a former foster youth myself, I do understand, now navigating the professional work space, how critical and crucial the services that I received while in school were to my career advancement. So the mission of Journey House is to assist former foster youth Reach self-sufficiency, and we do this by supporting them through their educational journeys. We understand the impact that college or vocational degrees have on one's ability to obtain meaningful employment, so we focus our efforts to helping former foster youth enroll and graduate from colleges and universities. In California, less than half of former foster youth graduate high school compared to 79% of other students. By the age of 26, only 4% of former foster youth complete college compared to 36% of the 26 year olds in general student populations. AB 1567 to address this issue by providing former foster youth notification of on campus support programs on California community colleges and Cal State University's campuses. Programs such as the Extended Opportunities Programs and Services and the cooperating agencies for Foster Youth Educational Success, provides students with support, such as, books, supplies, transportation, counseling and tutoring.  These critical supports have a huge impact on a youth's ability to successfully complete college courses. We know that if a youth succeeds in college, they are more likely to find meaningful employment, contribute to the economy, be less likely to depend on government support, and ultimately break the cycles of poverty that lead children into the child welfare system. For these reasons, we request your support on AB 1567.
[{'start': 55, 'end': 67, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lucero Loyola: good afternoon, committee chair and members. thank you for taking the time today to hear my testimony in support of ab 1567. my name is lucero and i am a former foster youth. i grew up in southern california. i entered foster care at the age of 16 and after having my daughter at the age of 18, i entered community college. i attended east las angeles community college and at the time, there were a few support programs on campus that i qualified for, but i did not know about them. elpns, care and now k fees. i could have utilized these programs to help me pay for school books and supplies, help me with food transportation and educational counseling as well. instead i applied to welfare. i utilized cash benefits and food stamps to help me sustain myself and my daughter while attending college. and i advocated for gain, a program intended to transition welfare recipients into jobs to help me with school, because financial aid for tuition was not enough. thankfully, i had the second option as a single mother, when many other former foster youth may not have that. a recent study showed that fewer than one out of five former foster youth in california enrolled in community college and csus, participated in support services. this study noted, not knowing of the support programs as a huge factor, leading to under-utilization of these programs. i went about two years without knowing about these campus support programs, and when i learned about them my last semester, the deadline to apply had already passed. it is imperative we ensure that students who are eligible for existing programs and supports are aware of them and can fully assess them to support them to living up to their true potential. i have since completed community college and transferred to the university of southern california, usc. while at usc, i was able to utilize a similar support program, guardian scholars, that helped me in a similar way that elpns and k fees has as a potential to assist former foster youth. i'm now pursuing my masters at usc, and i continue to utilize the support program. without the support i accessed, and continue to access in college, i would not have been able to attain my undergraduate degree and move to my masters at usc. on behalf of myself and the thousands of former foster youth in california who are struggling to apply, enroll and complete their college certificate and degree programs, i urge your aye vote for ab 1567. thank you.
[{'start': 136, 'end': 142, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bikila Ochoa: Bikila Ochoa, Anti-recidivism Coalition, in strong support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melanie Martinez: melanie, current guardian scholar at sacramento state university in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brennan Biggerdam: thank you chair and members, my name is brennan gabriel biggerdam with the california student aid commission. and just very briefly i want to say that the apple program was a very popular program. there are still participants in it and it really provides relief for teachers in their first years of teaching in which they see fairly low wages, combined with challenges in paying for housing, teaching supplies, continuing education, and many other expenses as well as watching their student loans become due. this is an opportunity for them to receive several years of loan forgiveness, and it can really make the difference in a teacher staying with the profession or not. and as we approach a teacher shortage, it's a very important program and the california state student aid commission supports this bill. i apologize for there not being a letter. we had the commission meeting last thursday and we're still sending out letters to the effect. so, thank you.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 65, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carlos Machado: carlos brennan machado with california school boards association, representing approximately 1,000 school districts and county offices of education, in strong support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Rivas: Brian Rivas on behalf of the Education Trust West, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erica Romero: Erica Romero on behalf of the Association of Independent California Colleges and Universities, the WASC-accredited private and not for profit institutions, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Rosenberger: I've gotta apologize for the lateness, a little bit of a crowd. Kimberly Rosenberger with Service Employees International Union. We haven't formal position, but upon reviewing it we like what it is trying to achieve and we are in support at this time. Thank you.
[{'start': 64, 'end': 84, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessie Ryan: Good afternoon, Chairman Medina and Committee Members. Jessie Ryan, Executive Vice President at the Campaign for College Opportunity, a state-wide nonprofit working to ensure that all Californians have an equal opportunity to attend and succeed in college, in order to build a vibrant workforce, economy, and democracy. We're here today as sponsors of AB 847, to promote transparency and accessibility of data on the representation of academic senates, in order to help foster a better understanding of faculty leadership at public colleges and universities. We know that the increasing diversity of students in higher education is a prevalent trend across the country. Such that, in certain states like California, the minority has now become the majority. Today students of colors are really the representative at 64% of all freshmen at the UC, 68% of all first-time freshmen at the CSU and 71% of first-time freshmen at the community college system. However, the proportion of faculty and leadership has not kept pace with the growing number of students of color enrolling in college and universities. With public colleges and universities averaging only 30% of its total leadership from people of color. We know diversity matters and that having diversity and leadership including academic senates has many benefits to students. Diverse leaders are well situated to make diversity integral to the mission of the college and into the fabric of their decision making, to ensure minority perspectives are incorporated into organizational decision making and they are creating opportunities where institutions are responsive to issues of diversity. We also know that the impact is profound for students, such that an intentional commitment to diversity will yield important improvements to campus climate. Furthermore, diversity in leadership is actively sought in corporate environments where increased leadership diversity is found to improve organizational outcomes. It's not enough to seek improvements in faculty diversity, we need to improve the diversity of the leadership, to change the institutional environments, such that it is more reflective and responsive to the students we serve. We strongly believe that as Assembly Member Bocanegra said, this is a pragmatic bill, and a simple matter of transparency. We collect student-level data as a tool for student-centered change. Similarly, we should make publicly available, upon request, data on the state's academic senates as a means of promoting equity and success. Lifting up culturally responsive teaching strategies and fostering a campus culture conducive to faculty diversity and student achievement. We believe that this bill is timely, as in the past faculty diversity has been made a priority of the chair and many in the legislature, thus we ask for your aye vote today.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 31, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 55, 'end': 66, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2240, 'end': 2249, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Miguel Guerrero: Hello, my name is Miguel Guerrero, I am representing the Campaign for College Opportunity, and I support Assembly Bill 847. Thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Moises Ramirez: hi, so my name is moises, i am from the same campaign, and i support bill 487 also. thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melody Jimenez: my name is melody carlos jimenez and i'm a student from sacramento city college. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Evan Nguyen: my name is nguyen and i'm a student from cosumnes river college and i, too, support the bill. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joshua Feegen: My name is Joshua Feegen, I'm a student from Sacramento Community College as well, and I support AB 847.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julie Bruno: Good morning. Good afternoon, I'm so sorry. I am actually not here to provide a position of support or opposition. My name is Julie Bruno I'm the President of the Academic Senate for California Community Colleges. I came in a little late, but I heard what Jessie said and we absolutely agree on faculty diversity. We know we need to diversify our faculty and our leadership. We have some concerns about this bill, we've been in contact with the author, Assembly Member Bocanegra's office. We're a little concerned about some of the language in the bill that may actually have a chilling effect for faculty get into governance because of the concern around data sharing. So we would very much like to continue to work with the author to maybe address our concerns because we really do want to make sure that our faculty are representative of our students in California. So the academic Senate has been doing a number of things to increase the diversity of their faculty, but also we know we have more work to do. So I'd like to just say that we're a little concerned with some of the language. We're actually meeting this week at our plannery session and the body will probably take a position on this bill, but we are absolutely in support of faculty diversity. Thank you.
[{'start': 126, 'end': 137, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 256, 'end': 262, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 469, 'end': 478, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dean Murakami: hello, thank you. my name's dean melody murakami, i'm vice president of the california federation of teachers, also vice president of the faculty association of california community colleges and also president of the los rios college federation of teachers, which many of our students transfer to the uc system. our concern, and for many of our students, has been that it's been harder and harder to get into admissions at the uc system and that the expense, what many feel, is from the out-of-state or out-of-country admissions. this is one of the real concerns that we have. we think that there's an inconsistent policy across the system that really is different across the board. so, for example, at uc riverside, there's incredible diversity of the students there that i think enriches the educational quality there in that campus, of which i'm an alumnus. but at the same time, you don't see that kind of diversity at ucla, uc berkeley, and you can't tell me you can't find diversity in the la area. that's just wrong. so i think that there's a vastly, i think, inadequate policy, in terms of allowing our resident students in, and allowing the ethnic diversity that i think is critical to the dynamic educational quality of culture at those colleges, thank you.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 48, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Joseph Portier: thank you mr. chair and members. my name is joseph, i'm an attorney with the state auditor's office. i'm not here to take a position on the bill, however i can confirm that this bill is consistent with a recommendation that we made in our march 26th report about the university of california. in that report, we found that over a three year period the university had admitted 16,000 non-residents who's academic scores fell below the average scores of applicants who are california residents. this occurred in part because the university had changed its admission standard for non-residents, which it calls the compare favorably standard. we recommended that the university replace its compare favorably standard with a standard that reflects the intent of the master plan for higher education in california. the master plan states that the university should require non-resident applicants to stand in the upper half of those who are ordinarily eligible. more than a year has passed, however the university has not implemented our recommendation. in our opinion, the standard for non-resident admission that this bill would require the university to follow, as a condition of receipt of its annual state appropriation, is consistent with the intent of the master plan and therefore, it is consistent with our recommendation. thank you.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nadia Leal-Carrillo: chair and members, thank you, chair and members nadia dean leal-carrillo with the university of california. the university did have a oppose unless amended position but with the amendments we want to take this opportunity to really thank the author for working with us and the committee staff for your recommended committee amendments that do address the university's concerns. we look forward to continuing to work with the author on this issue of mutual importance and i do want to take this opportunity to also state that the university stands poised to admit additional california residents and that is our commitment and our priority moving forward. thank you so much.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 72, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Morgan Carvajal: Morgan Carvajal with the Hernndez Strategy Group on behalf of the Consumer Federation of California. We're the sponsors on this bill and have been working with the Senator along with the Department of Social Services and the administration for two years now to figure out a good balance to provide some consumer protections to consumers who are not only seniors, but their family members, who are seeking placement for elder care services for themselves or for their loved ones. As the Senator said, these are great services that provide a great service to seniors who are confused by how many RCFEs, or Residential Care Facilities, are out there and how many services are out there close to them. So they really do help narrow the pool down, but when they're used in a way that harms the consumer or takes advantage of those seniors is where there needs to be some oversight, and some consumer protection. We think this bill establishes some very strong consumer protections to help protect those seniors, and would urge your aye vote, and here for any questions.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 25, 'end': 33, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Shawna Reeves: hi, shawna jonah reeves, director of elderby's prevention at the institute on aging. this is a bill that's very near and dear to us. we had a number of elder care referral agencies coming in and out of our building at the institute on aging in san francisco, tried to get a handle of what was going on there and this bill really would go a long way to protect elders who are in situations of crisis, having health problems and don't really know where to go for help. what we noticed at the institute on aging is that a lot of the elders were unaware that these were for-profit agencies. that they were getting commissions. that they weren't required to carry liability insurance or that there was no oversight of them whatsoever. so again, when seniors hear about a service that's marketed as a free service, they're especially vulnerable and they often are unaware of money changing hands behind the scenes. so again, i think this bill brings a lot of transparency to that process, and i really applaud the senators for this bill and cfc, and if this bill is passed, i do think it'll go a long way towards preventing elder abuse, and that's why i support the bill, and why i felt it was so important to come here today to talk to you all about it, and how the institute on aging and my elder abuse department, prevention department supports this especially. so, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roxanne Goulde: Madam Chair and members, Roxanne Goulde representing 6Beds it's an Association of residential care facilities for the elderly that are like small family like settings, six beds or fewer. We're actually in violent agreement with what the Senator's attempting to do with this bill. We just think it could be stronger and we have a few areas that we think we can make it far more beneficial to such a vulnerable population and I thank him for his repeated efforts to come forward in this area. We do have a meeting with him to discuss a few of those amendments. One of them, in particular, is to allow residents to change referral agencies and if there's a referral fee, the new referral agency should be able to get it. That doesn't happen in today's environment and the one area I'd like to focus on today is that I think that the referral fee language in the bill is misplaced because it puts the onus on the home where the resident is going to be placed, as opposed to upfront and there's a misconception that these referral agencies operate for free. In fact, many of them in their advertising state that it's free, when in fact, a vast majority of them charge up to a month. And a half of rent to the homes where they're placing these residents and families don't know that and so we believe that the notice should be upfront when a family is talking to a referral agency they should hear at that time there will be a referral fee so that they can make a decision based on that particular information. We look forward to working with the Senator and thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Patrick Shannon: can you hear me now? great, okay. that's why we had thought there was no other witnesses in opposition, which is why we had two witnesses here, but i'll reserve time for him if you want to talk to him. so good afternoon, thank you very much for indulging me here. i'm shannon, i represent caring.com. they're the largest california based referral agency for senior housing. so we support core consumer protection provisions, such as fee disclosure and anti-kick back language and the like, but we're opposed to this measure in other respects as over broad and lacking justification. in short, the three-tiered regulatory system already in place over referral agencies, facilities, and department of social services inspectors, regulates referrals to, and admissions into senior communities. so there is an existing regulatory regime. it's incorrect to suggest otherwise. there's simply been insufficient evidence produced to demonstrate that a problem exists that justifies even more regulation or to suggest that any outlier problems cannot be handled by the tools already in existing california law. that was the precise conclusion that governor brown came to just eight months ago when he vetoed the bill as unnecessary. stating specifically that the proponents had failed to produce a convincing case for the legislation. under health and safety code 1569.47 the department has had the authority to enforce restrictions on referral agencies for 26 years with provisions among others to ensure referrals are made only to facilities that are licensed, appropriate based on level of care, and free of known or suspected safety concerns. the facilities themselves are the linchpin in this ecosystem, they're the bulwark for consumer protection. facility personnel are in the unique position to render a reliable, in-depth, definitive assessment, of a fit between a senior and a facility. facilities must comply with exhaustive state mandated criteria for this matching between the senior and the facility and that's the proper place in which it should be proposed.
[{'start': 268, 'end': 275, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1148, 'end': 1153, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alan Frill: Thank you, my name's Alan Frill, I'm a partner at Baker Hostetler, where I am the Co-Chair of the advertising practice group and a member of the privacy and security group I teach law school at Loyola Marymount and at UCLA. I am here to speak only about one very narrow part of the bill, as I read it.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Heather Harrison: heather, with the california assisted living association, we're oppose unless amended to the recent amendments that kind of flip flopped the disclosure timing. we believe the disclosure is now kind of backwards in the bill. we've been talking to the author's office, originally it required disclosure upfront to consumers about the referral agency fees the language in the bill now requires the community that the resident the senior moves into to make that disclosure with ink in order for it to be a value it needs to happen before the fact that after the fact. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Oscar Bobrow: My name's Oscar Bobrow, I'm the Chief Deputy Public Defender in Solano County. I've been a public defender for 31 years, on behalf of the Public Defender Association, California Public Defender Association.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Oscar Bobrow: sure. that's better. that's better. my name is oscar shawna bobrow. i'm a chief deputy public defender in solano county. i've been a public defender for 31 years. i was in contra costa county for 25 years before moving to solano. i am a board member of the california public defender association. the california public defender association is a group of approximately 3,500 criminal defense lawyers throughout the state of california. and we urge you to support this legislation. as you probably know, criminal defense attorneys are tasked with ensuring that the constitutional rights of their clients are protected. these rights are, include the right to a jury trial and in a jury trial. the right to a fair cross-section or a jury of one's peers is protected both constitutionally and statutorily. as you must be aware, anybody that has any contact with the media or the criminal justice system, there is a disproportionate number of people of color who are criminal defendants in the criminal justice community. our clients are overwhelmingly, and disproportionately, hispanic and african american. however, it has been our experience, the experience of the attorneys that practice in this state, that those people that are in the trenches, that conduct these trials. that the panel of jurors who are summoned to hear the trial cases are more often than not under-representative of minority populations, of the communities that they live in. this legislation that senator weiner is proposing would be part of a long overdue step in figuring out why this phenomenon exists on a regular basis and will help figure out a solution to remedy it. for my personal experience for 25 years in the contra costa public defenders office as a trial lawyer and as a supervisor of trial lawyers i witnessed panels after panels of all white jurors trying cases of african-american and hispanic defendants primarily due to some factors that may have to do with the geographics of contra costa county and many other similar counties where these centers where the courthouses are the locations where trials are conducted are miles away from the centers of the populations of where the large segments of minority populations live and there's no adequate public transportation. this legislation would start to, or force, the documentation of is this phenomenon occurring regularly from certain jurisdictions because as senator wiener pointed out, the zip code information, not the personal information of the jurors that are summoned, but the zip code information from where they come would be collected and would be part of a report.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 66, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1476, 'end': 1482, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2410, 'end': 2416, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Manohar Raju: thank you. my name is manohar oscar raju. i'm the currently the felony manager of the attorneys in the san francisco public defender's office. thank you for your time. wanting to echo the comments of my colleagues here, practice for over 15 years, both as a line deputy representing clients accused of misdemeanors, accused of felonies. and i'm now managing over 40 attorneys. it is quite common that you're be in a courtroom with a person sitting next to you, a person of color, and have not a single person in the jury who not one of the 12 who is the same race of that client. and it's significant in that often times the actual community being affected by the issues that's in front of the court is not present to serve, they're not able to be a referendum on what happened there because it's just there's not present, so the people who often sitting in judgement, often aren't the ones impacted by the alleged crime. i'll tell one story that i think illustrates this point. i was trying a case in san francisco. it involved an issue in the bayview, which is a predominantly african-american part of san francisco. we were asking jurors whether they could be fair in a case that involved a lot of complicated issues. whether the client was a gang member or just someone who happened to be hanging out with people in his neighborhood. whether it was self defense or complicated issues. and a white juror raised his hand and said "i don't think i can be fair in this case. there's no in this jury who's from his community, there's no one who's african american here another juror raised his hand and said, yes, shouldn't it be a higher percentage? however you're drawing people, doesn't seem to be bringing a fair cross section of the community." and then the last juror raised his hand and said, you've been talking about a fair cross-section over and over again, but i think you failed in that regard. and literally the jurists were there who came, started clapping. it was embarrassing for the prosecutor, it was embarrassing for the judge and their recognizing how it wasn't fair for the client and i think the community is now ahead of what we are asking for it's just happened at the so we can make a record of what we are trying fair cross section or not.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Glenn Backes: Good afternoon, Glenn Backes for Drug Policy Alliance, in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 21, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lee Fosterguy: lee manohar fosterguy, with california public defenders associations, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Calleano: Chris Calleano from the California Immigrant Policies Center, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carly Mitchell: carly lee mitchell, a citizen, i support this, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cesar Diaz: chair, i'm cesar carly diaz on behalf of the state building construction trades council, also co-sponsors of this bill. proud to support. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shane Gusman: madam chairmember, shane cesar gusman on behalf of the teamsters as well as the machinists union unite here, and the engineers and scientists of california and the consumer attorneys of california, all in support.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rene Bayardo: Madame Chair and members, Rene Bayardo, SEIU California, also a co-sponsor, in support.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 40, 'end': 44, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Barrera: good afternoon, madam chair, members of the committee. jennifer shane barrera on behalf of the california chamber of commerce and we are opposed to sb 306. although we haven't indicated it as a sky is falling bill, we do have concerns with it. with regards to some of the data that was provided earlier, there was a mention that there's over 4,000 claims that are filed with the dlse. there's approximately 1,800 complaints that were filed with the dlse, as most recently in their 2014 report. and while there may be multiple claims included within the complaint, there was 1,800 complaints that were filed, perhaps alleging multiple violations within those complaints. out of the 1,800 that were filed, the dlse was able to deal, essentially, or resolve 1,500 of those complaints. excuse me, thank you. 1,500 of those complaints, 300 that were left essentially unresolved by the end of the year. i understand that there was approximately 27 positions in the retaliation complaint unit and we totally agree that's probably far less than necessary. my understanding is there is 55 positions opened for the retaliation complaint unit. and that there's currently budget proposals to increase the staffing levels in the retaliation complaint unit to make sure that there's more timely investigations completed and resolved for these complaints that are taken by the labor commissioner's office. so we think the appropriate measure to dealing with this retaliation complaints is to increase the staffing for the labor commissioners office, which is something that we wouldn't have concern with. and actually depending on the proposal, may even be supportive of because we do believe that the labor commissioner is totally fit to handle this. the concern we have is this basically turns the employer into having to deal with potential claims before the court, before any allegation is even determined, right? so, the temporary restraining order would be a legal petition that the employer would have to deal with based upon an allegation that a violation has occurred. and i heard the author and the sponsors mention that these are only violations dealing with when somebody has been a whistle blower, alleged a complaint. and that they're being treated unfairly now as a result of recording some type of violation. that's not exactly how i read the language of the bill and i don't think it's as narrowly tailored as that. it basically says that at any time during the investigation that there's any violation, that they can go and seek injunctive relief. it's not a violation with regards to the whistle blower who alleged the complaint where there's an injunctive relief necessary for that particular person to make sure they're protected. but any violation that occurs during any course of investigation. while these investigations are supposed to be resolved within 60 days, as the author mentioned, they take a lot longer than that and we've had instances where it's been three years. so you have an employer that's exposed to constant legal petitions before the court for injunctive relief for any violation that they believe may have occurred but don't actually have proof. and so, that concerns us from that perspective that the employer's constantly going to be having to defend themselves. and while you may think, the labor commissioner doesn't necessarily have the resources to go and defend this. there's also a provision in the bill that says, if enforcement action is ultimately taken by the labor commissioner's office, they will deem it to be successful if they obtain any relief. so, if they go to court, and they deem, they obtain a dollar, or they've requested $500,000, and that gets reduced to $500, so you would think ultimately the employer was prevailing. in this circumstance they would deem the labor commissioner, the prevailing party, and the labor commissioner would get to obtain all costs from the employer and that enforcement action, presumably including any temporary restraining order cost that they obtained, as well as attorneys fees. so when that incentivizes these cases to move forward, it puts an employer in a difficult position for defending themselves against force in actions. because even if they ultimately prevail, they may ultimately pay the cost. labor commissioners office is primarily almost 100% funded already by employers. we pay employer assessments every year to fund it so we're essentially paying twice now for the labor commissioners office with regards to cost and attorney's fees. so we have a lot of concerns with this on the legal cost and the burdens that this will place on employers, and we think that it's better to be handled through the budget process with regards to staffing the retaliation complaining it. for those reasons we are opposed.
[{'start': 55, 'end': 77, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matthew Allen: yes, good afternoon, matthew jennifer allen with western growers association, we're also opposed.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Francie Koehler: good afternoon, my name is francie matthew koehler. i'm the past president, current legislative chair for the california association of licensed investigators. and members and chair, we'd appreciate your aye vote. to continue to allow private investigators who organize these llcs.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jerry Desmond: Jerry Desmond on behalf of the California Association of Licensed Investigators in support. And to appreciate the efforts of the Committee to develop the amendments being accepted today to provide for those disclosures online through BRIE system at DCA. To address those issues that have been raised, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Beth Hassett: Hello, my name's Beth Hassett and I'm the CEO of WEAVE. We provide lifesaving services for victims of sexual assault, domestic violence, and human trafficking in the Sacramento region. There are many barriers to achieving self sufficiency for victims of human trafficking, including a lack of financial resources, legal ties to the perpetrator of the abuse, and the fear that the abuser will find and potentially kill them. In the past nine months alone, WEAVE has served 138 adult and child victims of sex trafficking. We provide emergency response and we also provide safe shelter. We have a dedicated shelter for victims of human trafficking and three transitional houses, but that's very temporary housing for them, and it's very difficult for them to move forward, many of them have never worked a job before. They have a very hard time finding a place to live in the first place, let alone a place where they and their children will be safe. We've had many success stories with the Safe At Home program in placing victims of domestic violence and sexual assault over the years, and we've also had many unsuccessful attempts to place the victims of human trafficking and their children because even though they've very often suffered sexual assault, and domestic violence as part of the trafficking, they just aren't always being seen as victims of those particular crimes and this would absolutely clear that up and make it very clear that these people, many of whom have suffered hundreds to thousands of sexual assaults during their time as a sex trafficking victim, it would just close that loop and that gap and give them the safety that they need. And we heartily approve and support this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 38, 'end': 54, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Harms: Jennifer Harms with the National Association of Social Workers, California Chapter, in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jerilyn Stapleton: Jerilyn Stapleton, President of California NOW, we stand in strong support of this issue. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Wanner: Linda Wanner with the California Catholic Conference, in strong support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Justin Jones: justin, i'm a pediatrician in los angeles, in support. thank you, sir.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Peco: kimberly francie peco, also a pediatrician in the county of los angeles, in strong support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pete Contay: Yes, well, thank you for your previous work and I brought all the veterans from your bill this morning to come and be short. Anyway, Pete Contay representing the California Association of County Veterans Service Officers and other Veteran's groups and we're in support, sponsor.
[{'start': 133, 'end': 144, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lorraine Plass: Lorraine Plass, Legislative Chair for AMVETS is sponsor of this bill. Well, keep it short, if left to the VA, you could see where care is in America. And I think we have a jewel, a crown jewel ourself in Dr. Imbasciani, because he's fresh from Kaiser, where I retired out of 30 years work, and he's fresh from the war. He knows how to take care of things, and it's a good position that we're in right now. We support it.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 208, 'end': 218, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Colonel Grace: yeah, colonel kimberly grace representing military officers association california council of chapters. and also speaking as a nurse, i've been to a few of the homes, i think my favorite is yountville of course, but i know it needs fixing. the time to fix the healthcare system in the veterans homes is now. because it's going to get worse and harder to fix, especially when we get the more acute patients in there. so really the time to fix it is now, we support this bill.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Don Harper: Madam Chair, my name is Don Harper, I'm Chair of the Legislative Commission for the American League Department of California. Over 100,000 members strong, and we strongly support this bill. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary White: mary colonel white with anvets, strongly support this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 13, 'end': 18, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Thomas Johnson: johnson, amvets post 1996 in redding, i want your support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debbie Johnson: very good, thank you. debbie mary johnson, amvets auxiliary, in support.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Cooney: Good afternoon, Michael Cooney representing Post 53 in Redwood Cities, strongly supporting this bill. Also Secretary of Vietnam Veterans 464, and the Cryptological Veterans of America, California branch. Thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Diane Freeman: diane debbie freeman, certified shorthand reporter, freeman reporting. strongly support this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 52, 'end': 59, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Christy Bouma: yes, ma'am. madam chair, members of the committee, bouma on behalf of the california professional firefighters, pleased to be cosponsors of this measure. i think i just would add that the impact really is minimal, at least with respect to the firefighter cases. i think currently pending before perb there are 33 cases, 31 of which are at some process at perb, it's a small number. and, as you know, successful and respectful labor negotiations are bolstered by effective remedies if they should fail and without a remedy to strike, we're only left with the perb, which this legislature rightfully gave them a jurisdiction to hear these disputes. but the the lack of timeliness at perb has led us to have no remedies and just seems to disturb the harmony that we are seeking with our employers when we're adjudicating our complaints. so it was rightfully noticed in your analysis that the courts want to give due discretion to perb, which they have. i think in this case, you could also say the legislature never contemplated that a matter before perb could take much, much longer than a civil matter before court. so this returns us to the superior court, where we were before the action in 2000, and we ask you to consider this alternate option now and urge your support.
[{'start': 51, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shane Gusman: Shane Gusman on behalf of the Teamsters in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Janetta Johnson: Good day, Senators. My name is Janetta Johnson, I'm the Executive Director of TGI Justice Project. I'm also a formerly incarcerated transgender woman. I'd like to speak in favor of SB 310, the Name and Dignity Act. I work with currently and formerly incarcerated transgender women that are preparing to reenter a society that has never socially accepted of them and has not given them access to basic human rights and dignity. Our work is to re-humanize transgender women in a world that dehumanize them. Through my work with our members inside and out of the jails and prisons, I am familiar with the physical and psychological impact on transgender people face when they are mis-gender or aren't able to have their name and gender marker that affirms their gender identity. It's all about re-humanizing and also understanding that for transgender women, name represents letting go of past traumas and stepping into a more nurtured and dignified way into moving through life. This could lead to depression, anxiety, suicidal ideation, not being well mentality translate into not being well physically resulting in high blood pressure, self mutilation, in some cases, suicide. This is all from ongoing assaults on transgender persons sense of self. For transgender people released from prison trying to find a job and housing is even more difficult when their name and gender presentation does not match the name and gender marker on their legal documents. As part of parole requirements for transgender people to have and find stable housing and employment, and filing a name and gender change with the courts on the outside can be a lengthy process. It can be such simpler and empowering impact into close the reentry gap that folks run the risk of falling into Tulia Prison with all resolved. The reentry process is challenging enough. This bill is a simple measure that would give incarcerated transgender people a moment to respa and dignity that would set them up for success and rebuild one's life and a better quality of being. I am strongly in support of SB 310, the Name and Dignity Act. Please give incarcerated transgender people access to basic dignity and vote yes on this important bill.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Coral Fagan: good afternoon chairperson and members of the committee. my name is coral and i am the director of community organizing at the western regional advocacy program wrap. i'm here to talk about the impact of sb 310 on incarcerated transgender people and urge you to support this important legislation. at wrap we work with a coalition of organizations that are fighting the criminalization of poor and homeless people's existence. and working with our members we can see the ways that transgendered people are disproportionately impacted by poverty, homelessness, criminalization and incarceration. sb 310 will establish the right of a person in state prison or county jail to petition the court to obtain a name and or gender change. this bill will also support a moment of dignity amongst daily violence experienced by transgendered people in custody. nearly one in six transgender people have reported being incarcerated, and one in two black transgender black women have been incarcerated at some point in their lives. and i have never met a trans person who has been incarcerated who has not experienced sexual or physical violence while incarcerated. sb 310 would also ease transgender people's experience reentering into the community after being incarcerated. currently, people must show legal identification when applying for most things in society, including housing, employment, healthcare, and government subsidies. transgender people re-entering phase barriers for both being formally incarcerated and also having identification documents that don't match their gender presentation. one in three trans people who have shown an identification document with a name and or gender that did not match their gender presentation were verbally harassed, denied service or were assaulted. having documentation that matches the persons gender presentation increases the likelihood of accessing these services that are integral to a persons well being. in closing, this bill is a simple measure that will greatly impact the lives of transgender people inside prison and going through the reentry process and i urge that you vote aye on sb 310, the name and dignity act today. thank you.
[{'start': 68, 'end': 73, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joan Michael: good afternoon, madam chair and members, joan diane michael for equality california. we are proud to be a co-sponsor of this bill in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Leah Brimley: good afternoon, leah joan brimley, on behalf of californians for safety and justice, in strong support. thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Woods Irvin: good afternoon, woods leah irvin with transgender gender variant intersex justice project, cosponsor and in support of the bill.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Orthwine: Hi, Jennifer Orthwine from Bay Area Lawyers for Individual Freedom and we strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Emily Harris: emily woods harris with the ella baker center for human rights in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mia Ingram: mia, aclu of california in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 5, 'end': 9, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sandra Johnson: Sandra Johnson for All of Us or None and we strongly support this bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrea Richardson: andrea emily richardson, legal services for prisoners with children, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennie Kogan: Jennie Kogan, Bend the Arc Jewish Partnership for Justice, strongly support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bethlehem Desta: Bethlehem Desta with the Ella Baker Center for Human Rights, in strong support. Thank you.
[]
Carly Mitchell: carly with intersex and gender queer recognition project in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Harms: jennifer andrea harms of the national association of social work california chapter in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joy Chang: joy jennifer chang with work safe and coalition of low wage immigrant navigates in strong support. thank you very much.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Evetta Lay: Evetta Lay for California's United for Responsible Budget, strongly in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Greg Bertz: i'm sorry, bertz. bertz. sorry, the california family council opposes this bill because we believe government documents need to reflect genetic and biological reality for identification and medical purposes. if the state allows an inmate who is genetically male to list themselves as female, or vice versa, then the government will be knowingly let inmates put false identification information on identity documents. allowing this fundamentally undermines the credibility, honesty, and authenticity that the public expects and requires from its government. secondly, we believe this bill advances a lie. that being male, or female, or no gender at all is a choice each person has a right to make, not a medical fact that each person must recognize. laws like sb 310 will simply erase any meaningful gender definitions if being male or female is completely divorced from biological reality. the only exception to this rule should be for individuals who are truly intersex. that is, born with genetics, anatomy, or other physiological characteristics that are neither fully male or female. these intersex individuals should have the choice to identify which sex they should be. and the prison system should be willing to accommodate these very rare instances. however, this must only be based on physical evidence and not merely personal feelings or self-identification. for these reasons, the california family council respectfully oppose this sb 310, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Edgar Yagomin: my name is edgar joy yagomin, also with wake america. and i'm also concerned about my fellow friends who works at prison guard in folsom. and i believe we should, look at their health welfare also. and i believe that we should let our prisoners, our prison, i'm sorry, be run by our guards not by our inmates. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sasha Buchert: My name is Sasha Buchert, and I'm Staff Attorney at Transgender Law Center. I just wanted to address the prior question before addressing this question, if that's okay? I just wanted to state that I think that the theoretical and hypothetical concerns that are cited here regarding transpeople or people abusing the system are frequently used to eliminate or prevent people from being able to invoke their rights. And I think it ignores the fact that people are already suffering and experiencing discrimination and harassment. That aren't able to change their name and gender, that far outweigh any speculative concern. And I think there are checks and balances that we placed in this bill that requires that individual petitioners notify the prison or jail that they're obtaining a name change. Can I just also add that, folks, that a, it's really a detailed process. There are up to 11 different court forms that an individual has to file and it can cost up to $500. People come to us at Transgender Law Center every day asking for assistance in helping to fill out the forms. And also, I would just add, in addition, that that position ignores the harassment and discrimination stigma associated with being transgender. For a lot of people it's not a privilege, it's a lot of suffering.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Lovell: lovell, representing the code enforcement officers, and as the senator indicated, a half dozen other law enforcement groups who are supporting this bill. actually, this bill is an incremental cleanup bill. right now, some code enforcement officers, those who do municipal parking or a part of police departments, are covered by the law. other code enforcement officers are not. similarly, some municipal parking officers are covered. others are not. this bill makes everything consistent. it's a good sense bill. we strongly support it and here to answer any questions.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rachele Trigueros: hi, good afternoon, chair and senators. thank you for having me. my name is rachele jonah trigueros, i'm a housing policy manager with the bay area council. the bay area council is a nonprofit public policy advocacy organization representing close to 300 of the largest employers across our nine county region. the council's mission is to preserve and support a healthier regional economy, high quality of life for everybody who calls the bay area home.
[{'start': 76, 'end': 99, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Charlie Ray: hi, my name's ray, with the california construction industrial materials association, trade association for aggregate ready mix concrete and industrial minerals producers. we support sb 389 and we believe it would assist with getting materials and plants approved for highway and road projects. be happy to answer any questions.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Greg Odenthal: hello, my name is greg rachele odenthal. i'm a consultant to the industry. have over a dozen material producers, concrete, asphalt, and aggregates. and this would allow for contingency back-up supply of critical materials on caltrans work and other agencies that relate to the caltrans specifications.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Todd Bloomstine: Thank you, Mr. Chair, members. Todd Bloomstine for the Southern California Contractors Association in strong support. Thank you.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeff Severs: jeff greg severs on behalf of the california asphalt pavement association in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mollie D'Agostino: All right, thank you so much for having me. Thanks to the Chair and the Members of the Committee. My name is Mollie D'Agostino, and I'm with the UC Davis Institute of Transportation Studies. I'm working on a policy initiative called the three revolutions, looking at sharing, autonomation, and electrification. We know that Senator Skinner is correct, that AVs, autonomous vehicles, pose to make some serious changes in the way people travel in our communities. There's a lot of benefits that we expect. It could mean safer travel, improved travel time and travel costs, it could even result in environmental and community benefits. But we also know that these benefits are not guaranteed. There's a range of benefits expected. Some of the emissions ranges that have been estimated by my research team, and that's a collaborative research team that includes both nonprofit stakeholders and private sector stakeholders. We've identified ranging from a 90% reduction in emissions to a doubling of emissions. This is the range autonomous vehicles could result in. So right now, there isn't a lot of well known, of course, no one has a crystal ball. So what we need to do is continue to analyze, continue to research, continue to work together to determine what is the best path for it. How can we ensure that these benefits occur and also mitigate some of the potential negative impacts that could occur, such as emissions? And also, increased driving times for folks that don't have access to an autonomous vehicle. While we know that autonomous vehicles may end up making roads safer overall, there may be some winners and some losers. So we need to make sure we're taking a step back and really looking at how we think we should move forward with autonomous vehicle policy. So we are in strong support of this bill.
[{'start': 109, 'end': 126, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 332, 'end': 339, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ashanti Izran: good afternoon, ashanti from environment california in support.
[]
Andrea Deveau: All right, good afternoon, Mr. Chair and members. My name is Andrea Deveau. I am here today on behalf of Tech Net. With the utmost respect to the author, Senator Skinner, we must oppose SB 802 as it appeared in print this morning. And while we certainly need more time to review, we do have initial concerns about the amendments to create a task force. Initial thinking is that it may repeat the work already conducted by SB 1298, the Steering Committee, but we will need to do our homework there. We look forward to seeing the amendments in print, or that are being proposed in amendments today, so that we can evaluate more carefully. TechNet is concerned, that while well-intentioned, presupposed requirements, assertions, or even requests for a task force is premature. And can have detrimental impacts on advancements and innovation. We certainly know this is not the author's intent. We commit to working with the author, and thank she and her staff for working with us.
[{'start': 61, 'end': 74, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 162, 'end': 169, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Amy Mmagu: mmagu, on behalf of the california chamber of commerce. we too are opposed to the bill in print as of this morning. and do share the same concerns with the proposed amendments from before. thank you.
[]
Margaret Gladstein: margaret jeff gladstein, on behalf of the global automakers. we appreciate the direction that the author has moved. we do look forward to working with her, but we do have concerns about the task force. and look forward to continuing the conversation.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debra Carlton: thank you and good afternoon mr chairman and members. my name is debra margaret carlton, with the california apartment association, we represent many developers and housing providers throughout the state of california. this is such an incredibly important bill, all of the affordable housing financing, and all of the other production bills that you have introduced this year, will be for naught if we don't continue to have and we don't continue to grow the accountability at the local level. the nimby groups, the not in my backyard groups, that have forced the local governments and interfered with some of the housing production going out on the low level, has been a big concern here in california. as you all know one of the most significant barriers to construction is the local nimby groups, who state unreasonable arguments, and stop housing production. this has worsened our jobs-housing balance as you all know, you've all been at the local level and you know what you face. in response, it's not unusual for local governments to force builders to agree to build fewer units than allowed under the current density. when a local city, as they did recently, refused to approve a 315, i would argue, modest apartment complex in exchange for 44 luxury homes, that's a problem here in california when we so desperately need housing. this bill forces accountability and we believe it's very important going forward, and we request your aye vote.
[{'start': 65, 'end': 87, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Hanlon: Good afternoon, my name is Brian Hanlon, I'm the co-founder of Carla, the California Renters Legal Advocacy and Education Fund. Thank you for considering SB 167, the Legislature passed the Housing Accountability Act way back in 1982, the year of my birth, and has amended it 15 times since then. In 1990, 27 years ago, the Legislature substantially expanded the HAA and included a preamble that sounds like it was written yesterday. It reads in part, the lack of affordable housing is a critical problem which threatens the economic, environmental, and social quality of life in California. California housing has become the most expensive in the nation. The excessive cost of the state's housing supply is partially caused by activities and policies of many local governments which limit the approval of affordable housing, increase the cost of land for affordable housing, and require that high fees and exactions be paid by producers of potentially affordable housing. In 2001, the Legislature again amended the HAA and dropped the word affordable from findings, why? Because the problems that once afflicted the least of us now afflict the most of us. Today, the Legislature is again confronted with amending the HAA. For 35 years, many local governments have thwarted the will of Legislature, violated the HAA, and worst of all, have created a housing shortage that is both acute and chronic that immiserates renters and aspirational homeowners throughout the state. On a personal note, as a renter, as a moderate income earner, as a not so young person who wrestles with the effects of the state's housing shortage every day, I implore you to shrinking the Housing Accountability Act and make good on the promise of California. The YIMBY, or Yes In My Back Yard movement, consists of mostly renters in their 20s and 30s who are locked out of home ownership, struggling with rent, or living with housemates when we want to start families. We know that our housing struggles are not the result of impersonal economic forces, or lack of individual effort, but derived from bad laws and bad policy decisions that have restricted housing growth for decades. In short, we are angry and we vote on housing. We are not asking for public assistance, we are asking for the Legislature to make its own housing laws enforceable so that California's construction trades people may build the future and construct a state affordable and accessible for all of us. I'd be happy to answer any questions that you might have of SB 167, especially the need for a heightened evidentiary standard, expanded attorney's fees, and the HAA analysis for provost housing developments. Thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sonya Trouse: Hi my name is Sonya Trouse, I'm here from YIMBY Action, Yes In My Backyard, we are a political organization. We have 3000 members mostly in the Bay Area. Our members are between 25 and 35 and they range in income from 30,000 to $230,000. So we are in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Speck: Jennifer Speck on behalf of the California Association of Realtors, also here in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rachele Trigueros: hi rachele debra trigueros, bay area council, in support.
[{'start': 3, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erin Guerrero: erin rachele guerrero on behalf of the california building industry association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marina Wiant: Marina Wiant with the California Housing Consortium in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tiffany Fan: tiffany erin fan on behalf of bridge housing in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Victoria Fierce: fierce of east bay forward representing renters from districts seven, nine, and 10 in support.
[]
Eric Panzer: eric tiffany panzer with lovable berkeley in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Augusta: Brian Augusta on behalf of the California Rural Legal Assistance Foundation. We've been working closely with the author on the language and we're still reviewing the latest changes, hope to be along with our colleagues at Western Center in support of the bill as we continue to review those amendments in the next Committee. Thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sande George: thank you, senators and members. i represent, george with the american planning association. we have been working with the author's office. the staff has met with us many times, and we also talked with the sponsors would greatly appreciate that. we, unfortunately though, even with the last set of amendments, which we do appreciate, are still opposed. there are some provisions in the bill that we think make it very unbalanced. and we actually haven't heard of a lot of specific court cases that have meant that the developers are treated more or worse than any local government depending on the situation and the facts of the case. and we think when you look at the provisions of the bill that are still there, that the combination is going to make it almost impossible for a city and county to ensure that any fee exaction condition is justified under the new standard of review. and i'm going to go through the issues quickly here. but the major problem is the change from substantial evidence, which is what is the standard review for every land use law in california, to clear and convincing evidence. and i'm not an attorney, but the change is something that we don't think is going to be workable for a land use decision. it's usually used where there's a risk of deprivation of personal rights, while land use decisions are based on numerous assumptions about future economic conditions and costs that can't be determined by any degree of certainty. so we don't think we can meet that standard on a land use decision. we also have concerns that this would subject different land use decisions to different standards of review, as stated before. the bill also authorized the developer, without providing any documentation that we can look at to determine if the imposition of fees or other exactions would ensure that the project remains feasible. even in bonus density law we have the ability to request information so that we can tell ourselves whether or not something's been unfair and it won't pencil out for the developer. i think we deserve the right to look at that before we are going to court to determine whether or not the court believes us. it requires the court to impose a minimum fine of $100,000 per housing unit. we did hear that that would probably be reduced. but the concern we have is that the court yet now allows a jurisdiction that may have run afoul to that housing accountability act to cure it first without having steep fines on them. the court takes the case, keeps it, decides whether or not there's been problems, and they can remand it back to the local jurisdiction and tell them either fix it or tell them to approve the project as is. we think that's enough, and then if they still don't do it, then the court has the ability to impose those fines. it also imposes a new mandate that every local agency for every project publish an analysis of the haa. we think that's a precedent that would be set. we don't understand why this would not be the one of first. and it would really substantially change how we approve the housing development. haa is just not one, is one of the 10 or 12 housing laws that we currently have to comply with, in determining whether we approve, deny, condition, etc. a project. it also-
[{'start': 46, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jolena Voorhis: Mr. Chair and members. Jolena Voorhis on behalf of the Urban Counties of California. We also unfortunately oppose the bill. We certainly appreciate the amendments, and we have been talking with the authors and staff about some amendments to the bill. Our concerns are very similar to APA's as far as the standard review, but I just want to highlight a few areas that she did not cover. First, our fee authority is very restricted into the bill. There's a new standard in there under feasible, which we think has never been tested. So that's going to restrict our ability to have fees for various projects. Also, on the court fines, which I understand is going to be addressed in judiciary, I will say it ties it to the regional housing needs assessment. So it says if you don't meet a target and you reach your housing needs assessment, you can get fined. Reaching a housing assessment is a planning document. It is not for production. So we are opposed to tying anything like that to the arena and also the expansion of individuals that can sue local government is also a concern. And in short, we just belive that there's, as Ms. George says, too many restrictions in this bill. If you layer them upon each other, it's going to basically stop us from being able to make decisions on these affordable housing projects which have numerous issues anyway, so it's going to restrict us even further.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1132, 'end': 1138, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tracy Rhine: Tracy Rhine, Rural County Representatives of California, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Lee: lee on behalf of the california state association of counties, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vern Goehring: Yes, chairmen and members, I'm Vern Goehring on behalf of the California Native Plant Society. Plus a dozen and a half other groups that have been coordinating and working together in support of this bill. Any form of outdoor recreation, as you can imagine, can cause environmental degradation, whether it's hiking, camping, fishing, or off-roading. The challenge that we all have in participating in outdoor recreation is how do we individually and collectively do no harm to common resources, such that others' ability to enjoy them is not compromised? Some forms of recreation demand little because the impacts are little, others demand a lot because the impacts are great. I have about five or six statement sentences I'd like to make on the resource elements of the bill, and the same amount, a little bit on the fuel tax portion that I can just go through quickly. On the resource aspects of the bill, it's the nature of OHVMR activities that environmental impacts are continuous and ongoing. The longer an area is used, the damage multiples. And areas once restored, if reopened to OHV use, will again be damaged. Current law does not require periodic updates of soil conservation standards or plans to avoid erosion, sedimentation, and water quality problems. SB 249 corrects this. The current law last required the wildlife inventories or habitat protection plans to be completed in 1989. SB 249 corrects this. Current law prohibits designating within state vehicle recreation areas cultural and natural resource preserves, even if these areas contain these resources. SB 249 corrects this. Current law requires temporarily closing and repairing, and possibly permanently closing, areas if soil conservation measures cannot be met. SB 249 extends this same process to wildlife and habitat protection plans. Currently, a portion of the fuel tax derived from traditional OHV use or dirt bikes and ATVs and so forth, and fuel tax from driving on unpaved roads to take part in non-motorized recreation like camping, hunting, fishing, and so forth, is transferred to the OHVR Trust Fund to support, expand, and restore damage caused by traditional motorized recreation. It's long been known that, the fuel tax from accessing camping, fishing, hiking type recreation was not being used to primarily support these types of recreation. Okay. So instead, that money's been used, had been transferred to the OHV Trust Fund. Even the OHV Commission in its 2017 program reports, admits that the fuel tax transferred to the program is not based on actual fuel used in OHV recreation. The fuel tax SB249 seeks to use differently is not money from the traditional off-road recreation uses, and we urge your yes vote.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Reed Addis: Chair and members, Reed Addis on behalf of the California Wilderness Coalition in support today. We think Senator Allen's bill is a good policy, because we do actually believe that this recreation should exist. We think there should be parks for this type of recreation, we also think it's appropriate to have these facilities on federal lands and managed properly. However, having said that, I think we would all agree that this type of recreational activity is loud, it's dangerous, and it does create environmental problems. And so, therefore, we need to have an appropriate management system in the State of California to deal with that. 10 years ago we worked with then Senator Steinberg on the last reform measure. We spent a lot of time dealing with the funding and the grant programs, but at the same time we were very concerned about the management of the existing facilities and the type of writing that was occurring. Move forward 10 years, and what you'll see, and it's being handed out to you right now, is that unfortunately, there is still riding that is occurring outside of designated trails, and occurring on very sensitive habitat. Just like the rest of us, if we go to a state park and there's a pedestrian trail, there's certain rules, and when we go off those trails, we're not allowed to do that and there's enforcement measures. All we're trying to argue here, in particular in these state facilities, is there needs to be better conversation measures and better governance. And we think Senator Allen's bill does that, and we think it allows for stronger conservation measures. We also think the governance reform in the bill is appropriate, and allows the appropriate set of agencies to make sure the writing is occurring in a way that's sustainable and doesn't harm the environment.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 114, 'end': 119, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 683, 'end': 692, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1520, 'end': 1525, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Fearing: good after, good afternoon, mr. chair and members. jennifer here today in support of sb 249 on behalf of defenders of wildlife and sierra club california. thank you.
[{'start': 51, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stan Van Velsor: Good afternoon, my name is Stan Van Velsor with the Wilderness Society, and I support 249.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Celeste Garamendi: Good afternoon, Celeste Garamendi with Friends of Tesla Park. We're in alliance of organizations in the East Bay working to protect the Tesla parkland from expansion of Carnegie SVRA. We include the support of local agencies as well as many officials. We strongly urge your support of SB 249. We have seen first hand why the fiscal reform as well as the governance and conservation reform that's identified in the bill is needed. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
James Lombardo: mr. chairman, members of the committee. james on behalf of the california motorcycle dealers association. the last time senator steinberg had his bill, did we authorize this. he had banned red sticker motorcycles. and that would have been a loss of $20 million to the general fund state of california. so we're very hopeful that we can just extend this program and not have to go through the rest of this, but we're working with your staff.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 128, 'end': 137, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kelly Beam: hi, kelly on behalf of honda north america. and we are working with the coalition to work on a solution, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Clay: senator beall and committee members, my name's chris eric clay on behalf of the sponsor, the california chapter of the naacp. the naacp is very concerned about the lack of affordable housing in california and the effect that that has on the poor and people of color, often displacing them from the communities in which they traditionally reside and our understanding of the legislative intent in enacting hawkins-costa, not to usurp the local authorities from making local decisions about local land use. involving, with the input of local constituents and local developers, so, this bill merely clarifies that. and so, we thank senator bradford for bringing this important measure forward, and we ask for your support, thank you.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 13, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 47, 'end': 62, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 637, 'end': 645, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Anya Lawler: Good afternoon, Anya Lawler on behalf of the Western Center on Law and Poverty and California Rural Legal Assistance Foundation in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marina Wiant: Marina Wiant with the California Housing Consortium in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Emmel: good afternoon, emmell on behalf of the city of santa monica here in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 22, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
 : Mister Chair and members, Sean [UNKNOWN] on behalf of the California Apartment Association.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 30, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Justin Paddock: Justin Paddock on behalf of the California Association of Realtors. Mr. Chairman and Senators, I'd just like to echo California Department of Associations comments. We want to make sure that the housing gets built. It's very important that, there are certain things that are left on the table when we go to negotiate these projects. If you're going to make sure that affordable rental, which is typically a 55 year deed restriction, is going to be on the table, we also want to make sure that there's other critical aspects to make sure these projects get built. Specifically, in lieu fees, or land donation options, because that's how we feel the units actually will be constructed. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Chang: mr. chair and members of the committee, tim chris chang for the auto club of southern california. like senator hill, this will be our fourth time supporting this measure. as he pointed out, the right turn on ready was never meant to be a $100 fine. with jurisdictions adopting camera enforcement through the 2000, it became much more of a problem, because right turn violations were cited with impunity, and our members complained to us. we investigated the situation and senator hill, then assembly member hill, did introduce a bill to correctly rectify the situation. he's explained it very well. we do urge an aye vote.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 111, 'end': 115, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 480, 'end': 484, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 507, 'end': 511, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sean Mullin: good afternoon, chairman and members. thank you for the opportunity to discuss why sb 53 is an important step to accelerating the deployment of cleaner trucks on our roads. my name is mullin. i'm the general manager of refuel energy partners. refuel energy partners is a california grown, sacramento based, alternative fuel provider and infrastructure developer with fuel stations in sacramento and the bay area. our first station partnered with local technology to turn watermelons or other organic waste into transportation fuel. we sell this renewable natural gas to fleets and consumers of all sizes. from tractor trailers to school districts to honda civics. being in sacramento, i do openly invite any and all legislators, staffers and curious minds to contact me for a tour of our local facility. sb53 seeks to codify the federal vehicle weight exemption for natural gas vehicles, as specified in the fixing america's surface transportation, or fast act, of 2015. the act allows natural gas vehicles to exceed federal weight limits by up to 2,000 pounds. transportation is the largest source of air pollution and greenhouse gas emissions in california, and heavy duty trucks are the biggest culprit. sb 53 will allow the largest contributing sector of greenhouse gas and nox emissions. goods movement sector trucks weighing 26,001 pounds over to get on a level playing field with fossil-based fuels. natural gas vehicles will be able to hold additional fuel capacity, allowing my customers to work more efficiently by reducing the frequency of fueling stops needed in a given shift. sb 53 will send a signal of confidence to the market that california continues to be a leader in supporting innovation and industry that's good for the health of the people and for the environment equally and at the same time. in closing, we believe that this bill rewards those that have made the investment in cleaner truck technology, instead of punishing them. and incentivize the new fleet assets to consider renewable natural gas as their fuel of choice. i will ask for you aye vote and join the 24 other states that have or are working on creating parody for cleaner, alternative fuels for trucks. thank you for your time.
[{'start': 184, 'end': 190, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Steve Self: mr chair, members of the committee. my name is steve tim self. i have the great honor of serving as president of the san diego county disposal association. we're the co-sponsor of the bill. we applaud senator hueso for his leadership on this. and we very much thank the chair and the analysts for their continued work with us to create a better bill that could advance and pro duce clean energy or clean use for californians for decades to come. we're available to answer any questions and we appreciate your time and consideration. thank you.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 209, 'end': 214, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Josh Pawn: mr. chairman, josh steve pawn on behalf of the california refuse for recycling council. we'd appreciate your support on this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kelly Aster: thank you mr. chairman and members. kelly on behalf of the los angeles county waste management association, the solid waste association of orange county and the inland empire disposal association all in vigorous support of the measure, thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Beau Biller: Mr. Chair, Beau Biller for Bruce Double D Macre and UPS in support. Okay
[{'start': 11, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Immel: Good afternoon, Melissa Immel on behalf of SWANA and the Western Placer Waste Management Authority here in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Carmichael: Good afternoon, Tim Carmichael on behalf of San Diego Gas and Electric, and Southern California Gas Company both in support, thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Morin Penim: Morin Penim, on behalf of Waste Connections in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matt Roman: roman on behalf of california trucking association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Todd Campbell: todd with the bioenergy alliance of california in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Benjamin Palmer: All right, good afternoon. Benjamin Palmer, on behalf of the California Manufactured Housing Institute. Senator Leyva covered the issue well. These are houses built the same as regular stick-built homes. They cost under $100,000, they contain granite countertops, all the additional amenities you find in a regular house. So SB 329 seeks to ensure that state and local programs designed to facilitate homeownership or residence include manufactured housing. As a matter of policy, prospective homeowners and residents should be able to apply for the programs that facilitate homeownership or residence, regardless of the type of home that they're considering. Any categorical exclusion of today's lower cost, high quality manufactured homes creates additional barriers for those who are seeking to find affordable housing within the state. As Senator Leyva noted, the Department of HCD's housing report noted that today's homes are high quality, greater energy efficiency than prior generations, and cost 10 to 20% per square foot less than conventional homes. SB 329 seeks to ensure that state and local programs that facilitate home ownership or residence don't automatically exclude these affordable high quality manufacturered homes from their scope. For all of the above reasons we're pleased to sponsor SB 329 and respectfully ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 112, 'end': 117, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 851, 'end': 856, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Catherine Borg: Catherine Borg with the Western Manufactured Housing Communities. Manufactured homes are the largest unsubsidized affordable housing in the State of California. Being so, we lack the financing to allow people to buy homes in parks. And those homes are much older, they need to be replaced, and this would be a good step forward getting those people in homes. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicholas Chavez: nicholas josh chavez on behalf of the golden state manufactured home owners league, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Speck: Mr. Chair, members of Senate Transportation and Housing Committee. Jennifer Speck with the California Association of Realtors. We thank you for the opportunity to speak today. We apologize for be... late, we have an oppose unless amended position on SB 329 and sought to work with the sponsors over the last month to amend the bill to alleviate our concerns. Unfortunately, while we agree with the spirit of the bill, the bill seeks to take resources already dedicated to existing down payment assistance and home ownership programs and would reallocate those resources to chattel loans like those used to purchase a car. Loans for real property and personal property are vastly different. Personal property loans used to buy manufactured housing have different qualification criteria, reduced loan terms, and higher interest rates as pointed out by the Senator. While single-family homes are the predominant housing type serving 65% of California's families, they only receive about 20% of the affordable housing program dollars. With scarce resources, while well intended, SB 329 would jeopardize these existing programs. For example, California housing finance agencies programs facilitate the purchase of real property. It would prove costly to the agency and the state to force Cal FHA to begin making personal property loans, which is not within their scope of expertise, requires a significant rule making process, and staff would need training on a whole new lending product. Because California is amid an affordable housing crisis, it is vitally important that we not divert precious resources for real property home ownership opportunities to tangible personal property loans. We would respectfully suggest that the sponsor instead seek to create programs specifically designed to serve the community. We respectfully request your no vote on SB 329, and request that it be held in committee until we can find a resolution to this problem that works.
[{'start': 67, 'end': 81, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alicia Sebastian: Hello, Alicia Sebastian, I'm the Director of Housing and Community Development Programs for the California Coalition for Rural Housing. Manufactured homes make up over 4% of all housing stock across the state. In California, at least 1 million people live in more than 5,000 registered manufactured housing communities or mobile home parks. They're in the rural Sierra Nevadas, the coast of Santa Monica and in the heart of Silicon Valley. While the price of homes, lots of land vary widely across communities, manufactured homes make up a significant portion of California's limited affordable housing stock. However, with the recovery of the housing market, these communities are being marked by owners and investors for acquisition and conversion to other uses. When this happens, residents cannot easily move to other parks, because affordable spaces are not available or the homes are too old to move, or because the cost of moving the home is too great an economic burden. In fact, over 81% of today's manufactured homes will never be relocated. As such, renters and homeowners alike lose their homes. CCRH has spent years exploring the challenges facing non-profit housing developers and resident groups who seek to preserve California's manufactured housing opportunities. Extensive stakeholder engagement helped identify this legislative opportunity. At this very moment, there are at least 10 potential parks our members are interested in, and many more of our partners would like to enter into park preservation. However, many organizations struggle to identify parks for sale. In some cases, a park may be on the market for over a year. Other times, sales move so quickly, developers are too late to the table. Every month, CCRH receives calls from organizations and residents and communities interested in park preservation. They can't figure out where to begin, they don't know what resources are available to them, and they don't understand what an acquisition will entail. Even expert organizations that exclusively operate park acquisitions are unfamiliar with MPROP or existing resources. Nonprofit acquisition of parks is a successful model, but it isn't widely recognized. People across the United States are looking at MPROP in California to see how this is done. We have an opportunity to lead across the nation, and facing California's housing crisis SB136 will allow the state to be nimble in meeting the needs of communities in order to make the most of existing resources to protect the housing we already have.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Ainger: Paul Ainger, Development Solutions Manager for Rural Community Systems Corporation. As an affordable non-profit housing developer in California with Community Housing Opportunities Corporation, I used $1.5 million in MPROP funding as part of an overall $12 million package needed to acquire and rehabilitate the 153-unit Casa Del Sol mobile home park in Woodland, California. The project is now a vital improved development that provides long term affordable housing for farm workers and seniors in Woodland. The MPROP funding was pivotal in leveraging millions of dollars in additional funding for this mobile home park. This project, however, took eight years from start to finish. We began the effort in 2001 and completed it in 2008. One key reason for this long time period is the difficulty in securing financing for mobile home parks. Mobile home parks financing requires a mix of sources, and some of those sources have restricted uses. Further, there are issues related to loan values, subordination and the other issues that are substantially different from conventional affordable housing financing. One of the reasons for the current unspent balances and MPROP financing is not because there's a lack of demand for the financing, we get inquiries two, three times a month from different sellers and buyers. It's largely because of sellers aren't familiar with the program, and the buyers are really perplexed by the complex financing structuring required to purchase and rehabilitate the parks. So as a result, some of the sellers just take the cash, and sell the park and sometimes that park is no longer there because the buyer says, I'm not going to operate this as a park anymore. So some of these sellers may have preferred to sell to a nonprofit developer or to the residents, but they believe the alternative is too risky and uncertain. So what is the fix? Clearly there is a need for technical assistance to bridge the knowledge gap. This bill would add technical assistance as an allowable use of MPROP funds. By using this, the California Department of Housing and Community Development can set aside a modest amount of funding for the critical, technical assistance that is needed to make mobile home parks acquisition and rehabilitation deals happen. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Augusta: Mr Chairman, Brian Augusta, on behalf of the California Royal Legal Assistance Foundation, in support.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tyrone Buckley: good afternoon, tyrone nicholas buckley, housing california, also in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicholas Chavez: Nicholas Chavez, on behalf of the Golden State Manufactured Homeowners League, in support. Okay, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carol Soule: Carol Soule from the California Commission on Aging. Mobile homes provide a very important source of housing for older adults and we support any effort to make it more available.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katherine Borg: hi, borg with the western manufactured housing communities association, we're kind of one of those in-between groups. we're working with the author to tighten up the language to make sure that the funds go to legitimate groups that are trying to create these opportunities. but not through the use of eminent domain or other actions, be it not willing seller. otherwise, we're very supportive of the concept.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Yoder: yeah, thank you, mr. chair. i'm paul on behalf of mayor ed lee and the city to support the bill. look forward to working with assemblymember ting and his staff, you and your staff. and with me today, i have sam dodge who's the director of san francisco's department of homelessness and supportive housing. he'd like to say a couple of words in support.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 56, 'end': 62, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 141, 'end': 145, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 207, 'end': 216, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nicolo Deluca: nicolo jonah deluca here on behalf of oakland mayor libby schaaf. i want to thank the assembly member for including oakland in this bill. looking forward to working with him and thank you very much. another big tool to help us address a very, very important problem. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 52, 'end': 64, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Miranda Cole-Corona: good morning, chair and members of the committee, my name miranda nicolo cole-corona, i am the economic development and housing manager for the city of la habra, and i want to thank you for the attention that you're giving to ab 346. we are supportive of the bill because it would allow us the flexibility to use some of our remaining low and moderate income housing asset funds to support emergency services, such as homeless shelters for our regional and our local homeless population. we do have currently a lot of rental and home ownership long-term affordability projects, but unfortunately those projects are not generating a revenue stream to the city. so the small amount of low and moderate income housing funds that we have remaining have not been enough to produce an affordable housing project in the city, even if we were to pull those funds with other local cities. so we are looking forward to the opportunity to provide the much needed services to our homeless population through the use of ab 346. we are still very committed to continuing to provide permanent affordable housing, but we are, as i said, optimistic for this opportunity to extend that beyond the current restrictive uses of the current legislation, thank you.
[{'start': 58, 'end': 84, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Diana Coronado: hi there, chair, and committee members, diana with the association of california cities, orange county, we are the sponsor of the bill, and thank mr. bocanegra for helping us out today, and we thank the committee for all their work on this bill, and we are in strong support.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 150, 'end': 159, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Casey Elliott: casey on behalf of the cities of santa ana, fullerton, and huntington beach, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicole Wordelman: nicole miranda wordelman, on behalf of the orange county board of supervisors, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyra Ross: kyra on behalf of the city of pasadena, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mario Empeneda: Mario Empeneda on behalf of the City of Alhambra, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anya Lawler: Anya Lawler, on behalf of Western Center on Law and Poverty and the California Rural Legal Assistance Foundation, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Yoder: mr chairman and members, paul, on behalf of the state association, excuse me, the state humane association of. california. don't have a letter in yet, we'll remedy that, urge your aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Fearing: good morning, mr chair and members. fearing, in strong support. thank you, mr maienschein for this bill. on behalf of the humane society of the united states, the san diego humane society, the san francisco aspca, best friends animal society and the humane society veterinary medical association.
[{'start': 78, 'end': 89, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nicholas Romo: chair and member, romo with the league of california cities in support. we appreciate the author's work and creativity in this measure, we think it provides another tool in the toolbox for cities to do the housing related infrastructure to set the stage for development. thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anya Lawler: good morning, anya nicole lawler, on behalf of the western center on law and poverty, we're one of the co-sponsors on this measure. i probably don't need to go into a lot of detail about the depth of the housing crisis in california right now. i think you've all probably noticed by now, that it's pretty bad. how we got here is complicated, and fixing it is going to be even more complicated. but one thing is clear. california simply doesn't have enough housing units available to go around. and the shortage is most acute at the lower income level. a recent report by hcd, the state department of housing and community development, showed that the state is short nearly 3.5 million units affordable at the low, very low, and extremely low income levels. california law has long obligated citizen counties to plan to accommodate their fair share of housing at all income levels. the law recognizes that local governments aren't in the business of building, but they do have tremendous influence through their zoning powers, over what does and doesn't get built in our community. and the housing elements in cities and counties must show that they have enough adequately zoned land, to accommodate their share of the regional housing aid at all income levels. so, the market level, as well as the moderate, low, and very low income levels. to accommodate lower income housing, cities and counties have to have densely zoned land, that may be developed as multifamily housing. many, many local governments take these planning obligations very seriously. unfortunately, some do not and continue to skirt the requirements of the law, and include sites in their housing elements that are not truly buildable, which only serves to exacerbate the crisis. when a local law effectively makes it impossible for housing developers, particularly affordable housing developers to find a site on which to build, it's unfair to their neighboring jurisdictions that are welcoming housing development. even though some cities are doing everything right, they still see their housing costs rise because of a regional shortage of units, exacerbated by neighbors who are not doing the right planning. it is also unfair to preschool teachers, restaurant workers, artists and other low wage earners, and increasingly to high wage earners like teachers and critical first responders, who are told that they're welcome to work in a community, but they can't live there. ab 1397 tightens the rules for what constitutes an adequate site under housing element law, to ensure all that local governments are providing real opportunities for developers to come in and build. it's the only way we're going to solve this crisis. we have to build. and with that, i will close.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Keith Dunn: thank you, mr. chairman, keith anya dunn on behalf of the california apartment association. i'll echo the comments of my colleagues, but in very strong support and i'm going to ask for your vote. thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Pariset: michelle with public advocates, we are co-sponsors of this bill and in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Patricia Lealla: Good morning. My name is Patricia Lealla on behalf of Leadership Council for Justice and Accountability, we support this bill from Arvin and Kern. County.  Good morning. My name is Blanca Flores from Lideres Campesinas.  And I'm here in support of this bill because there's a lack in need of housing especially for farm workers in Arven Weed Patch.  And Lamont.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 180, 'end': 193, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Leonard Oakens: Good morning, my name is Leonard Oakens, I'm from Tulare County. I'm representing Matheny Tract area, and I support this bill.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Francisco Mendes: hi, my name is francisco keith mendes, i live in southwest fresno. and i am here to support this bill, because so many farm workers don't have any house to stay and they pick up temporarily, thank you
[{'start': 15, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Isabel Solario: good morning, my name is isabel francisco solario. i come from the community of lanier in fresno county and i support this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ashley Warner: good morning, my name is ashley isabel warner based in fresno. and on behalf of the california environmental justice alliance, we support this legislation. thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Lane: Michael Lane, with the Nonprofit Housing Association of Northern California, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jonathan Arambel: Jonathan Arambel, on behalf of the Apartment Association of Greater Los Angeles and the Santa Barbara Rental Property Association, also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Fisher: I'm Kimberly Fisher, I'm from Arcata in Humboldt County. And I'm a preschool teacher and I'm in support of this bill.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tyrone Buckley: Tyrone Buckley, on behalf of Housing California, also in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Morgan Kelly: Good morning, my name's Morgan Kelly, I'm an apartment manager in Humboldt County, and I support this bill
[{'start': 24, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sande George: Okay, Sande George, representing the American Planning Association, I am an in-between. We've been working with the author's office and the staff, and the sponsors on this bill. We are not sure why the existing housing element review process with ATD is not working to catch these sites that are truly not. Available to build. But we are convinced that there are some issues, particularly with non-vacant sites, and we are willing to work with the author on that. Our biggest concern is the requirement, and I'm not sure what the amendments were, but the requirement to ensure within three years that water, sewer, and utilities are available on every single site by site. We don't have the authority or the money to do that, so that's one of the things we're going to be working on. Thank you.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicholas Romo: Hi, Nicholas Romo with the League of California Cities in opposition to this bill. I can appreciate the passion on this topic and as the supporters mentioned, there is a large focus on the housing crisis in front of us, unfortunately. This measure poses a number of significant challenges for local jurisdictions. As just mentioned, the arena process and our general planning and zoning already require us to do, to identify sites, and this bill generally abandons that process. Like I said, requires us to do analyses that we feel that really just can be done. Furthermore, the bill also requires us to bring some utilities to these sites, this will be extremely costly and burdensome for local governments. Furthermore, we have no guarantee that those sites even after we bring those utilities to those sites that they would be constructed. So we'll be just have the cost. So we look forward to further conversations with the author and the supporters on this measure, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Lee: good morning, chris with the california state association of counties. we don't have a position on the bill yet, but our members have raised some concerns, specifically related to the provisions about minimum parcel sizes. it looks like there's some language in the bill that gives flexibility about that in terms of if there's a track record of being able to develop large parcels. but we want to carefully look at that requirement as it effects projects that might be proposed in the unincorporated area. we also have concerns with the infrastructure related language. as you know, counties often aren't full service cities in the unincorporated area and may not be the provider of infrastructure such as water and sewer. so you want to carefully look at those requirements as they might apply to unincorporated area. another concern that was raised with regard to those infrastructure provisions was the fact that perhaps in new growth areas, where infrastructure isn't built out yet. would this bill create a disincentive to allocate land in those developments for affordable housing and have an adverse and unintended impact of sort of packing of the sites into existing built out areas that might have overly burdened in terms of the amount of affordable housing that's located there. and honestly, i don't see that i'm wearing two different shoes the elephant in the room but thanks. we look forward to working with the author and the sponsors and looking into those questions with a little more detail. so thanks.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Peter Daniels: Yes, Peter Daniels from the Santa Clara County Office of Education.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Caitlin Jung: caitlin ashley jung on behalf of the san diego county office of ed in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barrett Snider: Hey, good morning, Barrett Snider representing the Santa Clara County Office of Education and the San Francisco Unified School District, sponsoring the bill. Frankly, this was just a simple math problem where you had to arbitrarily draw a line. If we can run a pilot program, you pick a scope of dollars and then what can you do taking into account average salaries of teachers, how many teachers, median home values, what can you do and how could that money be spread around? We wanted to provide a meaningful amount of money to do a little something so we could get some data and see how this goes. So it was frankly, a little arbitrary on where we drew the line. Whether you went four counties, five counties, six, was what could you do with the amount of money we thought we could potentially play with when we started with the bill. That's kind of how we got there.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Speck: Jennifer Speck on behalf of the California Association of Realtors here in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Keith Dunn: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Keith Dunn on behalf of the California Apartment Association here in support
[{'start': 25, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anya Lawler: Good morning Mr. Chair and Members. Anya Lawler on behalf of the Western Center on Law and Poverty and the California Rural Legal Assistance Foundation. We don't have a position on the bill at this time but we're working closely with the author and his staff and the other stakeholders. And are confident that we can turn this bill into something that will meaningfully help address the affordable housing crisis.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tracy Ryan: Good morning, Tracy Ryan with the Rural County Representatives of California and also on behalf of the urban counties. We appreciate the author and the author's staff working with us. We understand it's a work in progress and we look forward to continuing to work on the issues. However, there are a number of provisions in this bill that we find problematic in taking away local control on determining these developments. The first one is the creation of the new board. And the second is their creation of the board of appeals which takes the final determination away from the cities and counties, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicholas Donald: Hi, Nicholas Donald with the League of Cities. I echo the concerns of RCRC, that for we're working with the author further. Also in opposition.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Areva Martin: good afternoon members of the committee. my name is areva jonah martin and i'm a civil rights attorney. i'm also the founder and president of special needs network, a non-profit working on behalf of children with autism and developmental disabilities primarily minority and children in under-served and low income communities. i've had the pleasure of sitting on just about every task force and committee convened by this body on autism, on developmental disabilities dating back to when fabian nunes was the chair- was speaker of this body. i'm very frustrated today. i'm frustrated because the disparities that assembly member ridley-thomas just spoke about aren't new, in fact they're decades old. we've been talking about these disparities now for over two decades. and although efforts have been made nothing has been done to address the way that funding is made in the state and the way that it discriminates against children of color. in 2009... okay i'm sorry, this bill 1610 which i'm proud to co-sponsor along with public counsel, addresses those disparities. a budget provision in 2009 suspended critical social and recreational services as well as imposed a cap on respite services. what we know about the disparities is that white families typically keep their kids in out-of-home placement services. african american and latino families tend to keep their children at home. those respect services, those social and recreational services are key to keeping kids in home. those services that were suspended in 2009, the state promised that those suspensions would be temporary and those services would be restored. to date 2017 those services have not been restored adding to the disparities. we will never end these disparities unless those services are restored. this bill does that. i've been listening today and i know some of the questions are about the money, how do we do this? because we're talking about services that cost about $34 million. that was the price tag in 2009. as you all know, in 2016, through a bill...
[{'start': 52, 'end': 70, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 488, 'end': 500, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 629, 'end': 642, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Evelyn Abouhassan: Evelyn Abouhassan, with Disability Rights of California, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Cortez-Roth: melissa areva cortez-roth, on behalf of the center for autism and related disorders, in support. thank you, any witnesses in opposition?
[{'start': 0, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Daniel Savino: savino, association of regional center agencies, our position is technically opposed unless amended, and that was based off of the introduced text. so there have been a number of changes in the interim. the initial premise on the oppose unless amended was really into the complaint and appeal process being provided at the beginning of the meeting. those amendments having been accepted, and that specific issue obviously is resolved. however, the current structure of the bill, the association is going to be reviewing it, and providing further comment on it. there are a couple points that remain outstanding that we can speak on at this moment though. first, we do support the bill restoring the suspended services, lifting that cap on respite, getting kids back into camp and social rec. this is a very provable way of supporting diverse communities. however, we are concerned that the proposal should no longer require parental participation for behavioral services. behavioral services are designed to make an individual more successful across settings. and this is difficult to achieve without parent or caregiver participation. arca recognizes that many parents have other demands on their time. so we would encourage a change in the language to allow another caregiver as opposed to simply a parent as in the current statute to participate instead. and as i mentioned, we'll be evaluating our position on the bill in its current form as it passes out of the committee, if that's the committee's will, on the new provisions. and we'll remain in close contact with author's office and the committee.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tanya Samson: Thank you. Good afternoon Chairs and Members. My name is Tanya Samson, and I'm here today to speak on behalf of the Waiver Personal Care Services WPCS program providers state wide and the people like my daughter who depend on us to survive. My daughter, Brady, is 23 years old, she was just a few days old when she was diagnosed with meningitis. Because of her illness, my daughter developed cerebral palsy. She has never been able to speak or walk. My daughter's disability means that I have to take care of her personal needs as if she were an infant. I must bathe her, get her out of bed in the morning, she's tube fed, I must dress her and lift her to her wheelchair and other things. Because my daughter doesn't speak, I've had to learn her facial expressions so I can meet her needs. I was just 16 years old when my daughter became ill and I was unable to handle the details of her care. Thankfully, my mother stepped in to become her granddaughter's caregiver under the In-Home Supportive Services or IHSS program. My nephew who is also an IHSS worker also helps care for my daughter. As I'm matured I was able to resume responsibility for my daughter. So six years ago I qualified as a caregiver under the WPCS program. My mother, nephew and I worked side by side doing the same demanding work for my daughter. We all approached the work with the same love and care. But because I am part of the WPCS program instead of IHSS program, my mother and nephew are entitled to the work protections, and an employee representative while I am not. This is wrong and unfair. My mother and nephew have the right to file grievances while I do not. My mother and nephew have employer provided healthcare coverage while I'm dependent under the coverage of the Affordable Care Act, which is under threat. Those of us who are providing the same care as IHSS workers should receive the same benefits and protections. That is why I'm urging your support Assembly Bill 432, a proposal that seeks to establish parity between IHSS and WPCS providers. By supporting AB 432, you will extend existing IHSS labor protections and benefits to all WPCS providers like me who are performing the demanding work that enables people like my daughter to stay in their homes and out of institutions. On behalf of WPCS workers, we support AB 432 and we hope that you will, too. Thank you.
[{'start': 57, 'end': 69, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 254, 'end': 259, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Beverly Yu: good afternoon, madam chair and members, beverly melissa yu with udw afscme local 3930, in support. thank you.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Aslanian: Kevin Aslanian, Coalition of California Rights and Wealth Organiztaion, also sponsoring the bill. And this bill was first introduced by Ken Maddy in the 1991, who was a Republican bipartisan and we're still suffering under this crazy 100 hour rule that is anti family and anti work and we urge an aye vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 136, 'end': 145, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tiffany Whiten : madam chair and members, tiffany beverly whiten with the service employees international union in support, thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 47, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Barry Jardini: Thank you. Good afternoon, Madam Chair and Members of the Committee. My name is Barry Jardini with the California Disability Services Association. And we are proud to sponsor 1607, which will help facilitate competitive integrated employment opportunities and outcomes for individuals with developmental disabilities. I want to thank Assemblymember Frazier for authoring this important bill. California's Employment First Policy prioritizes opportunities for integrated competitive employment for individuals with developmental disabilities, regardless of the severity of disability. However, we see significant unemployment in our population. In fact, according to 2015 EDD data, only 13.6% of working-age Regional Center consumers reported any income. And a national core indicators study of over 8,700 consumers indicated that fewer than 5% of those surveyed had a job in an integrated competitive setting. So AB 1607 seeks to address two issues that currently exist for providing requisite pre-vocational job discovery and skills training necessary to help consumers achieve competitive integrated employment. First, in 2014, the Legislature passed SB 577, which was intended to provide community-based vocational development services to consumers as a pilot program to increase employment in integrated settings. CBVD services are services designed to promote job discovery, employment exploration, skills training, volunteer opportunities, potentially educational opportunities as well. And we thought it would be a great program. But unfortunately, SB 577 has not been implemented because it required federal financial participation. And as a pilot program, it couldn't be included in the existing HCBS services waiver. In order to implement the program, DDS would have to write a separate, standalone waiver with CMS to put this into action and get federal financial participation. That process would take years and is not likely to happen. So what we're looking for today is to remove the pilot language on this, which would enable this service, which would, again, do the pre-vocational services to give people the skills required to achieve competitive integrated employment. And 1607 would make that happen by removing the pilot language, and thereby enabling participation in the HCBS waiver. And I also want to highlight that the recent California Competitive Integrated Employment Blueprint, which was put together by the Department of Developmental Services, Department of Rehab, and the Department of Education, specifically lists SB 577 as one of the tools to achieve competitive integrated employment. And this bill would actually make that possible. The second aim of the bill is to provide a means of transition for consumers who are currently working in supported employment group or work activity programs to transition into more competitive integrated employment if they choose to do so. Currently, there are over 15,000 consumers working in these settings that are earning wages. They're compliant with current rules. But they're at risk under new federal regulations that go into effect March of 2019. And those settings may no longer be eligible for federal financial participation. So what we want to do is start the transition process for those consumers to be able to move into more competitive integrated employment. And so as a second provision, this bill would allow individuals who are seeking competitive integrated employment. To apply for or to get tailored day services in addition to their existing work programs in order to start the process for them to do the skills training. And the job exploration and the different things to help them find a job in the community that they feel is appropriate for them. We believe that AB 1607 will increase opportunities for individuals with developmental disabilities to engage in that job discovery and job readiness training. That's necessary to assist their transition into competitive integrated employment and support their employment success. We believe this will start to build the self-sufficiency of adults with developmental disabilities. Which includes increased earning capacity and a reduced dependence on government support. By providing the necessary services to transition to those employment settings. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today, and I'm happy to answer any questions you might have.
[{'start': 80, 'end': 93, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 349, 'end': 356, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Robert Giovati: thank you. yes, dr. choi and members, robert tiffany giovati with the state council on developmental disabilities, thanking assemblymember frazier for bringing this bill forward. the state council exists according to federal and state law to make sure that people with intellectual and developmental disabilities have the supports and services they need. and we have a headquarters here in sacramento as well as 12 regional offices that are constantly doing outreach to consumers and californians all across the state. and recently we thoroughly polled all the folks that we serve. and out of their top priorities, competitive integrated employment was number one. the council also hosts the employment first committee, which was established in statute. so the state council on developmental disabilities is extremely interested in this issue. i have a personal stake in it as well, i have an adult son with fragile x syndrome and that's kind of what brought me into this whole area of expertise in the first place. but, we find continually the people with intellectual and developmental disabilities are just like anyone else. they want to contribute to society, they want to have jobs, they want to be independent, they want to have as many choices as any of us would want to have. and to the extent that this bill advances that and we believe it does, we would respectfully ask for your support today. thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 24, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 38, 'end': 60, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 139, 'end': 146, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Daniel Savino: daniel robert savino, association of regional center agencies. we had previously had a support of amended position, the amendments we had requested would clarify that the taylor day service wouldn't have to be provided by the wap. those amends were taken, we've had some very productive conversations with the author and sponsors, very collaborative, positive outcomes. the amends are in so we are now in a straight support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Areva Martin: Hi, I'm Areva Martin, on behalf of Special Needs Network, in support.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Blade Oestreich: Hi, my name is Blade Oestreich, and I am a policy assistant for California Youth Connection. I'm also a former member of CYC and a former foster youth. AB 754 seeks to create a foster youth enrichment fund to allow access to extracurricular activities. This bill is important to me and CYC because it will help youth in the extracurricular activities and give them more access in more colleges in the future. This will also help to enhance healthy relationships. AB 574, if passed, will directly be responsible for helping these youth set up their future. From sports, to chess club, to debate club and FFA, all these activities will be somewhat responsible for their success in the future. When it comes to your future, it helps to have a strong resume for what you have accomplished and what you were a part of and extracurricular help can get you to these great things and teach you teamwork and how to win and lose. This will also teach self worth into a team setting. Foster youth typically do not have access to such activities because of money, circumstances, and transportation. Sometimes foster youth do not have parents or caregivers to teach these life lessons that the extracurricular provide. This is important to me, because my extracurricular activities have modeled me into what I am today. It is important to learn the meaning of togetherness, to learn the value of a team, and create a resume that colleges and careers try to look for when they're in their recruitment. For these reasons, I urge your aye vote on AB 754 by Assemblymember Acosta.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1556, 'end': 1562, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Vanessa Hernandez: hi, my name's vanessa daniel hernandez. i'm with california youth connection. cyc is sponsoring this bill because we believe it'll directly impact our brothers and sisters in care across the state in terms of their self-esteem, building community, and creating lifelong connections. i'm also a former foster youth. for me, growing up in care, i entered when i was four, school was the one constant in my life when things were falling apart at home. i could rely on the yellow school bus picking me up and taking me to school. so today, i urge your aye vote on this, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Mole: good afternoon, danielle, california alliance of child and family services in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jackie Wong: Good afternoon. Jackie Wong from the National Center for Youth Law, in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Simone Tureck: Simone Tureck, John Burton Advocates for Youth, support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Lapisco: yes, hi, my name is laura vanessa lapisco, and i'm a childcare provider in the santa barbara county. i am coming here to talk to you guys, the problems that we are having with processing our payments. i would like to see more, what is it called, transparency from the programs, because at this point we call them. but there's a program that where we can not ask about our payments or our checks. they tell us that is first come and first serve, meaning that the sooner we take in the sign in and out sheets, that's how we're going to be getting paid. well, sometimes i get to take the sign in and out sheet on the first, but i don't get paid until the end of the month. so if we call, they tell us we don't know, we have until the last of the month to pay you. so meaning, this is that we don't have a date to tell our, like our payment agencies. like if i have to make my car payment, i cannot tell them an exact day. so, it's very frustrating. i'm a single parent with eight kids. so, i depend on these payments. and without them telling me when they're going to be paying me, it's a very frustrating. as a matter of fact, three years ago my car got repossessed because of this, because i was providing care for a family for about six months and that program was not paying me, and this other program was not telling me when i was going to get paid. also i think it's time for us to start getting paid electronically. like if they were to deposit our checks on a monthly basis instead of mailing us the check. i think it'll save us a lot of time and money. so, this is why we're here today.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amber Hammond: hello, my name is amber laura hammond, and i'm a licensed family child care provider for 13 years in sacramento county. i have an in-home day care where i provide care for kids who are on the alternative payment program. i want to thank you for hearing our stories today, and let you know how the program works. as it is right now, they are only required to let the parents know that they are no longer eligible for the program, which puts us in a hard spot. we're the ones who provide care. the parents don't want to lose their services, so they don't tell us that they were removed from the program. thus, we're providing care and not getting paid. i believe a better policy would be to let us know as providers that the parent is no longer eligible for care, so that we can stop caring for children we're not going to be getting paid for. just recently, what happened to me last year in july, i received, i have been caring for a family in may, april, may, and part of june. i finally received a check in june for may's care, in july for april's care, and then come august when i finally went to the office to find out i was not going to be paid for care for june and july because the parent was no longer eligible for services. i was not notified, thus i provided care for free but really at a loss to me since i provided food and transportation, and other extra curricular activities that i provided for that child. this cost me thousands of dollars out of my own pocket, as i paid for assistance and other services to give to the child. when i first started doing child care i only watched children that were on subsidy program, so i thought it was a great program. those children really need the care, and the parents really were appreciative of it. unfortunately, over the years i've had to stop watching so many of those children because i'm not guaranteed payment. it's too much of a gamble for myself, and other providers that i know have stopped completely watching those children, unfortunately because we don't know when we're ever going to get paid. now, i only watch three children at a time with subsidies. i know that i'm not alone on this, and i just hope that you can listen to us today. and ab 603 will help correct these errors that cost thousands of dollars for us and will help those children as well. thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Visvanna Peralta: Hi, good afternoon. My name is Visvanna Peralta. I'm a family daycare provider for the past 15 years. The reason why I'm here, I live in San Diego. County. And I'm on the other side. The thing is that I've been receiving direct deposit at least six, seven years. And, for me, it's the best thing ever. Because I don't have to worry about the bill or the payment coming to the mail, getting lost. I know that with this three program that I work with, I know that if I turn in my attendance sheet by the first of each month, I will get my payment within 15 days or before that, and it's directly into my bank statement. And if I need to go and check it out who else it belongs to, I can go into the website. Three different programs, or two different programs are all connected within the same application. And I can see any information that I needed. So I really think that everybody should have the same ability to be able to have that and not be in fear of not getting their money after working for a whole month. Thank you.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Cardenas: ignacio amber cardenas with afscme local 3930. i'm just going to do a quick translation for her. she's in support of ab 603 that would give providers direct deposit, electronic time sheets, and provider's notification of change in status, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Young: Michael Young with the California Labor Federation also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicole Rouse: nicole ignacio rouse, managing attorney in our sacramento office of the children's law center of california. we provide direct legal representation for the children and youth in foster care in los angeles, placer, and sacramento counties. in total, that is over 33,000 children, or approximately half of california's foster youth population. we want to start by thanking assemblymember cooley for chairing the select committee on foster care, and also for authoring this important legislation. ab 1446 will provide critical court oversight when a child or youth is residing in a temporary or transitional placement not designed for long term care. like all children, a child in foster care needs and deserves a loving and stable family home. unfortunately, this is not always the reality for our clients. far too many still spend extended periods of time in placements designed to be temporary. or even worse, they are bounced from shelter to shelter to avoid violations of licensing regulations. this is especially common for children with intensive mental health needs, or our older foster youth population. one such recent example is our client, a 16-year-old female, last fall, who had spent five weeks in our shelter care facility locally. she was post-disposition in her court proceedings, and was in a foster home that gave a seven day notice. her social worker and the placement unit were looking for a permanent placement but that took over five weeks to locate for this young lady. she turned 17, during that five week period. and eventually ended up transitioning over to an ilp or an infinite living program. we urge your support for ab 1446, to promote stable placements for our youth in foster care, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 386, 'end': 392, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Simon Turret: simon nicole turret, john burton advocates for youth, we support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maggy Krell: good afternoon everybody, my name is krell and i'm a prosecutor at the attorney general's office. the attorney general's office is proud to support this bill. we see cases in all of your districts, all over california, it looks different in different communities, but all the victims share various vulnerability factors. the point of this bill is to remove, to counteract those vulnerability factors, so that students will be ready to not only stand up for themselves, but to stand up to their peers. what i've realized is that long after we've prosecuted these cases, long after the defendants are sentenced to lengthy prison terms, the victims still suffer. it's really, really, really difficult to unwind and restore all of the crushing damage that human traffickers do. i know that those of you on this committee, i've seen your leadership on this issue. i've seen other bills that you all have authored that recognized the damage caused by human trafficking. this is a proactive bill. we are giving these kids a chance from the get-go to get educated, to be able to protect themselves. we'd appreciate your aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ashlie Bryant: Thank you Madam Chair and members, my name is Ashlie Bryant and I'm the co-founder and President of 3Strands Global foundation. Our organization is actively engaged in the fight against human trafficking through our statewide prevention education program called Protect. The great abolitionist Frederick Douglass once said, it is easier to build strong children than repair broken men. This is the essence of AB 1227. The power and value of prevention, both on a human and economic scale is enormous. It is the most powerful way to prevent human trafficking in the first place. To date, we've educated more than 23,000 high school students in 13 California counties about human trafficking, with 95% of those educated saying they understand how to avoid victimization. In fact, just this morning during our training in a local high school, a young girl self-identified as a victim. AB 1227 will arm our teachers with the tools, techniques, and resources necessary to help students avoid victimization. Through this bill, we will create trauma-informed communities and reduce the impact of human trafficking in this great State of California. If you have any questions, I'm happy to answer them. Thank you members, and I respectfully ask for an aye vote.
[{'start': 46, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 294, 'end': 312, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tiffany Lavoy: Good morning, my name is Tiffany LaVoy. I'm the mother of five children, 15 to 22. I'm a long time educator, both in middle and high school as an algebra teacher, and a survivor of human trafficking. From the age of three, until in my early teens, my mom was an addict and an alcoholic. She trafficked me to pay her bills and buy her drugs. Growing up, I never missed school. School was my safe place. I was a straight A student. But my teachers were not knowledgeable about the warning signs of human trafficking. They didn't know how to identify me in the classroom. I didn't see myself as a victim, because the abuse that I endured was all I had ever known. If the Protect curriculum had been available to me growing up, it literally would have changed my life. As an educator, we spend more time with our students than anyone else in their life. Statistically, we know there are victims of human trafficking throughout California. Who better to train to identify the signs of human trafficking than an educator? More importantly, Protect offers the education community the tools and the resources we need to educate and empower our students to avoid becoming victims in the first place. Our homeless youth, our foster youth, all our youth, are vulnerable to traffickers. John Dewey said, if we teach today's students as we taught yesterday's, we rob them of tomorrow. Thank you, members, and I respectfully ask for an aye vote.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1275, 'end': 1285, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Seth Brambell: Members, Seth Brambell here on behalf of more than 325,000 of California educators, the members of the California Teacher's Association in strong support.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mickey Tishara: tishara, crawley childrens, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melanie Quavis: good afternoon, melanie on behalf of cast, the coalition to abolish slavery and trafficking also in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Janet Montgomery: janet simon montgomery casa, educator and in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Heistler: Jennifer Heistler, I'm a parent in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Heather Hoffman: heather, i'm the director of education with 3strands global foundation and i'm in support. if you could just see the impact this has on the youth in our classrooms.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeffrey Brown: jeffrey janet brown, filmmaker and member of the unodc at the un arm of anti-trafficking in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Sane: Sarah Sane, Outreach Manager for 3Strands Global in Support. Linda Water with the California Catholic Conference in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 61, 'end': 72, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Carrie Jacobstein: Carrie Jacobstein on behalf of 3Strands Global Foundation in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Trudy Bryant-Williams: trudy jeffrey bryant-williams, mother of a trafficked 12 year old last year, in total support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Elizabeth Espinoza: good afternoon, elizabeth trudy espinoza on behalf of the county welfare directors association. current position on the bill is oppose unless amended. i want to make that clear from the start. we've continued to work with the authors and sponsors. and understand that the amendments that are being committed to today will go a long way to addressing some of the critical concerns we have on the bill. particularly, as it relates to the expansion of the child welfare jurisdiction to include labor trafficking. based on the commitment of assemblymember bonta. we do look forward to continuing our work with the author and sponsors to address the additional issues that remain. thank you very much.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 552, 'end': 557, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Levi Deatherage: How are you guys? My name is Levi Deatherage. I'm a formerly homeless youth. I'm with the California Coalition for Youth. I currently sit on their Board of Directors. I'm here to tell you today that there is a large, very large, group of people out there who has no support. Because when you turn 18, homelessness does not end. And your problems do not end when you turn 18, either. And when I was personally 15 years old, my father left home, and I was put out on the streets because I had no other choice. I was lucky enough to be in a county where there are services available to me to have a shelter, at least. After my time in that shelter was completed and I was approaching my 18th birthday, there would have been nothing for me, had not a church family that I had known through just being close with them over time was the offer to take me in. Had they not, and had I not gotten that kindness, I would have ended up as another 18 year old, or 19 year old with nowhere to go and no support, because unfortunately, there is very, very little, and by little, I mean there is nothing out there for a 19 year old with no family, and no one to help him. And I am currently past all of that. I now have a job, I have my own house. And I sit on the Board of Directors to come back and fight for the kids who are in the same position that I am in, simply because I got the opportunities to reach those services. And I got the life skill coaching, and I got the aid that I needed most in my time of most need. And I want every child who is homeless in this state to have that same opportunity. Thank you, and I hope for your aye votes.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Darryl Evey: Thank you, my name is Darryl Evey with Family Assistance Program. And fortunately, I'm the guy that runs the program that he was in when he was young. And we were very fortunate with him because when he turned 18, we were able to find a home for him. A very nice family was willing to say "Sure, we have an extra bedroom. You can come live with us." Unfortunately, most of the youth we work with do not have that luxury. With many of the youth, we struggle to find them a place and they end up sleeping on a friend's couch. And as you probably know, I know when I was in college, I slept on a friend's couch for a while and it wasn't in the healthiest environment. And these kids that are in those circumstances frequently end up breaking the laws and they end up in jail. And they end up back on the streets, and they end up with their lives just in shatters. We need services for these kids. Some of them qualify for a variety of programs, Job Corps is a great program. I can go on for hours about all of the great programs that are out there available. But all of them have this very specific niches that they fit. So if you're in foster care, there's something for you. If you have a substance abuse problem, there's something for you. There's a variety of those type, but for the normal child who just had some bad luck with their parents, or they have a bad circumstance. There's nothing available for those kids. I'm really excited that someone's coming forward. And I appreciate Mr. Lackey solving this problem. Looking at, how do we fill that gap and help these kids that need that extra little help?
[{'start': 22, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1491, 'end': 1497, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jack Walker: jack elizabeth walker on behalf of catholic charities of california, united, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Emmel: Melissa Emmel, on behalf of the City of Santa Monica, here in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Wanner: linda with the california catholic conference, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Simone Tureck: Simone Tureck, from John Burton Advocates for Youth. We support the Committee amendments; there are just a couple of main concerns we have that we'd love to work with the authors office on, thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dawn McLaughlin: Dawn McLaughlin, on behalf of the California Association of Local Conservation Corps, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
George Kutnerian: thank you madam chair and members. george jack kutnerian here, on behalf of 6beds inc. which represents more than 2000 small home residential care facilities. for the elderly and adult residential facilities serving six or fewer persons. i'd like to start by saying that 6beds is very appreciative of assembly member patterson for understanding this issue. and carrying this bill on our behalf. we'd also like to acknowledge our principle co-author, senator weiner. as well as the committee staff for assisting us with this bill. the initial certification training program, known as the ictp, requires a completion of 80 hours of initial course work and passing of the administrator's test. ccl's interpretation of current law, requires a licensee to redo the ictp if the licensee applies for a new facility at a date is later than five years since the license he last completed in ictp. this requirement applies even to a licensing applicant who is a certified administrator, and has kept up with continuing education requirements, which consist of 40 hours of coursework, every two years. applying the requirement to redo the ictp to licencing applicants who are also certified administrators is unnecessarily redundant and costly. this bill would acknowledge that licencing applicants who are also certified administrators should not have to undertake an entirely new ictp. the bill will also address requirements pertaining the criminal background clearance transfer request. current law requires a criminal background clearance for an employee to be transferred to a new facility before the before the employee can work there. even if the new facility is operated by the same licensee, 80% of california's rcfvs are six bed facilities. many six bed licensees operate multiple facilities in the same geographic local. with such a license he has an employee who is cleared as associated to at least one of its facilities who is found to be working at another one of the same licensing facilities without being formally associated by ccl. current statute and regulations treat that situation identically as a situation where licensing allowed a new employee to work without any criminal background clearing whatsoever, resulting in a subtle penalties of up to $500 however these two situations are not identical. ab 1437 would stop unfairly penalizing licensees who are simply trying to ensure adequate staffing, using their already cleared employees in response to situations such as when employees may go on family or medical leave. or may abruptly quit their employment. ab 1437 will modernize statutes and regulations and better align them with the operational realities that rcfes, particularly smaller rcfes face on a regular basis. we also believe that ab 1437 will results in efficiencies that will reduce ccl's workload. we respectfully ask for your aye votes, thank you.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 317, 'end': 326, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 458, 'end': 464, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Darby Kernan: hi, darby george kernan with the california state association of counties and in addition for the urban counties of california in support. mr. ansell is on our joint task force with the league of california cities addressing homelessness. and we think this bill helps move in the direction of addressing this problem, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 143, 'end': 149, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kira Rosoff: Good afternoon, Kira Rosoff on behalf of the City of Glendale in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cierra Emory: hi, cierra with california coalition for youth, in support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Emmel: Good afternoon, Melissa Emmel on behalf of the City of Santa Monica, here in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Betsy Armstrong: good afternoon, armstrong with the county health executives representing local health departments, in strong support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Elizabeth Espinoza: elizabeth on behalf of the county welfare directors association in support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Avat: michael darby avat, on behalf of the board of supervisors in santa clara county in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Parra: Hello, Laura Parra on behalf of the City of Long Beach in support.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Areva Martin: Areva Martin on behalf of Special Needs Network, a non profit organization working on behalf of individuals with developmental disabilities in support.
[]
Linda Warner: Linda Warner with the California Catholic conference in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Otero: good afternoon, my name is chris. i work for an organization called ability first in southern california. we serve about 2000 individuals, children and adults, with developmental disabilities. we work with approximately eight regional centers in southern california. i want to use my two minutes to give a short example of the problems that exist, especially in disparity of services, and why the assemblymember's bill will help with that information. we have after school programs. they meet the requirements of socialization of code for socialization. now if you looked in the city of pasadena or the city of glendale, as a family you could go to the regional center and ask for that and they would authorize your services at pasadena. or glendale for that code. and we have individuals from nine different school districts, who are bused into pasadena because there's such a need for that service. however, if you lived in claremont, or long beach, or east los angeles, or englewood, and you needed to ask the regent center for those services. first of all, if you looked on your list of services from the time on your website, i pulled this yesterday from harbor regional center. first of all, it says it's a list of services from february of 2013. and i can't believe that they don't have any that have closed or opened since then. but you will not find socialization on there. we have a very large center in long beach, which has got exact same program that pasadena has. if a family goes there and they say, they want to go to bellevue first in long beach, they will be told that that is childcare, because they have chosen to code it as childcare. and they'd say, maybe that's sex for the photo, but the family get the services. but the reason that's detrimental is that when it's coded as childcare, if there's a parent in the home, the service can be denied, and often is. so, and that's these disparities throughout the regional centers. so, the assemblymembers bill, which would mean they could look at the services offered, have a link, see what ability first offers and then, be able to ask for that service specifically. most parents don't know how to do that.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : I tried to edit this for the two minutes
[]
Haik Bagdasarian: good morning, chairman rodriguez and honorable members of the committee. my name is haik, and i'm here on behalf of the armenian national committee of america western region, to urge your support of ab 1597. assemblyman nazarian's bill calling for divestment from the turkish government owned and controlled investment vehicles and the rationale is simple, the assemblyman stated it. our state has a clear record regarding the armenian genocide. and the government of turkey spends considerable amounts every year on efforts to oppose our recognition and education, educating our children regarding the genocide. so in effect, we're indirectly subsidizing the denial of the genocide by investing in the government of turkey. it's a very narrowly tailored bill, assemblyman nazarian has gone to great lengths to make sure that our public employees, and retirees, and teachers would not be negatively impacted. it would only impact government owned bonds and state owned. it's a finite, small list of investments, and towards that end, it would just call for no new investment. so, as articulated, it would not call for any sort of immediate divestment, which could have any adverse impact. so i respect the pension funds and some of the other organizations, physicians and trying to invest responsibly and wisely, but on the other hand, i think it's your role, as our representatives, to reflect and make sure that our investments are consistent with our values as californians. so this in effect would be putting our money where our mouth is, and supporting the votes that you all cast on monday in recognition of the armenian genocide. the other thing that i'd just like to point out is that the government of turkey, unfortunately, is no longer a safe investment. so i'm guessing the calpers and strs themselves are actually scrutinizing the investments. and just a few days ago, the democracy of turkey, which had already been on the down turn, was eroded considerably through the passage of a referendum. so that's something else that i urge you to be cognizant of and i urge your support on behalf of the near 1 million armenian-americans in the state. thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 32, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 84, 'end': 88, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 220, 'end': 228, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 773, 'end': 781, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Baker: Good morning, Jennifer Baker with the California Teachers Association. It's my unfortunate role to have to testify in opposition to this measure and we absolutely believe it's important that all governments and people's recognize the horrible atrocities that happen with the Armenian genocide. So we do stand in solidarity as far as wanting to make sure that, that message is communicated. Unfortunately, this measure can have lasting impacts on the CalSTRS fund, which is not fully funded. It took us 10 years to get a full funding mechanism, AB 1469, through the legislature. And we're still in the process of trying to make sure that our members' retirement funds are solid and secure. Anything that might potentially harm the ability for CalSTRS and CalPERS to make sure that they have the right opportunities, to make sure that they can keep our members' retirement funds secure is important. We also do want to note that I have been trying to work with the author's office to see if we can get the bill admitted into an engagement bill, which we would very much love to just support. So if there were an opportunity to still try to accomplish the goal through a different mechanism, we would be absolutely happy to do that. The dilemma, when you move towards divestment, is that tends to be a permanent factor. The Legislature has moved forward with divestment in Sudan, for example. It's no longer one country, but yet, there's still prohibitions from CalSTRS and CalPERS' investing. So this can have long repercussions, so we would encourage engagement as opposed to divestment because this way, our pension systems will have long term capabilities of trying to engage in systemic change while also making sure that they have the ability to ensure that our members' retirement funds are solid.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dylan Gibbons: chair, members of the committee, gibbons, with the california special districts association. similar to my comments earlier, our opposition is directly related to the calpers fund and csda's position that divestment as an investment strategy is a losing strategy, and one that will ultimately result in greater costs on employees and employers had the opportunity to talk with the author staff and also encourage the staff to and the office to look at ways to advocate without divesting. so, with that, we're opposed to the bill.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dean Hutchings: dean with lead the california cities, and i apologize for going slightly out of order, we are actually in a sort of position. this is unchartered territory for us, my board is expected tomorrow to adopt an official oppose position so it's why i could not formally engage but we do align our comments with those of csda, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Austin Webster: Austin Webster, on behalf of the Association of California Community Colleges. We'll align our comments with our colleague from CTA, and unfortunately, we're in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jocelyn Martinez-Wade: jocelyn jonah martinez-wade with the california state teachers' retirement system, and aligning with the previous comments, also in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christine Bell: Good morning Mr. Chair. Members of the Committee. Christine Bell on behalf of the California Professional Firefighters. Unfortunately, we're here to oppose the bill. I think the information that Mr. Allen is seeking to publicize on member statements is so easily accessible to my members. Probably just qualified by how many times my members call me about the same information that you're discussing. So I appreciate the intent of the author, I just think it's extra mandatory reporting that is already very available, out to our members. But I also don't want to miss the opportunity to agree with Mr. Allen on the fact that it is a travesty that a local government can choose to exercise its powers jointly with other local governments including the power to hire and fire and provide pension benefits for their employees. And then in their contract allow themselves to absolve that liability and walk away. And betray all of the employees that worked for that joint powers agency. That's a good focus, let's work on that together. But unfortunately, we're opposed to this bill.
[{'start': 50, 'end': 64, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 199, 'end': 204, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 603, 'end': 608, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jocelyn Martinez-Wade: martinez-wade with the california state teachers retirement system. and similar to the previous testimony, this bill would duplicate a current report that we already provide that also provides additional contextual information on investments and our funding status. it goes to a much broader audience than what the bill requires, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Baker: jennifer jocelyn baker with the california teacher's association for reasons previously stated, we're in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alistair Webster: Alistair Webster on behalf of the Faculty Association of California Community Colleges. I'll align my comments with some of the previous speakers that we're also in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Steve Henderson: steve jennifer henderson, representing the california school employees' association, also in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joshua Golca: Joshua Golca with the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tristan Brown: Thank you Mr. Chairman and members, Tristan Brown with the California Federation of Teachers, also in opposition.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dave Walwrath: Dave Walwrath with California Retired Teachers Association also in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Caitlin Vega: Caitlin Vega for the California Labor Federation also opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christy Bouma: mr. chairman and members, christy steve bouma. on behalf of the california professional fire fighters, pleased to be sponsors of this measure. this is just a reasonable i think solution to the practice by some employers to place firefighters and others in temporarily upgraded or out of class positions. it definitely puts a limit on them, very similar to what exists for retired annuitants. this only applies to vacant positions so if someone's gone on leave, injury leave or otherwise. they have the full freedom to appoint for a more unlimited duration. but we think it's a reasonable measure so that our members have the opportunity to actually promote into these elevated positions. we ask for your support, mr. o'donnell.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 717, 'end': 726, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Randy Perry: mr. chair and members, randy christy perry with aaron read and associates on behalf of porac and california association of highway patrol, in support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 48, 'end': 58, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Joshua Golka: mr. chair and members, joshua randy golka with the american federation of state, county and municipal employees in support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Scott Blackledge: This is Scott Blackledge from CalPERS. The CalPERS Board of Administration voted to sponsor this legislation in order to provide the system with the ability to properly track retired members' service for CalPERS employers. There are several benefits to doing this, as noted by Assembly member Cooley, and we would simply ask for your support.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 293, 'end': 299, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dan Bienvenue: bienvenue, i'm the managing investment director over at calpers and the investment officer responsible for the securities and lending program.
[]
Tom Dominguez: Good morning, I'm Tom Dominguez. I'm President of the Association of Orange County Deputy Sheriffs. We're also a member of the Fraternal Order of Police, which is the second largest law enforcement Association in the State of California. Today on behalf of my Association and close to the 3,000 members that I represent, we are proud sponsors of AB 530. Law enforcement and my Association in particular for too long have seen labor disputes ranging from unfair labor practices, breaches of contracts, or bad faith bargaining sent to Superior Court. This is highly problematic for a couple of reasons. First, it can be too costly. A Superior Court filing for labor dispute can cost a peace officer thousands of dollars. It is not rare for these cases to incur cost upwards of $40,000 while a similar filing in PELRB would generally be well under $5,000. Most law enforcement associations in the state are relatively small with limited financial resources. When one of these Peace Officers Association are deciding whether to take contract dispute to court. The mere cost of this must be considered, and many times these claims were not taken to court solely because of the cost. This is creating a deterrent. By doing so, this gives local government and management an unfair advantage. Other public employee unions don't have this burden, because they are under the jurisdiction of PELRB, which in most cases is not cost prohibitive. Secondly, PELRB has the knowledge and expertise over unfair labor claims, because these are the only types of cases that they hear. In contrast in superior courts cover a multitude of subject matters including civil and criminal litigation.  This makes it more difficult for the courts to make consistent findings, on issues, such as bad faith bargaining. These cases are complex and unique to the labor management relationship. AB 530 will allow peace officers associations to draw from the expertise of PELRB, and give the smaller police Peace Officers Unions the ability to defend themselves against unfair labor practices, contract disputes, and bad faith bargaining, by removing the barrier of the excessive cost occurred by courts. Based on these reasons, we respectfully ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : The bill is out, but we'll keep it on call.
[]
Steve Henderson: Mister Chairman, Steve Henderson representing the California School Employees Association. We are the sponsors of the bill. We believe AB 670 provides a level of protections and benefits to employees who currently don't have them. Part time playground employees do not do work that is tremendously different from other classified employees, but because they are excluded in the ed code they do not get the same benefits and the same rights. We think AB 670 corrects this, and we would urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Allison: Mister Chair and members, Brian Allison, on behalf of the American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees, also in strong support. Thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christian Brown: Mister Chair and Members, Christian Brown with California Federation of Teachers also in strong support.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Cass: Michelle Cass with the Service Employees International Union also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Baker: good morning, jennifer joshua baker, with the california teachers association, extremely appreciative of the leadership and foresight that assemblymember kalra has. his dedication to standing in solidarity with the standing rocks sioux tribe as well as his solidarity with protecting the pensions of our current and future educators and others in public service. we appreciate the direction that he's taken and think that it's an extremely effective tool to utilize the strength of our pension systems while keeping the fiduciary obligations that those systems have in line with some of the specific social directions that the legislature might seek to achieve. calstrs has actually been engaging with energy transfer partners for for over a year. we've had multiple conversations since last year with calstrs on this very issue, as well as a number of other issues that we're working with calstrs to get engaged with companies on it. and we appreciate the direction and stand in solidarity and urge your support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 154, 'end': 159, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ed Folia: yeah. ed jennifer folia, retired teacher of 24 years, and taught middle school. and really appreciate the work that has been done to try to i'll do things here in california and we strongly support this bill because it continues to have stability, but we have involvement in important issues that affect our justice system, thank you.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert Rodriguez: good morning. i'm robert ed rodriguez, and i'm a special education teacher, i live in the city of riverside, and i'm with the california teacher's association. and i want to thank assemblymember kalra for all of your work on this bill. and i want to encourage the committee members to vote yes, thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 195, 'end': 200, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Anderson: john robert anderson, teacher of 19 years, and tracy. i'm on spring break, by the way. but i teach government, so it's great to be with you all on spring break doing government. so we deeply appreciate the engagement, for assembly member kalra that he's taking, i deeply appreciate that amendment and support it, thank you very much.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 47, 'end': 52, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 238, 'end': 243, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Laura Shirley: I'm Laura Shirley, I'm a local Sacramento city teacher, I teach middle school math at Rosa Parks. About 3 miles away, and I'm here to strongly support Senator Caldera and Representative Caldera. Thank you for helping us out and saving our retirement.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 86, 'end': 96, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 159, 'end': 166, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 186, 'end': 193, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Colleen Bredenschmidt: Colleen Bredenschmidt, kindergarten teacher in Thousand Oaks, California and Chair of the Member Rights, Member Benefits and Retirement Committee for the National Education Association. Thank you so much for your amendment and helping us all work together, and this is a win-win. I am in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Denise Bradford: Good morning, Denise Bradford. I'm a kindergarten teacher in Mission Viejo, California. I'm also the chair of the California Teachers Association Retirement Committee, and I'm here in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Austin Webster: good morning. webster on behalf of the faculty association of california community colleges. we'd like to thank assemblymember kalra for working with us to make amendments and ensure that there's stability within the retirement fund. we urge an aye vote.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 127, 'end': 132, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Melvin Harshaw: Good morning. My name is Melvin Harshaw. I'm with the National Association of Social Workers, and we support this bill.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Hao: good morning. brian john hao with california federation of teachers. we applaud the author for his passion and commitment, and we're in strong support. thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christy Ballmer: Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee, Christy Ballmer on behalf of the California Professional Firefighters. We had initially expressed concerns to the author's office. Did not take an official oppose position. But we are delighted at the changes and we urge your support.
[{'start': 43, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dave Walwrath: walwrath, representing california retired teachers association echoing the comments. we appreciate the changes and your willingness to engage. we are in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dylan Givens: chair, members of the committee, dylan brian givens with the california special districts association in opposition. i want to start with saying thank you to the assemblyman. the amendments taken on this bill go a long way. there's still a provision of the bill on page three that says the most immediate action we should take is to divest from the dakota access pipeline. while it is in the facts and the findings of the bill, we do take issue with that. as assembly member cooper had already pointed out in his earlier testimony, the fund is, the calpers fund is currently sitting at 67% funded. any additional cost burdens that are put ont the retirement fund need to be made up by employers and employees. special districts, we have over 2,000 special districts in the state, many of which are calpers members, our rates are scheduled to go up for the next eight years through 2025. we can anticipate that we'll see rate increases again and again after that but with regards to any bill related to divestment, we're going to be opposed to those bills.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 475, 'end': 481, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Level: level on behalf of the association for los angeles deputy sheriffs, the association of deputy district attorneys, the los angeles county professional peace officers association, la police protective league and riverside sheriffs association, all in support.
[]
Randy Perry: mr. chairman and members, perry with aaron read and associates on behalf of porac and the california association of highway patrol. we're cosponsors of the bill.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 37, 'end': 47, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Lovell: john dylan lovell, on behalf of the association for los angeles deputy sheriffs, the association of deputy district attorneys, the california association of code enforcement officers, california college and university police chiefs' association, california narcotic officer, los angeles county professional peace officers association, la police protective league and the riverside sheriff's association. also co-sponsors of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Adam Acosta: good morning mr. chairman and committee members. adam john acosta with afscme council 36. we represent close to 10,000 employees in la county. we stand behind this bill as well.
[{'start': 49, 'end': 65, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Coby Pizzotti: mr. chair and members, coby adam pizzotti with the california association of psychiatric technicians, also in strong support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Castro: michelle coby castro with the service employees international union. we are the sponsors of the bill. this bill only affects services that are currently or are customarily done by public employees so it is actually very limited in its scope. the bill is consistent with other laws affecting school districts, community colleges, libraries in the state of california. what's important in this bill is that the government must stand in the best interest of the tax payer and in doing so. when contracting out, due diligence is required, because every misspent tax dollar is a dollar taken away from tax payers. a dollar away from services that the public demands and deserves. we're not interested in necessarily prohibiting outsourcing, we just want to make sure when it's done, it's done with diligence and money is not wasted. as assemblymember jones-sawyer said we are interested in working with the opposition. however, not a single one of the opposition has reached out to us, contacted us, sent their language, said what their specific issues are, so it's very difficult to work with the opposition when we don't even know what specifically their concerns are. again there is nothing radical in this bill, it's not a departure from current law. there are a few additional things in here based on our experience. but we think it's a very fair bill and protects the tax payers, we ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 846, 'end': 858, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Joshua Golca: good morning, mr chair and members, golca with the american federation of state, county, municipal employees, co-sponsors of the bill. for all the reasons previously stated, we're in support.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Lovell: john michelle lovell, los angeles county professional peace officers association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Young: Michael Young with the California Labor Federation also here in support
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dean Hutchings: good morning, chair members. dean, with the league of california cities. first off, i want to be clear that this was a gut and amend measure. and i did reach out to the author's office the second i saw the language hit and was attempting to coordinate with the sponsors. i did not reach out to the sponsors directly, but i did reach out the author's office and attempt to set a meeting before this hearing. so i want to just put that on the record. ab 1250 eliminates local agency hiring discretion by limiting our local agencies' ability to utilize a contract for the sole purposes of savings through salaries and benefits. this creates a significant hurdle as agencies are now at a near breaking point in their unfunded accrued liability for normal pension and opec costs. although touched on upon in the analysis, i would like to direct the committee's attention to your page 12, lines 1 through 10, where it states that a measure that would require a state to perform a full economic impact analysis for environmental impact analysis, and a full annual audit, a performance audit for contracts $100,000 or more. these are significantly costly and time consuming requirements that would be placed upon a local government. moreover, this measure would require that a city or county create a fully searchable database that must be posted on our websites. so the names, job titles, salaries of each non-city employee, and their subcontractors, which includes the service contract, the name of the agency, the department, so pretty significant information that we're going to be having to post. non-city employees' personal information on our websites. so apart from the inherent cost drivers with this provision, our members do have privacy concerns about posting full names, job titles, and salaries for non-city employees. ab 1250 would also require that a city and a county staff provide prescriptive employee orientations for non-city employees. additional orientations and non-city employees create significant cost and logistical concerns. given that the language is so broad does not adequately define a contract for services. cities that are built around the lakewood plan who would identify as contract cities would be forced to comply with these provisions with virtually every contract they enter into. cities such as ontario and pomona, long beach, avalon, signal hill, eastvale. these are all cities that are contract cities and by nature have that structure as their city was developed. the workload, privacy concerns, costs and litigation created by this measure places an overwhelmingly and significant burden on local agencies, and for those reasons we oppose.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dorothy Jones: jones with the california state association of counties and we submitted a letter on april, 12th, unfortunately that was not captured in the analysis provided for the committee today. i will echo the comments from my colleague from the league of california cities, and we appreciate the opportunity to continue to work on this bill, especially in light of the most onerous requirements, which would be the internet database, as my colleague stated, as well as the mandatory orientation provided for contractors, which we believe is already covered largely in the contracts that we enter into, again, we appreciate the intent to save tax dollars and preserve resources, but ultimately we believe that that is also in the best interest of the local agency, and that's the purpose of their contracting out. so for those reasons, we remain respectfully opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Reuben Valencia: Council Member, Reuben Valencia, from Ontario, and we oppose as well.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marty Fisher: fisher on behalf of the california chamber of commerce, and i apologize for the late opposition and our letter was not captured in the list of laid out position, although i hope that you all received our letter. it was delivered on monday, so if you don't have it, we will recirculate it for your information, but we're opposed. we also agree that our tax dollars should be spent wisely, but we think that the provisions of this bill practically preclude contracting out for these services. because the requirements are so onerous and so resource intensive, they'll require a lot of time to meet those requirements. we're also concerned about the privacy aspects of the bill that require the posting of personal and company confidential information onto a publicly searchable database. we're concerned that our businesses won't have the opportunity to provide these services to cities and counties for cost saving measures. or just for the quality of the services that cities and counties can rely on. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Steve Manils: My name is Steve Manils, city councilman for the City of Lake Elsmere as well as on the Board of Directors for the California League of Cities Also want to go ahead and mention the California League of Cities has collected at least 50 letters of opposition from cities throughout California. And this would be devastating for our city in particular, so we oppose for those reasons, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Davis: i'm councilman paul john davis from the city of riverside. even though we're a charter city, i represent the riverside county division of the league of california cities, i am the president. we stand with our colleagues of the contracting cities and oppose this for the obvious reasons that many of my colleagues sitting here have opposed. it's important that we keep local control, it's also important that we don't have onerous bills that makes it more difficult to do business in the areas in which we do, as the city of riverside does work with all of our colleagues who are general law cities. so we urge you to oppose this bill, and come back with something more favorable that would work with the california league of cities and the counties. so that we can come up with some thing much better. thank you for your time.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeffery Giva: Jeffery Giva, Council Member, City of Moreno Valley, representing the Riverside County League of Cities, and we oppose this. Alex Gibbs, here on behalf of the City of Palo Alto, and the City of Walnut Creek, in opposition, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 125, 'end': 135, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lou Lamont: I'm Lou Lamont, I'm the mayor of the City of Malibu, and also the President of California Contract Cities. Our name alone will tell you why we oppose this. Our city couldn't exist without contracts. We urge you to oppose this, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marcel Rodarte: good morning, marcel paul rodarte, i'm the executive director for california contract cities association. we represent 73 cities and over seven and a half million residents in southern california predominately, and our association unanimously opposes this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jorge Morales: Jorge Morales, Council Member of the City of South Gate. I'm also the Legislative Chair of California Contract Cities and on the executive board of League of California Cities, and I'm here opposed to this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anna Grandys: Anna Grandys, City of Indian Wells, in respectful opposition for the reasons stated, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kara Russ: kara on behalf of the city of murietta in opposition to the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anthony Gonsalves: mr chairman and members of the committee, anthony marcel gonsalves. incidentally, my father in the 60s carried the legislation, joe gonsalves, for contracting out for services. we are opposed, group of companies, the cities of bellflower, camille, dunbar, eastville, glendora, industry, indian wells. larupa valley, laguna hills, lakewood, norwalk, rancho cordova, rancho cucamonga, santa fe springs, and torrence. and we respectfully, and, i'm sorry, the city of elk row, respectfully request your no vote.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 66, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 128, 'end': 141, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Kaufman: good morning, my name is michael. i work for the county of los angeles's internal services department. my position is similar to a messenger, such as a postal employee, servicing more than 1,000 offices within the county. in addition, i interact with other departments, and cities within the county, that the county does business with. part of my job is transporting items, such as sensitive personnel documents, court documents, other legal documents. as well as currency, coins, bus tokens, department of public and social services information, and virtually anything that moves from department to department or agency to agency, whether within the county or out, it passes through our hands. in addition to that, i'm required to enter and leave secure locations, including county jails, and other high security areas. los angeles county has safeguards and trainings in place for public employees such as myself. we attend monthly safety meetings, we have sexual harassment trainings. we are trained in the laws and rules regarding hipaa regulations, to ensure that any medical documents as well are sacred. and protected from others as well as even ourselves knowing what to do with them. we do represent a well trained and qualified workforce. and with this, we like to have consistent service to the public. sometimes our department services are outsourced to private companies. they may promise to save money, but it's not always clear the risks to the taxpayers are accounted for. for example, we've had outside contractors use our facilities and our vehicles and our equipment, but it's not clear that they have the same trainings or standards. when these companies bid on doing our work, the question that we ask is, are the tax payers still paying for the wear and tear on the equipment? that i cannot possibly answer for you, but it's a consideration. another example, we had a contractor formerly, a former contractor, thank goodness, that provided fraudulent time cards. and what they claimed to the county was that they were using more staff than they actually were and that they were paying them in accordance with county regulations. where in fact, they were not paying them the living wage that was required. there should be transparency on how public dollars are spent. accountability is required if the public is misled on the savings. it can be disastrous to us all. it is the constituents that lose out on the quality of services if oversight is lacking. i am here supporting ab 1250 because the legislation would ensure that when services are outsourced, tax dollars are accounted for. and standards of service are in place. it simply says cities and counties must do the same due diligence that state agencies do when opting to outsource public services. ab 1250 is about protecting tax payers. and ensuring they can count on the crucial services our local governments provide. thank you for your support in the legislation, thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joe Colombo: thank you mr. chair. my name's joe anthony colombo. i'm the chapter chair person of a management chapter in the city of hawaii gardens, county of los angeles. i was involved in an arbitration case which was binding arbitration and the city had pretty much mounted a frivolous lawsuit and appeal to superior court. though the judge did affirm the case, the city did try to get the award vacated, which they failed. so subsequently, we got stuck with all the attorney fees because there was no provision for recouping those fees. not only did it hurt in that way, but it also prevented us from trying to obtain the actual award as granted by the arbitrator, because they tried to nickel and dime us all the way to the very end. something that should have awarded as high as 15 or 16%, they ended up settling for 3%, again, for fear that we 're going to rack up a ton of legal expenses which we don't have the ability to do that and cities do because they have deep pockets, so they can just keep on going. thank you.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Adam Acosta: Just Adam Acosta with ... 86 asks your support for the bill. This bill simply provides the opportunity for the court to award attorney fees to the prevailing party as mentioned by Assemblyman Santiago. So I request your support. Thank you.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 192, 'end': 200, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Joshua Golka: mr. chair and members, golka with the american federation of state, county and municipal employees, also in support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Doug Chiappetta: thank you. mr. chair, committee members, chiappetta on behalf of the union of american physicians and dentists with afscme, in strong support. thank you.
[]
James Sweeney: yes. james jonah sweeney, black american political association of, california, legislative director. the five b's, be brief brother, be brief. she is outstanding. she has razor sharp intellect. she has a natural propensity to deal with assessment. she has 20 plus years or to be exact 23. she also has played a prominent role in the community. especially with regard to elk grove, with regard to ... and with regard to working with competency emits diversity, the five b's.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Seyha: mr. chairman and members, seyha on behalf of the computing technology industry association.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Liam Crawford: members of the committee, my name is liam. i represent the it alliance for public sector, we are non-profit trade association that represents about 90 it vendors all of which do business with the state of california. we very strongly support the nomination and confirmation of amy. thus far it's been a pleasure to work with her. she's provided and increased amount of transparency to the vendor community. we strongly support her efforts to increase cyber security posture within the state, and we wholeheartedly support her nomination.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 277, 'end': 280, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lauren Greenwood: hi, lauren james greenwood with the california cable and telecommunications association. on behalf of carolyn mcintyre as well, in strong support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 102, 'end': 118, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark Faucette: good afternoon, mr. chair. my name is mark lauren faucette and i am chair of the los angeles regional reentry partnership, larrp. and also on faculty at amity foundations teaching and therapeutic community located in san diego. excuse me. and los angeles, in the chair's district. today i, along with larp, chair pastor tory vaughn, fellow with the just leadership usa. offer our strong support for the confirmation of jay virbel. mr. virbel's leadership and communication has been commendable. as we in the faith and community-based efforts throughout california face many developments. with california's strong criminal justice reforms. this past year mr. virbel participated in a state wide re entry conference. and communicated a strong vision of developing community based re-entry projects throughout the state. the citizens of california are faced with many issues, and how we weave our formerly incarcerated into the fabric of our communities, with families, children, employment, and housing is in need of a vision. as mr. virbel has demonstrated, thank you.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 320, 'end': 331, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 419, 'end': 429, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 435, 'end': 441, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 658, 'end': 664, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1032, 'end': 1038, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Shawn Jenkins: Good afternoon, Shawn Jenkins, Senior Vice President for WestCare California. We're here in strong support of Mr. Virbel's confirmation. We have several contracts and have been contracting for rehabilitative services with the Department for over 20 plus years. And we found Mr. Virbel's leadership to be both open, transparent. He listens to the issues. He is also fair and he holds the contractors accountable. He has no qualms in asking us for extra things or wants you to do something that's above and beyond. He wants a great program. And wants good services to the community. And so we're in strong support of his confirmation.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 114, 'end': 120, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 278, 'end': 284, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Eric Banks: there are a few people who i'd like to recognize. i am pleased to have my colleagues from the board here. our board chair, mark gregerson, priscilla winslow,  who's also on the board. my former colleague and friend gene hugemon is here with me today. [he's a former friend?] no he's my friend, former colleague, so. [i thought you said former friend.] now just an official lunch partner from time to time, and my legal advisor scott miller is here with me, he came up this morning from los angeles. so mr. chair and senators thank you for your time today. my name is eric mark banks, i'm a member of the public employment relations board, i am so sorry. my name is eric mark banks and i'm a member of the public employment relations board. i was first appointed by the governor in 2013, and i am just as honored now as i was the first time he appointed me. my goal for the next term is to continue to apply the statutes that you've entrusted us with in the most fair and impartial manner possible. and i want to continue to expeditiously decide decisions as best i possibly can without risking the quality of them. and with that i'm happy to be here today, and take any questions you may have.
[{'start': 123, 'end': 137, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 139, 'end': 156, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 214, 'end': 226, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 426, 'end': 438, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 566, 'end': 581, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 664, 'end': 679, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Terry Brennan: Mr. Pro Tem Senators, Terry Brennan, on behalf of SEIU California, in support of Mr. Banks' reappointment. His record speaks for itself on the PERB Board And I would say at the risk of further disturbing your caucus, he's been a personal friend of mine, a colleague, and Boss at times, for the last 20 years. [No motion now, no motion now.] Yeah, so, we're proud to stand in strong support of Mr. Banks, thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 85, 'end': 90, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 397, 'end': 402, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alice Kessler: thank you, good afternoon. alice eric kessler, i'm here on behalf of two organizations in support of mr. banks, the california charter schools association, and equality california. i would just say on behalf of equality california that mr. banks has been a leader in the lgbt community, and we are under represented in a state government appointments so we, you know really, this is exactly the type of person that we would like to see continue in service, so we urge your support.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 105, 'end': 110, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 240, 'end': 245, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kristi Baum: mr. chairman, members of the committee baum on behalf of the california professional firefighters. proud to be here in strong support of mr. bank's confirmation. he's done some excellent work. on the perb board, and we'd like to see that continue, so we urge your support.
[{'start': 141, 'end': 145, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Young: Michael Young with the California Labor Federation, also just want to echo our strong support for Mr. Eric Banks, he's done great work on the Board, and we hope to continue to work with him to make that a more effective Board for our members, thank you. Thank you, next witness in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 102, 'end': 112, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Seth Bramble : mr. chair, seth alice bramble here on behalf of the california teacher's association. there's been really strong balance on perb. we urge you to confirm. mr. banks has done great work, thanks.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 29, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 158, 'end': 163, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Chris Schneider: good afternoon my name is schneider i'm with the operating engineers local three, the area i represent is lake mendocino and sonoma counties. i'm here speaking in support and i come at this from a couple of different levels. i represent workers that had built the geysers. we have two power plants that could potentially be built worth about $700 million to billion that are going to create jobs for the industry, and for the area. and every single day we have members up there working in cranes. the geysers is such a wonderful resource. anybody ever get a chance get up there but cranes serving road maintenance with all the slides we have members up there and my construction side working up there and a lot of those people are in lake county. so on that side of things to me this is a jobs issue. and on another level we also represent most of lake county employees associations. we represent a lot of local police and fire and as you've heard that the calpine is one of the largest taxpayer, is the largest taxpayer in sonoma county. lake county is extremely close to my heart. two years ago, we had the devastating jericho fires and lake fires. and me and my staff were up there with calgary recycle and literally, this is one of the poorest counties, if not the poorest county in the state. i was able to be on hand for three months straight almost every single day, we watched 2,000 structures burn to the ground. we've had dozens of our members lose their homes, literally dozens and dozens and dozens, this county has almost no industry, whatsoever. they have a little bit of tourism but the geyser is the main game in town and local government which we represent a lot of these folks. going through that process, i made a commitment to the supervisors and i made a commitments to the members. we brought in over a hundred new members in lake county to help do all the hazmat, the demolition, and the rebuilding of lake county. and the committment i made is, i'm going to do everything i can. through our union and because of our members to make sure that there is some kind of economic development there. the county is still in very, very, very, very dire need of jobs, jobs, jobs. and at the end of the day when i see the members of the [inaudible] houses and i go up there and it's still black, two years later, i mean they just, they lost everything, so at the end of the day that's what we do in labors, we fight for working people. we fight to try to bring up the middle class and this is an opportunity to kind of push that forward especially in a very, very underserved region in the state with little resources and not a lot of opportunities, so for me this is an opportunity bill, not only for the members in my union but all of the people that i consider my county. so, i urge you to support this and to keep it in mind just what a really poor and underserved area that this bill is going to help, so, thank you very much. thank you, are there others to lend their support to this bill?
[{'start': 26, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kelly Boyd: Kelly Boyd on behalf of the California Low Carbon and Fuel Energy Coalition in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julia Kingsley: (dennis salvian on behalf of the [unknown] alliance, we support.) julia jonah kingsley representing the california compost coalition and cirque energy, in support.
[{'start': 1, 'end': 15, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 66, 'end': 86, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rhonda Mills: chairman, mills with the geothermal energy association, we strongly support the bill for its great reliability and cost effectiveness results that it will give us.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Russell Perdock: Russell Perdock, Mayor of Clearlake, and lifetime Lake County residence, strongly in support of this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joe Palla: palla, vice mayor of city of cloverdale, county of sonoma, strongly support the bill, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jody Hicks: jody julia hicks on behalf of cal pine, the nation's largest geothermal power producer in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 30, 'end': 38, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Josh Norquist: norquist with ormat technologies, we are a geothermal operator in imperial and mono county in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barbara Lavay: Barbara Lavay on behalf of California Women for Agriculture and the Sacramento Valley Landowners Association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kirstin Kolpitcke: Kirstin Kolpitcke with the California Forestry Association in support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Betsy Hammer: good afternoon, betsy with the california state association of counties here in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Keller: randy on behalf of berkshire hathaway energy geothermal in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Mills: Karen Mills with the California Farm Bureau Federation in support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brendan Twohig: Mr Chairman and members, Brendan Twohig on behalf of the California Air Pollution Control Officers Association. We're in support of the current version, we just need to evaluate the amendments and we certainly support it moving out of Committee today, so thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Harmon: richard jody harmon on behalf of the county of imperial, we're supporting concept, looking forward to working with the author and co authors, as this moves forward, thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Kelley: kevin richard kelley, imperial irrigation district, home of the salton sea, we support moving the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Cortez-Roth: Thank you, Melissa Cortez-Roth, on behalf of the California Wind Energy Association, regrettably here in opposition. I do want to start by saying we understand and sympathize greatly with the needs that this bill is trying to address. We also support a diverse portfolio, however, we don't believe it should be the role of the Legislature to dictate specific technologies. We do support the IRP process that's happening at the PUC right now, that should produce optimal portfolios, and look at the various benefits that the different technologies bring. And we would also like to have a conversation about how to help those existing facilities that maybe going off line, it should be noted that wind has about 500 mega watts of existing facilities that do not have long term RPS contracts. Those are primarily in Kern and Riverside Counties, which are also economically disadvantaged. If those contracts can, if we can find RPS contracts for those, they could be re-powered and provide additional benefits to those communities, both in terms of construction dollars and also in terms of tax dollars. Some of the various incentives for technologies have been noted, specifically, the wind production tax credit, that's a federal tax credit that will be expiring I believe in three years. So, this bill will make it very hard for our facilities to get new long term RPS contracts. We would like to see a discussion happen on how to ensure that some of those existing facilities have a path forward, wind should be included in that conversation, we believe. So again, regrettably here in opposition, we do understand and sympathize with the need for this bill, we just don't believe it's the right approach, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Israel Solis: thank you mr. chairman and members, this is solis here on behalf of san diego gas and electric, opposed to the current version of the bill. we haven't had the benefit to review the amendments that the committee and the author have worked out, as we laid out in our in our letter and in many conversations with your offices. we support the current integrated resource plan requirement under sb 350 that is currently underway at the cpuc. we think that that's the path forward. it's going to allow us to develop a plan, a resource plan, to be able to go out and procure the least cost resource mix to the benefit of our customers. from sce&g's perspective, we're particularly concerned about the rate impacts that something like this would have. based on the input that we have received, base load renewable technology such as geothermal or biomass, while not specifically included in the bill, tend to be 30 to 40% more expensive than other renewable resources. san diego, in particular, we have the highest rates in the country. we're very concerned about rates and the impacts to our customers and to the businesses that we serve. and so we'll review the amendments. obviously, we'll provide some feedback to the committee and the author and look forward to working with her.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ryan Pruney: Hi, Ryan Pruney with Southern California Edison. Certainly appreciate the authors' efforts and considerations to our district. I want to thank the Committee analysis for pointing out a lot of the problems with the original version of the bill. Obviously, we haven't had a chance to see the amendments and the agreement in Committee today. But look forward to looking at those, analyzing them, and we'll give you guys some feedback when we get a chance to analyze the bill. So thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tiffany Phan: hi, tiffany on behalf of large-scale solar association. we oppose [unknown] and so unfortunately have to oppose this bill. we appreciate all the work, the chair, the staff, and the author have done to fix this bill, and we are willing to continue working with the author, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Morgan Carvajal: Morgan Carvajal with the Hernandez Strategy Group on behalf of The Utility Reform Network. We'll also be analyzing the amendments that were taken today but are currently opposed to the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jacob Moss: moss with first solar etf renewables and pacificorp, also opposed but appreciate the taking of the amendments. we'll be reviewing those, and we'll get back to you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Unger: Okay, thank you for allowing me to be here, and thank you to Assembly Member Nazarian for introducing this important bill. My name is Jessica Unger, and I am with Capstone Turbine Corporation, Capstone turbine is the world leader in micro-turbines. We are one of the few manufacturers of clean distributed energy in Los Angeles, our Los Angeles facilities house headquarters, R&D, manufacturing. Approximately 90% of our employees live in Los Angeles and adjacent counties and 3/4 are highly educated or skilled. Capstone has been shipping products since the late 1990s, we are a frequent user of the Port of Los Angeles, exporting more than 50% of our systems outside the US. Much of our supply base in in California throughout the years and even today, these suppliers manufacture machine parts, sheet metal fabrications, welded assemblies, electrical components and more. Since California's inception, it's core values have included producing products with ultra low emissions, as such, our products are certified to the world's most stringent air standards. A substantial amount of microturbines are sold outside of California. California is one of the most difficult regions to sell into and that is because of policies that favor one type of technology over another. We respectfully request that you vote aye on AB 36 to make an existing program technology neutral and enable products that have the same input and meet these same environmental standards to compete on an equal playing field.
[{'start': 77, 'end': 85, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 134, 'end': 147, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Shaw: Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee, Michael Shaw, with California Manufacturers&Technology Association. And since it's been moved, seconded already, it will be brief, but we do think technology neutrality is important. It basically says, same set of rules for all technologies, that everybody can compete for that and that really is I think, at the core of what helps us maintain a competitive market. Also helps us drive innovation and technology in companies like capstone, turbines and solar turbines based down in San Diego, produce technologies that could meet some meet those standards. And they should be allowed to compete on a level plain field as result of that which held many benefits for California's economy. Both for the companies that produce it, but also for other manufacturers who might utilize the technology at their facilities to help reduce their energy costs and produce a more environmentally friendly product in the end, thank you.
[{'start': 54, 'end': 66, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Angus: hello, actually i didn't realize i was going to be nervous my first time in front of a california committee. today i'm here to support ab 1431. again, i'm brian kevin angus, i'm executive officer of the fresno economic opportunities commission. we are a community action agency that has been governed by and serving folks from disadvantaged communities in fresno county for over 50 years. we have been performing weatherization, solar energy and water conservation services for over 40 years. i am pleased to be here today and offer support to assembly member's arambula's bill 1431. energy programs for low income disadvantaged communities. fresno eoc is one of a thousand community action agencies serving 99% of the country. across the country and here in california's community action agencies are designated anti-poverty agencies in the state. and we also, as one of our major programs as a low income home managing assistance program and a low income weatherization program. more than 40 years ago the community action agencies in maine created the weatherization program in this country. and there is a program that made sense because you reducing energy needs rather than subsidizing energy consumption quickly spread across the country including to california. every provider in the federal low income weatherization program in california required to go to rigorous training and have multiple licenses and certifications. nationally, the weatherization network was recognized as the third largest job reducer during .... and during ..., california network was a leader in the nation. community action agencies are embedded in our communities and our tripod type board structures require representation of elected officials, the community, and those we serve. we do not just serve disadvantaged communities, we are governed by folks from these communities, the fabric of these communities. the ethnicity, race, language, and culture is woven into our boards. and this results in a trust that has been earned over many years. being local and holding the trust of the community is critical in pursuit of economic and energy equity. without trust, especially in the environment of immigrant fear, and many low income individuals will not participate in energy services they qualified. this bill essentially empowers regulatory agencies to increase access to federal and state energy programs available to low income families and disadvantages communities throughout california. it is modeled after the database used by the air resources bureau and we support the use of increased data to track participation and partnership, within the energy services being deployed. the database can be linked to the calenviroscreen, too. and providing the means to analyze how well services are being rendered and the areas representing the greatest need. a working group of regulatory agencies and stakeholders providing independent review and assessment of the effectiveness of our network and all delivery systems is over due and welcome. we believe completely that once data and quality program assessments completed and compiled into a report available to the legislature, then the strengths of all network with local roots will be identified and rewarded. while weaknesses will be identified and pruned. the working group will coordinate and advance the interest of energy programs targeting low income people, targeting disadvantaged communities. i am especially excited and pleased that our network has been included as a stakeholder. issues of energy and economic equity will be easier to identify and address as the working groups submits their reports to the legislature. and reading the bill that seems obvious that some analysis has been completed on the state and federal low income weatherization programs and that this was taken into account during the crafting of the legislation. the passage of this bill is certain to improve access and participation of eligible residents. and will ensure more equitable versions of services in disadvantaged communities in future programs. and i respectfully ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 155, 'end': 172, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 559, 'end': 570, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Reed Addis: Thank you Chair and Members, Reed Addis on behalf of Valley Clean Air Now. We are a non profit that operates in the San Joaquin Valley and based on the legislative leadership, we've had the opportunity to implement the both the smog repair program, as well as the electric vehicle program in the San Joaquin Valley. It's in that activity where we are working with low income communities. We have run into our colleagues here and others in the valley to realize that there are synergies between a lot of the programs we offer, and others offer. And in many cases we're operating and reaching out to the same communities, the same low income communities, throughout the state of California. We identify many months ago the need for not only stacking in coordination of our programs, but most importantly, information and data. That's why we're here today, we think this is a very thoughtful approach to making sure there's the right kinds of coordination among a number of state agencies. As well as the right kinds of data that can be put on the table to help organizations like ours, and our colleague's here, to deliver better services on the ground. So for those reasons, we're here in strong support today. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Lynch: hi, lynch on behalf of central coast energy services in support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Adriana Morro: hi, good afternoon, adriana brian morro on behalf of the latino coalition for a healthy california here in support.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marco Lizarraga: Hi, Marco Lizarraga, Executive Director of La Cooperativa Campesina, a statewide organization of farm workers, in strong support of this bill.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rachelle Arizmendi: Hi, Rachelle Arizmendi with PACE, Pacific Asian Consortium Social Employment in Los Angeles, and I urge you to support this bill.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrea Deveau: all right, thank you. good afternoon, mr. chair and committee. my name is andrea adriana deveau, i am here today on behalf of technet. we would like to thank assemblymember irwin for her leadership in authoring ab 1293. this bill is not only a measure that is a step forward in the modernization of our electricity grid, but an acknowledgement that accessible and transparent grid data is the key to unlocking innovation and the transformation of our grid towards one that is cleaner, more reliable, and cost effective. ab 1293 builds on the current dialog underway in the energy industry on the needs for increased transparency and data sharing. the key here is that data transparency and access is the foundational enabler required to foster innovation in electric grid design and operation. without data sharing in accessible formats, key stakeholders are sidelined from proactively proposing solutions that could increase the reliability, safety, affordability, and consumer choice of the 21st century grid. ab 1293's focus is on the format in which the data is shared. while today, the utilities identify both grid needs or concerns such as capacity, voltage, reliability, and plan investments such as systems upgrades to meet those needs. other stakeholders do not have access to adequate data justifying the needs for such investments, assuming it is available. without access, individuals, businesses, and communities cannot help meet grid needs of local distributed energy resources, solutions, even if it's cleaner solutions and saves ratepayers money. ab 1293 tackles the accessibility problem. even assuming data is comprehensive, if it is not user-friendly or accessible by modern technology, it can hinder innovation in insidious ways. we strongly encourage your support for ab 1293, and respectfully ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 74, 'end': 95, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 173, 'end': 178, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brandon Smithwood: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to the rest of the Committee Members for considering my testimony in AB 1293. My name is Brandon Smithwood. I'm the California Director for the Solar Energy Industries Association which is the national trade association of the solar industry.
[{'start': 128, 'end': 145, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tiffany Phan: Tiffany Phan, and on behalf of the California Energy Efficiency Industry Council, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Janice Lin: Janice Lin, on behalf of the California Energy Storage Alliance in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kelly Knutsen: kelly andrea knutsen on behalf of the california solar energy industries association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kelly Knutsen: Good afternoon. I'm Kelly Knutsen, the Senior Policy Advisor for CalSEIA. And just want to say thank you, Chair Holden and Vice Chair Patterson and the Committee, for allowing me to testify here today. The solar industry now supports over 100,000 jobs across California including solar thermal jobs. And every member of this Committee has at least one solar company based in their district. And most of the members actually have a solar thermal company based in or right next to the district. And all of you have CSI thermal projects that have been installed in your districts bringing roughly on the orders of several $100,000 in rebates to each one of your districts to support some of the projects that are helping your constituents lower their energy bills. As the author Assembly Member Irwin mentioned, this program is really taking off. It's growing now especially in the multi family housing sector with a 32% annual growth from 2015 to 2016. Now that these rebate levels are competitive with the low natural gas prices, and those are the natural gas savings. Those are really strong natural gas savings. So, the program is well established. It's well ran and we appreciate the juries' decision to continue this program seamlessly for the next 2 years. So that's solar thermal continue growing on the state, provide local jobs and economic development. And meet our state's goals of reducing our greenhouse gas emissions. And also the constituents have to be able to help meet those, so this is a bill that will help them meet those as well. Over 73 organizations support, including environmental groups, utility, as well as the solar industry. And there's no known opposition, so we urge an aye vote today. And thank you for support of Local Solar.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 112, 'end': 118, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 134, 'end': 143, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 792, 'end': 797, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ivan Jimenez: good afternoon, my name ivan kelly jimenez, staff attorney for brightline defense, nonprofit that focuses on quality of life improvement in low income communities of color. particularly, those that have historically been polluted by dirty power plants. ab 797 is critically needed to promote the continued growth of clean energy for low income residents and disadvantaged communities, helping them save money on their energy bills and improve air quality in their neighborhoods. low income residents across the state are currently benefiting from solar water heating. and we feel it is important to continue the trend started just a couple of years ago. half of the multifamily housing projects funded by csi thermal program are low income, which is why we are pleased that ab 797 targets 50% of authorized funding for solar thermal on low income housing and buildings in disadvantaged communities. given the current low cost of natural gas, this program is essential for installing solar water heating in these communities. low income residents spend proportionally more of their income on energy. meaning that the rebates will go further to helping those households. and extending the csi thermal program through ab 797 is critical part of helping these communities. and at the same time, further in the states, clean air and green health gas reduction goals. for all these reasons, brightline supports ab 797, and respectfully urges your aye vote. thank you.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alberto Torrico: Afternoon Mr. Chairman, members. Alberto Torrico, on behalf of Sunrun and the Lives for Solar Choice, in support.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alicia Priego: Alicia Priego, on behalf of SoCal Gasses, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ed Murray: Thank you, Mr Chair and Committee Members. Ed Murray with Aztec Solar and President of California Solar Energy Industries Association, urging an aye vote.
[{'start': 43, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Miles: I'm Mark Miles, CEO of NCI, an Oakland-based developer of solar thermal systems, in support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Al Rich: al ivan rich, president of acr solar, a local manufacturer of solar watering systems, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : AB 1431 Arambula. With the chair voting aye. Muratsuchi? Aye. Muratsuchi, aye.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 16, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 45, 'end': 55, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 62, 'end': 72, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Joshua Golca: Joshua Golca with the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, in support
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cesar Diaz: cesar jonah diaz, state building and trades, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicole Rice: Thank you. Nicole Rice, California Manufacturers & Technology Association. We're also opposed and we'd like to echo the comments made by the chamber that California's in a different place than the federal government was at the time that they were considering these regulations. And we will get to these points. So we, too, are concerned about what the urgency is to do that now.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Doug Subers: thank you, mr. chair and members, doug cesar subers on behalf of the western states petroleum association, respectfully in opposition today. we have some concerns about the structure of the bill but recognize for our members and our refiners. safety is absolutely a priority. to the incident that happened in the chairman's district, it was abhorrent, and nothing we would ever tolerate or condone. in relation to the way the bill is drafted, it requires two contracts are submitted to the unified program agencies. for our refiners, there's various unified program agencies that oversee the refineries in northern and southern california. it requires a complete copy of the contract submitted to the agency and a redacted copy of the contract that requires specified information. with those two contracts being submitted, it's clear that the language specifies that the second redacted contract is a public record. the first complete contract that this submitted is silent on whether or not it's a public record. there is competitively sensitive data and other information in those contracts that we think should be protected. so if it's necessary to submit the complete contract with the work on whether we can find a way to protect that data. and then the second issue is: we question whether or not the unified program agencies are the appropriate agencies. we're not sure if there's precedent in the specific unified program agencies to submit complete contracts between two private parties. we're not sure whether those unified program agencies have the staff or the processes in place to protect that data. so for those reasons, we're in opposition here today. but when the bill moves forward, we'll look forward to working with the supporters and the chairman, thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 44, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cesar Diaz: Mr. Chair and members, Cesar Diaz on behalf of the State Building and Construction Trades Council, just associate my comments with that of my colleague and ESM member. Thank you for introducing this important bill. When we have public works contracts out there and public works projects, there's a requirement to use apprentices. That requirement ensures that there's a next generation who's highly skilled individuals, that are also from California, to build the necessary infrastructure to keep our economy going. When a contractor fails to comply, there's often a lot of cheating that is associated with that is not just that they're attempting to comply with their different reasons so often times these contractors have other violations are associated with them, they're filling to actually pay the prevailing wage. They're failing to actually have the number of apprentices or the number of actual workers being called for their specific project. So, instead of actually having five workers, in terms of the need, they'll report less in order to avoid calling in apprentices. Sometimes they'll over-report apprentices in order to, basically, undercut wages and keep a worker at 40% of the prevailing wage rate. So, we see a lot of violations with contractors that fail to comply with just the basic requirements of public works. We think that this an important bill to fix a problem and put a very important regulation into statute. For those reasons, we ask for your support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Markenson: Mr. Chairman and members, Richard Markenson. My contractors members in addition to being contractor associations are also sponsors of a friendship programs and while the author did indicate that he is putting in statute what is already an existing regulations, I would point out that the same requirement is already in the same statute that he is adding it to. In 1777.5, the requirement for this notification already exist in the code so this will be the third time that these requirements are put into law since they already exist in the statute and they already exist in regulation. The other thing is that, the penalty language that was added to the bill does not distinguish between egregious behavior by a contractor who fails to use apprentices. The same penalty could be applied to a contractor that simply fails to disclose the information that is required approximately how long the apprentice will be dispatched the job location? Any of those kinds of paperwork errors could result in debarment. We think that penalty is way of over-blown for those kinds of paperwork errors. Finally, the financial penalties that are included in the bill run until the notice of completion is filed by the public agency owner of the project. This is contrary to DLSE's own public works enforcement manual, which It holds the penalty after that contractor has completed their work on the project. So say you are a grading contractor and you complete your work in the first six months of the project but during construction, construction could run two or three more years. By running those penalties until the notice of completion is filed, that contractor could be subject to penalties of $100 per day for two or three years which goes well beyond the completion of the work that that contractor was performing. For those reasons, we are opposed to this bill as it is in print today.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Markeson: Mr. Chairman, Richard Markeson, in for the Southern California chapter of Associated Builders and Contractors. There's actually two demonstrable benefits from right to work provisions. One in, from 1977 to 1999, the US Bureau of Economic Standards determined that those states with right to work laws had substantially better economic improvement than states that did not have that. The other thing is that I'm sure that we'll hear that relating to the pre-writer provision is that somehow this is going to put unions at the disadvantage right next door in Nevada. The culinary workers union had seen a quadrupling and a course of Nevada has had right to work authorization since the early 50s. They've actually seen a quadrupling of their membership since the 80s because right to work creates a competitive environment that makes unions more responsive to the needs of their members, to create better products, and services to encourage them to stay in the union and be contributing members. Finally, unfortunately, I will say that right-to-work can be completely consistent with project labor agreements to my friends in the building trades. And they've been a number of findings that indicate as much as I would like to say this would be rules out, that PLAs can be consistent with right to work. So those could remain in tact, in California. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Castro: Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Committee Members. Michelle Castro of the Service Employees International Union. Just want to make a couple quick points and hand something out to the Committee and defer my time to Elizabeth Alexander. First the proponents have talked a lot about union members and worker freedom. It's been the law of this country since 1947 that no worker is forced to join a union as a condition of employment. Further the US Supreme Court has affirmed that no worker has to pay any money to a union for any political purposes. They simply pay for the cost of representation. The rights and benefits they enjoy from union representation only. This bill is really about free writers and is politically motivated. And I want to hand out two items. One is a letter from the Freedom Foundation that was sent to my home, and a article by the Orange County Registry. And basically, in that letter, what it says, according to Freedom Foundation CEO Tom McCabe, they claim to reclaim California from union bosses who dominate our politics and culture. These scavengers supply the money and ground campaign to the left and power. This bill is very politically motivated. It's not about workers, because in fact workers conditions have gotten worse in Freedom Foundation states. In freedom right to work states, the death rate in work places are 49% higher in those states than in non. Poverty rates are higher, they earn less. So this is not about benefiting workers, this very politically motivated. Thank you. Can I give this to the sergeants? Bring it up? Thank you. Thank you.
[{'start': 45, 'end': 60, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 208, 'end': 227, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 955, 'end': 965, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Elizabeth Alexander: good afternoon. my name is elizabeth doug alexander, i work as a tenants right organizer in a housing program in san francisco. my job is to find housing for overcrowded and homeless families to make sure the landlord turns the heat on in the winter, and to help fight illegal evictions. my union, seiu local 1021 represents 57,000 people like me throughout northern california from fremont to oregon border, from the coast to the foothills. and our members are proud to work for the union, to members of the union to work for the public. to improve the quality of life for everyone in california through our public service. ab 1174 is unfortunately nothing more than an attack on the working people who provide essential services to the public. we are the emergency room staff in your trauma centers, we cook healthy food for the elementary school students, and every night we inspect the tracks and the trains in your public transportation system to make sure you get to work safely in the morning. by joining our voices in the union, we've been able to secure crystal protection such as the ability of workers to blow the whistle on violations of state's nursing staffing ratios. my union protected my coworkers against unjust firing, when our hr manager was covering up a director misuse of public funds. my union also has protected workers who reported that their manager was feeding patients food past its expiration date that had molds and maggots in it. without the protection of the union, our workers would have been vulnerable to being fired for blowing the whistle and telling the truth of what was happening and protecting patients and the public. the number one reasons people like me join a union is for respect for ourselves and a dignity and respect to the people we care for in the public. the ability to have a voice through the union means our members can provide a greater benefit to the tax payers. and that we can participate improving these services and making sure that the tax dollars are not wasted. but this bill is much more than just about public sector unions. this bill is an underhanded attempt to stop workers from standing up for other workers in both the public and private sectors. as you know, our union has worked together to improve the lives of all workers in california regardless of their representation by a union. for example we pushed a crackdown on businesses who steal wages from paychecks of workers. we fought to guarantee workers three paid sick days per year and give all workers the ability to save money from their own paychecks for retirement. the proponents of this bill don't want us to be able to join together to tackle income inequality or poverty among seniors and that's why they're trying to silence our voices. please join us in opposing ab 1174, and stopping their attempt to silence workers.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ashley Martinez: Mr. Chairman and Committee Members, Ashley Martinez on behalf of the Service Employees International Union Local 1000, representing over 96,000 state employees that work across the state, and we are strongly opposed to this bill. Today I am joined by one of our members, Barbara Bumpers who is a leader at Local 1000, also a state employee. And I would like to yield my time to her.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 271, 'end': 286, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Austin Webster: thank you, mr. chair and members, austin elizabeth webster, on behalf of the faculty association of california community colleges, in strong opposition.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Stender: Jessica Stender, Equal Rights Advocates, very strong opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Meg Vasey: Meg Vasey, TradesWomen Inc, I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mariko Yoshihara: mariko austin yoshihara, with the california employment lawyers association, strongly opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Coby Pizzotti: Mr Chair and members, Coby Pizzotti, with the California Association of Psychiatric Technicians, in strong opposition.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Solmani Chakan: Solmani Chakan on behalf of the California Nurses Association, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Beverly Yu: yu with udw local 3930. this bill essentially means right to work for less, so we ask you to oppose this bill as well, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 2, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tristan Brown: Thank you, Mr. Chair and members. Tristan Brown, with the California Federation of Teachers, in strong opposition, thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Rundin: thank you, rundin, member of the uc-aft, the union that represents lecturers and librarians at the university of california. we are in strong opposition of this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Brollini: Jason Brollini, President, United EMS Workers, strong opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Cremins: tim mariko cremins, international union of operating engineers, and a product of a joint labor management private sector apprenticeship program, in strong opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cesar Diaz: mr chair and members, cesar tim diaz on behalf of the 400,000 men, and women in the state building & construction trades council, also in strong opposition.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Renata Sanchez: i am renata, and i am a teacher at allen at steinbeck in san jose, california, and i stand in opposition.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chantaine Fauntleroy: mr chair and committee members, my name is chantaine, and i teach physical education at bret harte middle school in hayward, and i ask you to oppose this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 43, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Seth Bramble : seth cesar bramble here on behalf of the california teachers association we urge you a no vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Beyer: Thank you, Mr. Mccarty. Thank you, Mr Chair and members. My name is John Beyer, representing the State Auditor's office. With me is Heather Kendrick, our legal counsel. For the record the State Auditor does not take a position on any bills, but that said, Assembly Bill 581 does address certain recommendations from our November 2016 audit, that found problems with the oversight of apprenticeship programs by the Department of Industrial Relations. Specifically, our audit found that Industrial Relations was not verifying that apprenticeship programs were using grant funds only for training activities. We determined that Industrial Relations did have existing statutory authority to do this verification as part of an ongoing audit. However, outside of an audit we found that state law did not allow the industrial relations to do that verification. Therefore, to address the problem we found that the state law, we made two recommendations to the Legislator. One is that to provide industrial relations with authority to verify as a condition of receiving future grant funds that apprenticeship programs are using those funds for training apprentices. This verification would primarily consist of the apprenticeship program retaining and providing upon request invoices, receipts, and other accounting and records that would support that training was actually done. The second recommendation that we had to the Legislature was that it amend state law to provide industrialization see authority to deregister an apprenticeship program that either demonstrated that it wasn't using grant funds for training purposes, or that it had used grant funds for inappropriate purposes. A review of Assembly Bill 581 concludes that it does include both this recommendations within it and to address the issue that we identified. That concludes my testimony. Thank you. I can answer any questions.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 22, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 68, 'end': 78, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 132, 'end': 148, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cesar Diaz: mr chair, members of the committee. cesar, on behalf of the state building construction and trades council. this committee had heard various bills dealing with apprenticeship standards and the investment that goes into apprenticeship. there's a promise that is made to each and every single apprentice as they enter these programs basically a better lifestyle, better career and opportunities for a middle class. and so when that promise is broken because of unscrupulous practices, when they're failing the apprentice but also taking public dollars. we believe that it hurts all apprenticeship programs across the board, so this bill rectifies that and it deals with the state auditor recommendations. for those reasons we ask for your support.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Meg Vasey: meg seth vasey, trades human increase strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Stender: Jessica Stender, Equal Rights advocate in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Markeson: mr chairman, members, richard here on behalf of the american fire sprinkler association, associated builders and contractors, and independent roofing contractors of california plumbing and heating cooling contractors of california in the western electorial contractors association all strongly opposed to ab 581. what the auditors representatives neglected to mention was that in the course of their review the grants that were in question of the after audit where a few $1000. that's all that they were talking about in terms of the authority that is included in this bill, in fact the state of california through das collects about $11 million a year. in training contributions from employers, but they distribute only $2 million of them in grants to california apprenticeship programs. so the real question is, what's happening to the other $9 million? most of those grants are extremely small. some of them as few as a few $1000. the bill requires that every recipient has to be audited in order to continue to receive the grants. does it really make sense at whatever the cost will be to das to hire additional auditors to audit 70 programs for $2 million of grants? furthermore, would it make sense for any apprenticeship program that is only going to be receiving a few $1000 in training grants, to risk losing their apprenticeship training authorization because they made an inadvertent error? the bill does not recognize any distinction between egregious misuse of funds, and simply misappropriating or spending $50 on an unallocated or unapproved activity that is not related to training apprentices. perhaps they trained a journey worker, that would be a violation, and that would subject them to losing their apprenticeship training authority. the bill spends a lot of time talking about how important it is and the proponents have said that this is absolutely vital measure to protect the partnership. but the fact to the matter is that the das has first claim on training grants. these are the contributions that contractors make for training. those dollars are not being used to train anyone, they're being used by the division of apprenticeship standards to operate their program. and the 24% is all that they are actually allocating to training apprentices. we are opposed. we think that this is a measure that is looking for a problem that they're seeking to solve and we strongly urge you to oppose it.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tricia Zulic: good afternoon. i'm going to go first here. my name is tricia. i'm here on behalf of the california society human resource management, calshrm, representing over 22,000 hr professional and a 102,000 hr professionals throughout the state. hr professionals are cleanly aware of what veterans go through to try to gain employment. it is difficult. it's hard to translate those skills into the workplace, and we as hr professionals want to do what we can to help them. this bill assists with that. calshrm and shrm, our long term commitment to hiring of our nation's veterans. both organizations have partnerships conduct and education outreach activities to promote the hiring of vets for federal entities such as the employer support of the garden reserve. the department of veteran affairs and the department of labor we believe more should be done to make it easier for employers to hire veterans and allowing an employer to exercise a voluntary hiring preference exception for all veterans and one small way we can facilitate this hiring, michael.
[{'start': 55, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1040, 'end': 1047, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Kalt: mr. chair and members my name is michael i'm the calshrm government affairs director and i'm proud to say that i am a military brat having had numerous family members who honorably served in the marine corps and the army. i want to take a couple of minutes and address what some of the concerns i've heard expressed about this bill. first we're not asking this committee to do anything controversial. 37 states already have enacted veteran's preference for private employers. california already allows it for public sector employers. and fair employment and housing act already allows it for some veterans, we're just asking for the definition to be updated. we're also not asking you to do anything that you haven't done before, four members of this committee already voted to support an identical bill in 2015, and the california assembly voted unanimously to approve an identical bill in 2015. this bill is not a measure for bad, it is a measure for good and gives us an opportunity to do what all of us say we do and that is to support our veterans. it's not often we get a chance to back a slogan with real action and in a meaningful manner where we can help veterans obtain new jobs and help them serve again. there's no dispute there's a need for this bill, especially in california. california is blessed the with the largest veterans population in the nation, but our unemployment rate for veterans materially exceeds national and state averages, and it's even higher for female veterans. recently reported that 6.9% where the state unemployment rate is 5%. there is no doubt there is a desire for this bill. president obama famously said if you want a job done right hire a vet, and employers want to do just that. the one thing holding us back is fear that that good deed will go punished under the fair employment and housing act. ab 353 provides much needed clarity. and that's why this bill is overwhelmingly supported and why it would pass if you let it proceed to a floor vote. now, some have said it will allow discrimination. that's not true. our bill goes farther than any other bill in any of the 37 states, and makes clear that it cannot be used as a basis for intentional discrimination, and we welcome assemblyman gloria's amendment to clarify that it would not discriminate against those of the lgbtq community. we've heard it said that it will create a disparate impact, but there's no evidence that that has actually occurred under the california public sector law, or any of the other 37 states that have recently enacted those laws. but even if there were concerns about the potential impact in the short term, haven't the veterans earned it? vets run to the danger to protect our freedoms and allow those to continue working in the private sector. california often rewards those who courageously do what others won't. are our veterans any less worthy? the committee today has a choice, it can vote to provide material assistance to our vets who need it and, in fact, who have earned it. or, it can deny such aid based upon hypotheticals. to the four who voted yes previously, we'd ask for your vote yes once again, and to the other three committee members, we ask you to vote yes also. thank you.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1628, 'end': 1633, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2237, 'end': 2243, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Deborah Johnson: Good afternoon, my name is Deborah Johnson. I am an honorably discharged army veteran from the gulf of war. I stand here and support of AB 353. My affiliation with the veterans of foreign wars. I'm also the President and CEO of a non-profit organization in Curan County California that provides transitional and permanent housing for homeless veterans. We know that current conflict veterans are the largest growing cohort of homeless veterans in our community and across the country. This priority preference for Veterans would help us move them from the homelessness to permanent housing much easier if they can find employment much quicker. Thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Baker: good afternoon, mr. chair and members, baker for the american civil liberties union of california. with great respect for the author, and for the honored veterans that are in support of the bill. we nevertheless believed that, if there are actions that should be taken to address the problems of unemployment and underemployment that veterans face, there might be more direct approaches taken. the approach taken by this bill though, is to single out one group that is already protected within the fair employment and housing act, and elevate it over another group. we don't do that for any other category. we don't allow preference, we prohibit discrimination against veterans just as we prohibit discrimination against all other categories, and we don't pick and choose winners within that group, it's across the board approach. this bill would allow new form of discrimination, if it doesn't allow intentional discrimination and nevertheless does allow, this would impact discrimination. as your analysis points out that people who have studied this, including the equal employment opportunity commission, have made quite clear that there is a desperate impact in this area. and, despite the amendment that the author has just alluded to with respect to the discharge, there nevertheless is the case that members of the lgbt community have faced a history of discrimination from the military services, and are not represented among veterans and the numbers that they would be, absent that discrimination. so, we do feel that it may be appropriate for the state to take steps to help address the employment needs of veterans. but, we don't believe it's appropriate to allow discrimination against others in the course of addressing those needs. thank you very much.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joe Michael: good afternoon mr. chair and members. joe meg michael, for equality california also regretfully hearing opposition. i'd like align our comments with those of the aclu and will add, veterans absolutely deserve recognition, respect and opportunity but not at the expense of every other marginalized group. this is simply not the right approach to addressing the challenges the veterans face in securing employment, and would undermined one of the most important goals viha, which is fostering equal opportunity. viha should protect all groups that are marginalized in the work place equally not any more than any others. i would also like to note the opposition of lambda legal who was not able to be here today, and highlight a few points that they would particularly like to make on their behalf. so, this would unfairly prejudice lgbt people for the reasons that kevin baker just explained. women, people with disabilities and others who have had unequal opportunities to join the us military, and serve through to an honorable discharge, which is an important point. a broad hiring preference for veterans would impose new systemic disadvantages on the very people who were already excluded from equal opportunity. title vii's veteran preference exclusion, explicitly allows states to shield employers who discriminate against non-veterans in their hiring preferences, which is part of the real complication that this bill brings up. so, once again we regretfully oppose and urge your no vote today. thank you.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 864, 'end': 875, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Marie Koyoshihara: koyoshihara, with the california employment lawyers association. also appreciate the intent of the bill, but we share the same concerns as our colleagues and must oppose. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Stender: jessica, equal rights advocates, for the same reasons explained we regretfully oppose.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mariko Yoshihara: thank you, mr. chair and members. yoshihara with the california employment lawyers association. i want to thank assembly member cooper for bringing this bill forward. we were co-sponsors of the fair pay act a couple years ago and i know there has been some confusion about which labor co-provisions apply in the public sector versus the private sector. so we thank the author for bringing this forward to make that clarification and ensure that the public sector is in fact included under the fair pay act.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 128, 'end': 134, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tristan Brown: Thank you Mr. Chair and Members, Tristan Brown with the California Federation of Teachers in support.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Coby Pizzotti: Thank you Mr. Chair and Members, Coby Pizzotti with California Association of Psychiatric Technicians in support.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joshua Golka: Mr. Chair and Members Joshua Golka with the American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees in support.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Harms: jennifer, national association of social work, california chapter in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eric Flores: good afternoon, mr. chair and committee members. i will be very brief, my name is eric joe flores, i'm here on the behalf of the california workforce association. we are the membership organization for the 46th local workforce development boards throughout the state of california and include over a 100 other members ranging from manufacturers, to educators, to organized labor. last year we saw over a million californians walk through the doors of our career centers. we also want to take the time to congratulate this legislature for passing sb 1, recognizing that bills importance in increasing to apprenticeship and pre-apprenticeship in construction jobs for underrepresented populations. we feel that ab 1376 will be an excellent complement to that bill and we look forward to collaborating with all stakeholders involved on this piece of legislation. to ensure we support and assist women entering construction trades in order to expand access to middle skill high wage jobs. i'll be happy to take any questions and thank you for your time.
[{'start': 82, 'end': 97, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Markuson: mr. chairman richard eric markuson for the associated builders and contractors. the american fire and sprinkler association, the independent roofing contractors of california. plumbing heating and cooling contractors of california and the western electrical contractors association. we certainly agree that women are under served in the construction industry. we support the concept, we have shared with the author our concern.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Stender: Jessica Stender, Equal Rights Advocates in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jo Michael: good afternoon mister chair and members. jo richard michael, for equality california. we are proud to be the sponsor of this bill and we thank the assemblymember for bringing it forward. as the assemblymember explained, under many of the pregnancy-related employment protections in feha, there are references to terms like female, she, and her, even when gender-neutral terms such as person or employee would be more appropriate. statutory provisions in california's code should be inclusive in general, so that all residents of our state know that they are protected. particularly for residents who are intersex, transgender, or gender non conforming or non binary. this is particularly important if they happen to be a person who also is pregnant or experiences pregnancy related conditions or complications during their employment. so, it's important to ensure that these protections are clear and that they are afforded to everyone. i would also like to state the support of transgender law center for this bill because they were not able to be here today, and respectfully urge your support.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mariko Yoshihara: Mariko Yoshihara with the California Employment Lawyers Association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tristan Brown: thank you, mr. chair and members, tristan jo brown with california federation of teachers, we apologize for a late letter of support.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Eberly: good afternoon, laura tristan eberly, ywca of san francisco and marin, in strong support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 38, 'end': 42, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Harms: Thank you. Jennifer Harms with the National Association of Social Workers, the California Chapter, in support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ashley Martinez: Ashley Martinez on behalf of SEIU Local 1000, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Barrera: Mr Chair and Committee Members, Jennifer Barrera on behalf of the California Chamber of Commerce, and we are in opposition to AB 168. We totally support equal pay for equal women. Actually, we support equal pay for substantially similar work, which is why we supported SB 358. And we think the fundamental issue is making sure that women who perform substantially similar duties are paid the same compensation at the time they're hired, which is what SB 358 ensures. SB 168 specifies that you cannot ask for prior salary, prior compensation history, you have to disclose pay scales, etc. We think that those issues were dealt with last year, with AB 1676, when we negotiated with then Assemblymember Campos to make sure that prior salary cannot be the sole basis for a compensation decision, which is now existing law, and it just went into effect on January 1. We believe that we should give that legislation that was just passed and implemented a chance to work to make sure that it is having the impact that we hope it has before we go and start implementing additional issues, with regards to prior salary. Despite the fact that prior salary, I 100% agree, has been used to perpetuate wage discrimination for women when it is the sole basis for the consideration for compensation, it actually can be used to the benefit of the employee as well. Oftentimes, employers don't have an accurate reflection of what the market data is for that prior position, and may have unrealistic expectations. By asking for prior compensation, they actually have a better understanding of what the position is valued at, what they should value it at, and likewise, with regards to employees who may have an unrealistic expectation of what the employer can provide. So again, we are 100% in support of equal pay for equal position, substantially similar work, we just don't think this achieves it. And we also do believe that minor violations that don't result in injury to the employee, such as not disclosing a pay scale, but yet, at the same time, ultimately paying the employee what they should be paid, equal compensation, will result in litigation under the Private Attorneys General Act, and we're concerned with that as well. So for those reasons, we are opposed.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 700, 'end': 706, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michelle Reyes: Michelle Reyes, on behalf of the California Travel Association, in opposition, thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Schneider: Jennifer Schneider on behalf of the California Association of Health Facilities greatly appreciate, Assemblymember Burke's leadership on this, and are very excited to see this bill move forward to provide our facilities with some training funds to move our CNAs forward in their work with our facilities. We have two folks that are CAHF, members of the California Association Health Facilities that would like to talk about their struggles and they will be very short in doing so I'm sure.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 115, 'end': 120, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Matt Yarwood: Good afternoon thank you. Not only your struggles but our successes I should add, yes thank you. So thank you Mr. Chair, thank you Committee Members. My name is Matt Yarwood, I have been a licensed nursing home administrator since 2003. I've been at Vintage Estates of Richmond since 2001, as you may recall you visited our facility last year, thank you for taking the time to do so. Our facility is a five star rated facility, I'm very pleased to say that, and it is 100% because of our staff, and our nursing staff, and the CNAs are the backbone of that nursing staff. And to be blunt, we're in a staffing crisis right now in California. In my facility, in just the last two months, we had over 50 open shifts, which equated to over 450 hours of overtime, this is not acceptable. We are still able to maintain the quality because the existing staff members are pulling doubles and pulling overtime. So this is a good bill, we thank you for considering it, and thank you for your time.
[{'start': 161, 'end': 173, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Esperanza Naltoborn: My name is Esperanza Naltoborn, I am a Nursing Home Administrator at Englewood Nursing Home's facility. I've been a nursing home administrator since 2013, and I like Matt also suffer the consequences of not having staff on all shifts. It is very, very difficult to work with the staff there that nurses have second jobs, doing doubles. Means single moms at home trying to find ways to try to better their lives. I do support this AB 1656 to help not only our residents, but our CNAs to continue a better life for themselves.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 166, 'end': 170, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Amber King: Amber King with the Association of California Healthcare Districts also in support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jedd Hampton: Thank you Mr. Chair and members, Jedd Hampton, on behalf of Leading Age California, the state's not for profit provider of senior services in care in strong support of the bill
[{'start': 33, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Young: mr. chair, members, michael, on behalf of the california labor federation. we know with recent executive actions from the administration that all immigrants here without permission are going to be enforcement priorities californian's already see an increase in enforcement actions and we anticipate that work site raids are going to be the next step. so when we began to think about this issue, we asked ourselves a couple of critical questions. first is, do employers have an obligation who ensure that workers, labor rights, there due process rights, their health and safety rights, their privacy rights are protected while they're at the workplace, and while they're under the control of the employer. the answer to that question is yes. so then we ask when we last saw work site raise in 2009 in california, do we see violations of those worker's protections? and the answer is obviously yes. so then the next step was does the state have an interest in ensuring that worker's that those rights remain protected? and obviously, that's what we're trying to do with this bill. we want to ensure that anytime that there's going to be an enforcement action at a work site that the employer first says, do you have permission to be here? are you authorized? do you have a warrant to come on these premises, and next before any critical information is disclosed to those agents, we want to make sure again that they're authorized to disseminate that information, do you have a subpoena? through our conversations with stakeholders and through our conversations with unions and workers. it also became clear that it's important that the state agency who's in charge of ensuring that worker's rights are protected, the labor commissioner is notified when these enforcement actions are going on. so they can ensure that one employer's following the law, and two the workers rights remain protected during these raids. so we feel that this is a critical first step in ensuring that workers are right to protected during these raids we anticipate. we want to thank the author for bringing this bill, and we urge your support. thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Renee Biardo: Thank you Mr. Chair and members Renee Biardo SEIU California, we're also a co sponsor of the bill along with the Labor Fed. I'd like to thank Assemblymember Chiu for running this bill.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 49, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 157, 'end': 161, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rosada Ramirez: My name is Rosada Ramirez from ACLU USWW we're here on favor.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mariko Yoshihara: Mariko Yoshihara with the California Employment lawyers Association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christopher Sanchez : christopher laura sanchez with coalition for human rights in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 25, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Beverly Hue: good afternoon. beverly christopher hue with udw afscme local 3938, we are in strong support this bill to ensure that workers don't lose out on their basic labor protections. thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gina De Silva: gina beverly de silva with california immigrant policy center in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Stender: jessica gina stender, equal rights advocates, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shane Guzman: Shane Guzman on behalf of the Teamsters and unite here in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dominique Lofton: dominique jessica lofton on behalf of the california association of local conservation corps, in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cesar Diaz: diaz on behalf of the state building and construction trades council, also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marty Fisher: okay, marty dominique fisher on behalf of the california chamber of commerce. we're here in opposition, but first, i do want to say that we are in strong support of comprehensive immigration reform, and that includes temporary foreign worker programs and a path to legal status. so we are here we want to protect our employees we value our workforce. we're not here to try to send them anywhere else, or have them be the subject of enforcement actions. we're opposed to ab 450 because it puts the employer in an untenable position between federal and state enforcement. it prohibits the employer from choosing the best course of action in the event of a workplace visit from federal immigration authorities, and we don't see how to the bill actually protects employees. we're also concerned as to whether there is any federal preemption or constitutional rights at issue by prohibiting employers from exercising their rights. if the employer has done nothing wrong and they feel that they are in full compliance with their duties to have their paperwork and documentation in order for their employees. they may believe that the best course of action is to be cooperative with the federal authorities. it could be the path of least resistance, and actually perhaps more protective of their employees as well if they're not trying to work against the federal authorities. however, if the employer does allow the immigration authorities to come onto their work site, without demanding a properly executed warrant, which we're not sure if employers will be able to recognize what that is, or know what that is. and they'll be subject to very steep penalties from 10 to $25,000 per violation, and that will be also, could be levied against an employee personally for acting on behalf of the employer. uncooperative employers that demand a warrant are often seen, as having something to hide. so when the authorities return with the warrant they're going to investigate not only what they came for, but they might go much further, and be looking for whatever it is the employer they think they implore as hiding, because they've been uncooperative. the bill treats an employer who is visited by us as somehow already guilty and casts a suspicion that they've committed wage and hour violations, when there is no nexus between wage and hour violations and a visit from the federal authorities. but it does, excuse me, trigger a duty for the employer to notify the labor commissioner so that they may choose to do a wall to wall inspection of the workplace for wage an hour and cal/osha violations. there's also very overly specific and onerous notification requirements from the employer to the employees within a very short time frame to notify them when there is going to be a visit from the authorities if they are notified in advance. and we question we don't know the answer to this, we question if that maybe illegal, maybe obstruction to justice for the employer to notify the employees that the federal authorities are coming tomorrow. there maybe a question about the legality of that. we are not sure we're still researching all of the new ones at the bill. the bill doesn't provide employers or employees, with tools to protect employees in the event that they are in the process of the federal authorities. to achieve that result, we will suggest a program of outreach and education as being more helpful to actually provide those tools and information to employees in the event that they're detained so they understand their rights. what could happen, how to respond and also where to turn for help. this bill does not provide that assistance. instead, ab 450 is punitive to employers regardless of their compliance with federal law. thank you.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicole Rice: Yes. Nicole Rice, California Manufacturers and Technology Association. I'll just say in summary that we feel, we oppose to the bill as well and that we feel that the employer in the position that the employer's being placed in Is the wrong entity to enforce the state's will against the federal government, thank you.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matthew Allen: Good afternoon, Matthew Allen with Western Growers Association, we're also opposed.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tyler Blackney: tyler marty blackney with the wine institute we're very concerned of this bill and oppose.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Trudi Hughes: trudi, with the california league of food processors, opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nikoli Hernandez: Hi, Nikoli Hernandez of the Family Winemakers of California and the Western Carwash Association, in opposition.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bruce Wick: bruce tyler wick, california professional association of specialty contractors, opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Patti Blosser: patti bruce blosser, state director, california state council of shrm, we are opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Damon Conklin: Damon Conklin with the Sacramento Regional Builders Exchange and also with the Federation of California Builders of California. We just want to thank the author for introducing this measure and share with the Committee that during the last recession, the construction industry lost 10000s of skilled trade individuals. A pipeline of workers that our industry desperately is trying to fill. Currently, there are 3 million Californians enrolled in the 30 various workforce development programs throughout the state, providing job specific training for the labor market. Unfortunately, the program collects somewhat of a hodgepodge of both near and long term outcome and demographic and wage information. And often, if they're collecting the same information or the same data it's at different intervals. So, instead of looking at wages from two to three months, they might be also collecting data from a different program from three to five years. And so, we believe that 849 will help alleviate frustrations between state agencies on linkage of data. And create some measures for performance outcomes that will benefit the programs throughout the state, and for these reasons we ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Natasha Collins: Natasha Collins with the Legislative Analyst's Office, as you may know, it's our office's standard practice to neither oppose nor support bills. But we're here today to speak of a report that our office released last year that analyzed how the state collects and uses workforce education and training data about those programs that it funds. We found that although the state's workforce system is extensive, policy makers cannot answer basic questions about it. For example, even how many people participate, or how well these programs compare in getting people jobs and wage growth. One of the reasons we cannot answer basic questions like these is because historically, outcome measures have not been standardized across workforce programs. That is, state and federal laws have required service providers to report different types of outcome data even if the programs are quite similar and sometimes, this is even within a single agency. While there has been recent progress towards establishing and using common outcome measures at both the state and federal levels, some state workforce programs still require providers to track different performance measures, sometimes using different data definitions and different reporting schedules. This results in an inability to assess the system's performance at a state level, also, it's administratively burdensome as was mentioned to both providers and to state agencies themselves. To address this concern, our report recommended that the Legislature direct the California Workforce Development Board to lead a task force that would resolve some of these remaining inconsistencies. Specifically, the task force would work on the development of detailed data definitions, common performance measures, reporting schedules and other specifications to ensure a more efficient and consistent data collection and reporting system. We believe that this would be a step towards providing more useful information to help policy makers, the public, and providers make decisions about their programs and funding, which would ultimately result in better workforce outcomes. AB 849 would implement this recommendation. I'm happy to answer any technical questions as the Assembly Member mentioned, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marissa Alcorta: Thank you. Mr. Chair, good afternoon, Committee Members, thank you for this opportunity. My name is Marissa Alcorta, I'm here representing the Center for Land-Based Learning. I just wanted to give you all a little bit of background on our apprenticeship program. The Center for Land-Based Learning has been training aspiring farmers for about six years now through our California Farm Academy. We have a training program which is a seven month intensive course, 200 hours, we accept about 20 trainees each year. We also have a farm business incubator where we lease land and provide infrastructure, mentorship, and support for beginning farmers to get them launched in their businesses. We typically have more applicants than spaces in our program which I think is a testament to the high demand for a structured training program in farming that's outside of the University system. We've also been approached by many farmers throughout the Sacramento region and the state seeking trained individuals who could qualify as high quality employees or potentially, farm managers. In particular, they're looking for farm managers. In response to this we've developed the California Farm Academy Apprenticeship Program. This apprenticeship will train for the occupation of the beginning farm and ranch manager, there are no other accredited or state approved apprenticeships in agriculture in California. So this is literally breaking new ground. Completion of this program requires 3000 hours of on the job training which is paid, and 250 hours of coursework. The program currently is in its pilot year, so we have three apprentices to date and two farms participating, but we anticipate doubling this number in 2018 and growing more beyond in the future. We are in the final stages of our application submission to the Division of Apprenticeship Standards and we expect to be a state approved apprenticeship accreditation sometime in 2017. Thank you very much for this opportunity, we respectfully request your aye vote for AB 1503.
[{'start': 100, 'end': 115, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shawn Harrison: I'll be brief, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Shawn Harrison, I'm the Director of Soil Born Farms here in Sacramento and we support this and I'm just going to be here to answer any questions you might have.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Trish Kelly: trish patti kelly, valley vision, also requesting your support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Kimball: Mary Kimball, Center for Land-Based Learning, strongly support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Craig McNamara: craig trish mcnamara, president of the state board of food and agriculture, requesting your support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicholas Chavez: Nicholas Chavez here, on behalf of the United Farm Workers. This bill has unintended consequences, but in an effort to work with the author's office, the UFW will remain neutral on this issue, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pam Lopez: Pam Lopez, on behalf of the California State Fire Fighters Association, I'm going to turn this over to Matt Epstein. Matt has 20 years in public service including as a police officer and a firefighter and the fire chief here in Northern California.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 103, 'end': 115, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 117, 'end': 121, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brian Allison: mr. chair and members of the committee, brian craig allison on behalf of the american federation of state, county and municipal employees. our affiliate, united ems workers local for 911, their president jason and one of the members from riverside county, is here to give substantive testimony and talk about the issues that they deal with every single day on behalf of you and the communities that they represent, but i just want to take the time very quickly to commend the author, the chair, the committee staff for their diligence in working on this bill. i'd also like to thank the vice chair for his work with us to ensure that we're addressing critical issues dealing with communication devices, and his commitment to public safety is one that we also share as a union. they represent these workers and provides the services across the state. we recognize that this is just the first step and what we believe to be a long process, but we think that this is absolutely critical that we stand up for the folks who providing the critical services and communities across the state that are literally saving lives, it is our responsibility, and i would hope that the legislature would make it a priority to ensure that these workers who are doing work on your behalf, have the adequate meal and rest rate, break provisions that they need. as well as the information that they need to begin to address some of the issues that they deal with and their memberships, but with that, i will respectfully request an aye vote from you on this.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 9, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 40, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 204, 'end': 209, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jason Brollini: thank you, mr. chair and members of the committee. my name is jason, i'm a paramedic in california, also the president and executive director of united ems workers. we represent about 3,000 private sector emts, paramedics and support staff in california. what i'd like to take an opportunity to share with you today, is our approach to dealing with mental health, and you may ask, why are we talking about mental health with language that looks traditionally like labor protection bill? it is very important for the committee to understand that when you look at suicide and mental health rates within our industry sector. suicidal ideation is 13 times higher than the general population. suicide attempts and completion, 10 times higher than the general population, and when you look at the progression from new career to severe mental health issues there is a clear, and very articulable pathway to that, and it starts with critical stress, whether it be accumulative or acute when that accumulative stress and critical stress is not relieved, at the 5 to 11 year mark depending on which report you look at creates career fatigue and burn out, which progresses to deep personalization, and we have a period in our careers where we no longer can empathize with the patients that we serve and we just flat out don't care. and when you get to that point it does not take much of a stimulus to move to severe mental health issues and so, our organization has looked at this and we have always supported back end mental health services, awareness, the check on your buddy and your partner programs, but we've also realized that if we don't do something about the front end critical stress, we're chasing our tail on the back end and we're never going to win when it comes to mental health issues. so what this bill does for us is provide some respite for the day to day, to reduce that opportunity for critical stress to rear it's ugly head and get us to walk down the path of significant mental health problems. and i'd like to introduce lisa larusso. she's a paramedic and a colleague of mine, that can share a personal story of what happens when we do not manage this stress and the mental health issues that arise from them.
[{'start': 62, 'end': 67, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2035, 'end': 2047, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lisa LaRusso: Hi, my name is Lisa LaRusso. I've been a paramedic in the private sector area for 27 years. I'd like to say is, imagine responding to an emergency call as a private sector paramedic, and a mother, and seeing two children lying in a puddle of blood and mutilated by the hands of their mother, knowing that, because of the severity of the act of violence, that only one of these precious lives could be saved. Imagine seeing the destruction of these two small lives doing everything humanly possible to save both of them and then, immediately having to respond to yet another call that could very well mean another life or death. That is the reality of our everyday. I'd like to give an example of one of my coworkers, who's been a medic for 35 years. He had two difficult 911 calls in one day, in which he no longer could cope with in his mind. He had his partner stop the ambulance and got out and proceeded to stand on the train tracks and waited for the train to come. His partner eventually talked him off the tracks. He went back to the station and left work and has not returned. After coming up with several different scenarios to commit suicide, he did finally decide to try and get through EAP, but they failed him and just wanted to prescribe medications. They didn't work. He just wanted to talk, but wasn't given the time. Workers Comp wouldn't cover him and he was denied disability. He's been left with no insurance and no income. He turned to alcohol, marijuana to try and forget. It was cheaper and it was easier. He has come to the decision to tie up loose ends and just disappear and commit suicide. He has treated his PTSD as a terminal illness and has come to terms with it. He is no longer looking for help and has made his decision. This is the only way to stop the memories and the nightmares. The opportunity to help him was gone as soon as he walked out of the station door. If EMS workers aren't given more help to cope with these horrific calls immediately following them, then there will continue to be more suicides. EMS workers save lives, but nobody's saving us. We believe this bill is the first step in addressing these concerns, please vote yes on AB 263.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marie Goyoshihara: thank you, mr. chair and members, marie brian goyoshihara with the california employment lawyers association. i want to thank the author and sponsors for bringing this bill forward. we have a support if amended position. there are just certain provisions of this bill that are declaratory of existing law that codify holdings from recent supreme court decisions and requirements under the wage order. so we just want to make that clear that, that is in fact declaratory of the existing law and not imposing new requirements that don't already exist, thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rene Bayardo: Thank you, Mr. Chair and members. Rene Bayardo, SEIU California, also in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ashley Martinez: Mr. Chairman and Committee Members, Ashley Martinez on behalf of the Service Employees International Union Local 1000, in strong support.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stephanie Roberson: Mr. Chair and Members of the Committee, Stephanie Roberson on behalf of the California Nurses Association. Just want to thank the diligent, diligent work of this Committee, your consultants, you Mr. Chair, your leadership, and of course, the leadership of Mr. Rodriguez and us all coming together on this table, on this issue. Just want to say upfront, we did not oppose the meal and rest break periods, it was just a real tiny, tiny technical difference around workplace violence. We got that figured out, and we are happy to remove our opposition. Thank you so much and thank you for the work on this bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 260, 'end': 269, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Katherine Osakart: sorry, katherine marie osakart with the california air medical services, the area meals providers. the bill currently, as drafted, does scoop in the area meals providers of a different model. they work a 24-hour shift, very similar to a firefighter. so we are working with the author to address some of our concerns around how the meal and rest is provided in other provisions of the bill since they are differently situated on ground. so thank you.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Micheli: Mr. Chair and members, Chris Micheli on behalf of the California Ambulance Association. We have a position of oppose unless amended, which is a rather uncomfortable position, because certainly, Mr. Rodriguez's part of the EMS brethren that we're a part of prior to his election, he was actually named a star of life in one of our annual programs and since his election to the Assembly has spoken annually at our conferences, our concern is strictly the ability for us to communicate with our employees, our EMS workers. We share the concerns on mental health, that they have adequate meal and rest periods. That if there is a failure to provide those, that they are compensated for those missed meal or rest breaks. As we have communicated to the assemblyman, he's been gracious with his time as well as his staff to meet with us, looking at our concerns. We have really our first big session, if you will, tomorrow morning and look forward to those discussions. What we have specifically requested is that ability to communicate. We were concerned with the Supreme Court decision that although it address security guards and wage order for, the same language is contained in a number of those wage orders, including wage order nine, which is applicable to many industries, including EMS workers. And of course, the Supreme Court essentially said that, that 10 minute rest period had to be uninterrupted. We of course work on a 24/7 basis. We don't have the luxury of declining or taking breaks from those calls when a 911 calls in. Only we and hospital EDs are required to treat every patient. We have one additional requirement within a contracted time, generally four to six minutes depending on the jurisdictions, and so we have to have an absolute ability to communicate with our employees by radio, by cell phone, by whatever means is available. The language that is contained in a measure by your Vice Chair, AB 817, has a specific provision. I know that, that measure was taken off calendar today, but that is the language that we have proposed to of the Assembly men, and again, if we cannot reschedule that break, we believe that the employee should be paid. Our issue, again, is the ability to communicate with them even during that rest period. The last item I will raise is we think those rules should be applicable to both the public and the private sectors. Right now, the bill's provisions have a carve-out for the public. If there is any carve-out to be provided, we think that it ought to be done in a collective bargaining agreement. The sponsors or proponents of the bill represent a number of our workers for our member companies of the CAA, and these issues concerning rest and meal breaks are adequately covered in those collective bargaining agreements, thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 198, 'end': 207, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sean Henschel: Thank you, Mr. Chair and members. Sean Henschel here on behalf of American Medical Response. I'll be brief, just to reinforce and echo some of the comments previously made. American Medical Response is California's largest provider of 911 emergency ambulatory services, and they respectfully oppose to the bill as currently written, but we believe that there's a middle ground to be working out. We're looking forward to the stakeholder meeting to be happening. We agree with the author that the employee's break period, if it has to be interrupted and not rescheduled, they should be compensated for that. However, this bill, as currently written, would prevented the employees from remaining and communication while on that break. As previously stated, that's a serious threat to public safety. We convene the author on his ongoing work to that effort for public safety, and again, look forward to the stakeholder meeting to resolve the on-call issue, thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Stender: Good afternoon, Mr. Chair, Members of the Committee. My name is Jessica Stender, I'm an attorney, which Equal Rights Advocates, a nonprofit public interest organization based in San Francisco, dedicated to promoting and expanding economic rights of woman and girls in this country. Throughout our 43 year history, we've work to address and close the gender wage gap. We share the Equal Pay Today campaign, a national collaboration of women's rights organizations dedicated to finding strategies to close the wage gap. We also chair the Stronger California Advocates Network. Also committed to economic security of women and families primarily focusing on issues including the wage gap. Despite the existence of laws that prohibit employer from paying employees different amounts for doing the same or substantially similar work. The wage gap persist between men and women and nearly every occupation. In California, women working full time year round, earn just $0.80 per of the dollar that every white men earns. As we all know, this wage gap is even more troubling when we talk about women of color. Asian American women earn $0.72, African American women $0.63, and Latinas just $0.43 per dollar. It's easy to gloss over the statistics and get lost in those numbers but this translates to real effects on real lives. California women lose approximately $78 billion per year to this gap and it's not just a woman's issue. In 2015, more than of working mothers were bread winners or co bread winners in California in their family. So this gap not only takes a toll on women but their families and communities throughout the state. It deprives them of wages that could go towards diapers, food, rent, and it also deprives them of future assets that can go towards financial security. Measures that address the lack of transparency around pay are critical to addressing this complex economic issue, and one strategy alone is not enough to solve it. These measures that increase pay transparency are an important strategy because employers are often unaware that these gaps and disparities even exist in their own companies. Research has shown as the Assembly woman mentioned that when these pay and transparency initiatives are undertaken Begin businesses, and in this case, government civil service jobs find that these disparities exist, and are able to then rectify them. In California, companies in California recognize the need to take a proactive approach, and have conducted internal pay analyses, and have determined where paid disparities exist and where they have then taken action to close those gaps. These include Apple. Apple, Google, Salesforce, and SpaceX. The only other thought is that employers have already been gearing up for the EEO1 in federal revised form which will already require employers to do these types of internal pay data analysis, which would begin this year. Although that is at risk, employers already have been gearing up to do this and are ready to do this and these companies, private companies have done it, have shown that it is possible to do it. Thank you.
[{'start': 64, 'end': 79, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shemman Crowley: all right crowley representing the american association of university women and as you heard in the previous testimony, there's been a lot of work over the last few years, both at the state and the federal level, but we're concerned about relying on some of the things at the federal level. there was a bill last year, ab 1890 by assembly member dodd, then assembly member dodd. that was going to be getting some transparency data and it was vetoed by the governor because he said we could rely on the federal government and sadly, that's not really the case. as jessica said, we're looking at the potential repeal of the eo1 form. and on january 30th just 10 days after being sworn in president trump sign an executive order saying for every new regulation do needed to be repealed, they have taken down from the white house website, the white house equal pay pledge that a 100 of the largest employers decide on to, and the white house advisor on women's issues, stephen miller, once wrote that the pay gap has nothing to do with gender discrimination. so seeing some of these actions you can, i'm sorry, and there was another one. there was a fairer pay and safe work places executive order of the obama administration has been resented, has been repealed. and that includes some equal paying components. so you see why we've got a little bit of concern, we don't have a whole lot of confidence that we're going to being able to rely on the federal government. so we need to be more active at the state level and institute our own transparency laws. thank you.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 346, 'end': 350, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 373, 'end': 377, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 563, 'end': 570, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 696, 'end': 701, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 965, 'end': 979, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mariko Yoshihara: Thank you, Mr. Chair and members. Mariko Yoshihara with the California Employment Lawyers Association. We're in support for all the reasons previously stated. We were co-sponsor pay auction. I think this is the great next step to take to address one of the biggest varies to addressing the gender wage gap just to pay lack of pay transparency. So we ask for you support.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Everly: Laura Everly, Wide of UC San Francisco and Marin, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sam Rodriguez: Sam Rodriguez on behalf of the United Food and Commercial Workers and a board member of Stronger California in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Meg Vasey: Meg Vasey, Tradeswomen, Inc., strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Barron: mr. chair and committee members, barron on behalf to he california chamber of commerce and we are opposed to this measure. obviously, we are supportive of equal pay, we supported sb 358 when senator jackson strengthened california's equal pay act, and we are still in support of that by working with the task force that has been implemented by the state. make sure that it's clear and it's implemented and takes full effect in california. so we are in support of equal pay, but what we are concerned with the bill, of ab 1209 is it doesn't capture the balance that was captured in sb 358. specifically, it says that we must compare the salaries, the mean and median salaries between men and women and i assure you that there is going to reflect wage disparity. there is going to be wage disparities between men and women captured in that data, but what it does not reflect is the bonafide factors listed in sb 358 upon which you can have a wage disparity for education, experience, training, merit systems, personal choices by the employees themselves. so it says compensation, we don't really know what the term compensation means. is it adjusted gross income after you've had personal choices with regards to maxing out your 401k, medical deductions, etc. it doesn't capture any of those legitimate reasons as to why you're going to have a wage disparity and that's what we're concerned with, is that you aggregate this data, you force employers to put it on their public websites so they can be criticized and publicly shamed for having wage disparities, but yet it doesn't capture any of the justified reasons why you can have a wage disparity. so we don't think that this moves the equal pay forward. we think it is just a way in which to public shame companies who are already doing the right things. a lot of these companies are already conducting pay audits of their compensation structure to make sure that employees who are performing substantially similar duties are actually getting payed the same amount. this bill compares job descriptions and job titles which both the eeoc and california courts have said that's not the proper analysis. you actually need to look at the duties of the employees and what they're doing to compare apples to apples and not apples to oranges. so for those reasons, we don't think it's going to provide any accurate data on what the wage disparity actually is in california, because it doesn't capture all of those personal choices, all of the bonafide factors upon which you can have a wage disparity legitimately. so for those reasons we are opposed.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 199, 'end': 206, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Chris McHill: Mr. Chair and members, Chris McHill on behalf of the Computing Technology Industry Association, and we too were active supporters on Senator Jackson's Senate Bill 358 and work diligently with the authors and proponents of last years AB 1676 by former Assembly Member Campos. We share the concerns, the specific concerns that Ms. Barrera outlined. Plus I want to add, we are also concerned about the threat of litigation. This reminds us of a few years ago when information was posted on different websites such as the Bureau of Automotive Repair, Barber and Cosmetology for violations and what resulted in those public shamings were not only the public shamings, but more importantly litigation. Publishing that information on those websites provided avenues for Enterprising plaintiffs lawyers to go and sue those individual companies and I would note that this bill would add a new section to the labor code, which of course means that any violation is subject to a private Attorney General representative action. So which is also a the threat of the litigation that is a significant concerns to our member companies, for that reason we are opposed. Thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 141, 'end': 148, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 267, 'end': 273, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 329, 'end': 336, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tyler Blacking: and thank you mr. vice chair. tyler katherine blacking with the wine institute, we are opposed. thank you.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matthew Long: Matthew Long, Western Growers, we are opposed. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bruce Wick: Bruce Wick, California Professional Association of Specialty Contractors, opposed. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barry Broad: broad, on behalf of the teamsters. so obviously, a lot of employees and a lot of workers who are designated as independent contractors by the people they work for rely on tips. and, i can tell you, i will name the rides sharing company, since we've met with hundreds if not thousands of their workers, drivers, uber, doesn't let these so-called independent business people, accept tips on the credit card, which they pay. although, uber is not their employer, and uber is not even in the transportation business, it's just putting business people on one side of the transaction together with people who want to ride in their vehicle. if they really are independent business people, they should be able to get a tip.  if there's a gratuity involved, they should be able to receive that, and they should be able to receive that in the form that is mandated for payment by the entity that is in total control of the economic relationship, namely uber. it is just not fair and when you talk to these, with these drivers, all they want is more money. they want to earn more money, that's what it's all about with them. and we ought to allow them to be able to do that. thank you.
[]
Mike Herald: mr. chair, mike tyler herald with the western center on law and poverty substituting for my colleague jessica barklow who's pulled away into another committee right now.  we concur in the remarks of mr. broad and we have brought a witness today, jeanetta hall who's a calworks recipient and has worked for uber and we'd like her to tell her story. jeanetta?
[{'start': 11, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 102, 'end': 117, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 202, 'end': 207, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 245, 'end': 258, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 347, 'end': 355, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jeanetta Hall: Hello, my name is Jeanetta Hall, I have a child, she's almost 10. We currently get cash aid and food stamps. I've been looking for work, and upon looking for work I ran into Uber and now I have been working for Uber. On one of my rides, a gentleman had said he would like to tip but he had his credit card and couldn't tip, and I said, well, that's okay. But I would have liked to have because I have all the gas and my car expenses when my car gets ran out by driving, so it would be nice to have that in there. And I just think that with this bill I think it would really help all the other Uber drivers and stuff. So I really support this bill AB 1099.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Caitlin Vega: mr. chair and members, vega for the california labor federation, also here in support. i would just add i think this bill is a minor ask of employers. we are not asking them that they pay workers more, we're simply asking them to allow customers to pay workers more. that is a very small thing to ask and it's something that would make a difference to the people working for them. thank you.
[]
Mariko Yoshihara: mariko mike yoshihara with the california employment lawyers association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Stender: Jessica Stender, Equal Rights Advocates, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Barrera: good afternoon, mr. chair and committee members, jennifer mariko barrera on behalf of the california chamber of commerce and we are opposed to this measure. we don't have a problem with obviously employees getting more money or gratuities. we're concerned with the actual implementation of this issue. again, the issue of tips and allocating tips has been a huge issue in the restaurant industry where tips are customary with regards to sit down service. and it's been an issue with regards to who gets those gratuities. the front of the house, the back of the house, all of them provide potential service to their customer. can you mandate tip pooling? can you allocate those to different employees who have contributed to the service? we see those same concerns popping up in industries that have identified in this bill who don't customarily keep tips, for example a hotel. i thought at the end of your stay you go and you pay your bill with a credit card. and you have a designation as this bill would require for you to provide a gratuity, and they provide a $20 gratuity, who does that go to? does that go to the concierge, does that go to the person who helps you with your luggage? does it go to the front desk receptionist who was super nice and helpful that day? how does an employer suppose to allocate that and how do they know who the gratuity goes to? it pops up with regards to that in the hotel industry, with regards to potentially drive thru industries, in the restaurant, and we don't want to get into that debate about how we allocate those tips because we don't want the liability that comes with it. there's been ton of litigation as i mentioned in the restaurant industry with regards to this, and we foresee those same concerns coming up again. i also wanted to mention that we actually agree with governor brown on this issue who vetoed the similar bill last year. that was only applicable to nail salons and said that the marketplace will dictate this and there's no need for government action in this area. we agree with that sentiment and for those reasons we are opposed.
[{'start': 49, 'end': 72, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1831, 'end': 1836, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Robert Callahan: thank you. callahan, with the internet association, in oppose unless amended position on the bill, specifically on provision a6 that speaks to online enabled applications and platforms. i would echo the comment just made by ms.barrera. especially in the online world, the ecosystem, the competitiveness of it is so fierce we do think the market can best figure out the tipping mandate issue in this bill. also want to appreciate the sensitivity of the author in her statement made to the distinctions between employer and employees and independent contractors. on that point, just wanted to raise a concern that we have that the bill currently includes these platforms, most of which, their workers are actually independent contractors. it includes them in a section that speaks to how employers are required to treat tips received by employees. we think that's kind of awkward at best and could create confusion and be improperly construed to resort to lead people to different conclusion, one that's not inconsequential. so for those reasons, we oppose unless amended but look forward to working with the author on the bill. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 224, 'end': 227, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 227, 'end': 234, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Fred Jones: and fred jennifer jones with the professional beauty federation of california. just a couple points that haven't been made. salons do have to eat the cost of these charges which are typically 2 to 3%. they cannot pass them on to the employee. so there is a cost embedded in this, to salon owners, at least, which could create a disincentive to even offer credit card as an option for payment. so i'm not going to repeat any of the comments already made. we oppose. thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrea Deveau: good afternoon, andrea fred deveau on behalf of technet. just to align myself with the comments made from robert callahan of internet association, we are opposed unless amended and look forward to continuing to work with the author. thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 106, 'end': 121, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Maria LaRado: Good afternoon, Maria LaRado of Maple Bear Inc, doing businesses Instacart. We are opposed unless amended.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tyler Blackney: tyler andrea blackney with the wine institute. we are opposed but would like to work with the author if possible. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Angie Mineti: Angie Mineti with the California Retailers Association, also opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katie Henson: henson with the california restaurant association, we are opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Reyes: Good afternoon, Michelle Reyes with the California Travel Association, in opposition. Thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alejandra Mejia: hi, my name is alejandra. i am a manager at mcdonald's, i've been working there for almost 11 years. i currently make $12.75 per hour, i have three children that i raise on my own. it's hard to support my kids by myself as a single mom but i got the worse when mcdonald's, they cut my hours. i, actually, 8 hours per week before, the worst was when i noticed that i couldn't survive with eight hours per week, so as a single mother, it's really hard to survive. i have a daycare, so if you don't make more than 30 hours they will cut your daycare, so as a single mother it's really hard. but they will hire more people, i will ask them for more and they would say, it's really low right now, there's no work for you. but you see, they will keep on hiring more people. so when they saw me on fight for $15, my manager came up to me, and she gave me a paper, she told me, okay, well then, give me your availability. your days, your hours, what you can work. but still, they will just give me, so right now i work 30 to 35 hours per week. and i will raise my voice and i won't get enough hours, and then i think my story is very similar to many others but the difference is that not everybody have the support that i found in this campaign. and i am here today to speak on behalf of so many workers that they need to work more than hours, with the ab 5 it could happen. and i will say, thank you very much for letting me talk for a lot of more people that they're having the same issue that i have.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lily Wayne: lily for the center of popular democracy. good afternoon, really appreciate the opportunity to testify in support of ab 5 on behalf of center for popular democracy and working partnerships usa. cpd's fair work week initiative supports efforts across the country to restore a work week that enables working families to thrive. cpd and our affiliate working partnerships usa played an integral role in enacting san jose's opportunity to work ordinance, which was adopted by voters in november 2016. we've also consulted on fair work ordinances in san francisco and emeryville, as well as seattle, all of which contain provisions that pretty similar to opportunity to work act. we are currently consulting with policy makers from new york city to oregon on the design of fair work week policies. the opportunity to work act is a common sense solution to the crisis of under employment. while unemployment is down the number of part time low wage jobs is actually on the rise. structural shifts towards part timing in high growth low wage sectors like retail and fast food service appear to be driving this trend. the proportion of californians stuck working part time who actually want to work full time nearly doubled from 2006 to 2014. and now stands at more than 900,000 workers, and even these striking figures likely understates the problem of under employment due to outdated federal metrics of voluntary verses involuntary part time work. and reliable survey show that almost half of all part time workers want to work more hours, then are available at their current jobs. in california that's a full 5% of our workforce. economists also see that this continuing weakness in labor markets as a hindrance to future economic growth. by constraining households' unrealized but desired income from additional working hours. we know that when workers are forced to juggle multiple part-time jobs, they often make less total income, faced with financial volatility and have significant stress and health issues. part timing of hourly work has also hidden costs for business.
[]
Alyssa Ramirez: my name is alyssa tyler ramirez. i don't speak english.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ashley Butch: my name is ashley alyssa butch, i am in support of ab 5. i'm a single mother and on behalf of my son as well, i am a support of ab 5. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Terry Brennan: mr. chair and members. brennan, on behalf of seiu california. representing over 700,000 working men and women in california. in strong support. it's the right thing to do. it's the moral thing. thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barry Broad: Mr. Chairman and members. Barry Broad on behalf of the Teamsters Almagamated Transit Union. The machinists unite here. The long foremen. The International Federation of Professional and Technical Engineers. The utility workers. And Consumer Attorney's, in support of the bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Fearing: hi, good afternoon, chair and members. jennifer ashley fearing on behalf of the california association of nonprofits. we support the practice of providing additional hours to qualified part time employees before hiring new staff. as with our support with the minimum wage increase we're not seeking an exemption for the non profits.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 54, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dominique Lawton: Hello, Dominique Lawton on behalf of the California Association of Local Conservation Corep in support.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Stender: hi. stender on behalf of equal rights advocates in strong support.
[]
Sam Rodriguez: Buenos Tartes, Mr. Chairman, Members of the Committee. Sam Rodriguez on behalf of United Food and Commercial Workers. Representing 160,000 workers statewide. We are in support of AB 5 for a better California. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 55, 'end': 68, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tristan Brown: Thank you, Chair and members. Tristan Brown with California Federation of Teachers in strong support.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mitch Simmon: Thank you, Mr. Chair and members. Mitch Simmon with California Labor Federation also in support.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alejandra Raja: chair and members, raja on behalf of nextgen climate in support.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tina Sanderbol: Hi, I'm Tina Sanderbol. I'm with the Fight for 15, a Mcdonald's worker and I support the bill.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrea Beaufort: My name is Andrea Beaufort and I support your bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Diana Williams: my name is diana jennifer williams and i support your bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ashley Martinez: mr. chairman and committee members. ashley diana martinez on behalf of seiu local 1000 representing over 96,000 state employees in strong support.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Abraham Lopez: my name is abraham, retired member of seiu in support off the bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Barrera: Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and Committee Members. Jennifer Barrera on behalf of California Chamber of Commerce and we are opposed to AB 5. I just want to talk about some of the statistics that have provided in the proponent's testimony. First, San Jose has adopted this and it just went into effect I believe about three weeks ago. So it has been implemented but I would say it's only three weeks old, and from our understanding of the locals it hasn't been a smooth implementation. So far there's still a lot of question out there with regards to businesses and how they're actually going to be able to adopt this policy in their businesses. Also with regards to the EDD statistics. There is 5% of the population of employees here in California who are part time unintentionally. Of those 5% I'm certain that there's some of these employees who are working for employers who are deliberately manipulating their schedules and we disagree with that policy wholeheartedly. But it's not a growing trend, it's not even a prevalent trend here in California. Yet, despite that this bill will be applicable to 85% of our employers in California who aren't engaged in those practices and that's our concern. AB 5 mandates that we offer any additional hours of work to existing employees before we hire anyone. What does that mean? For small employers who are less sophisticated than others they have to document every time they make an offer and we don't even know what qualifies as an offer. Is it an email? Is it a phone call? Is it a letter? And how long do we have to wait after we make that offer before we can move on and place somebody on that shift, on that schedule for the day? It says that we have to allocate the hours in a non-discriminatory and transparent process. If you have multiple employees that respond and said that they can work, how about if we have a five hour shift? I can work 30 minutes of that shift, I can work an hour of that shift, I can work 2 hours of that shift. How do you allocate those hours equally across the board and how do you respond to all those different requests? And I can tell you that if you're one of the employees who don't get the hours, you're going to feel like it was a non discriminatory and transparent. There's three separate levels of enforcement in this bill. There's an individual private right of action, there's labor Commissioner enforcement and investigation, and there's also the private Attorney General act that allows you to bring a representative of action. So one failure by an employer to follow any of these guidelines and we are subject to separate in litigation and enforcement actions, it's a huge concern. When we offer to existing employees, do we have to offer I appreciate the amendment taking out the geographical location that's helpful, but do we have to offer it to employees who are out on protective leave of absences? Do we have to offer it to employees who are out on vacation? Do we have to offer it to employees who have already indicated, I appreciate that they're going to be able to opt out, but what if they forget to opt out for that particular day? Do we have to indicate to those employees that they're entitled to additional hours of work? Last point I'm going to make Is that this also jeopardizes our hiring programs for veterans, at risk youth. If we can't allocate those hours to those programs, we can no longer participate. Cal Chamber did a survey, we had 52% of our members engaged in these programs that hired over 5,000 employees, veterans, at risk youths, convicts. We're concerned with the application of this bill to those programs as well. For those reasons we are opposed.
[{'start': 49, 'end': 65, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Angie Mineti: Angie Mineti with the California Retailers Association, also in opposition. I'm going to share my time with my colleague here. Certainly, won't be redundant with our comments but we believe that this bill does propose unnecessary mandates and really gets in to the day to day scheduling of a business. I know for our retail industry we do have very specific needs in many times. It's not about having employees to work longer hours in our stores but it's to ramp up and have more employees to satisfy the consumer demand or consumer traffic that we would be anticipating that day or that week. So we see many challenges, I know that for our members that do engage in hiring initiative practices and also programs for at risk youth. This certainly is an impediment and does place a barrier to entry for those individuals. I will say that we don't believe this policy approach will result in more employees converted into full time status. Rather, I think we believe this does reduce the opportunity for upper mobility. Many times retailers do know the individuals in the workforce that would like to have more hours or would like to be long term part of the company. And so we would just urge you to consider the cumulative impact this legislation has on California businesses, on top of the minimum wage increase. On top of other various measures that have passed that have significantly increased the cost to do business in California.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Robinson: mike ashley robinson here on behalf of the american staffing association and california staffing professionals. it's the temporary staffing industry in california. i'm going to just take little tact, a given tact here and just go to kind of the numbers and it was brought up in the analysis and correctly noted in the analysis, i might say, that really there's only 1.1% of the workforce that's working part-time involuntarily in jobs that are normally full-time. so it's not a large number of people who are working in jobs that should be working full time. there's a 5% of the total workforce that's affected, that is working part time involuntarily, 4% of them are working in jobs that are by their nature, part time. and that's largely retail and restaurants and this bill's really not going to help those folks. i mean the people who want to work full-time, who are in those part-time jobs aren't necessarily looking for full-time work in those jobs. they might be working for full-time work, but they might be looking at full-time work like my daughter is, working in a restaurant, looking for a full-time job in a career that she wants. and in the meantime, she's working part-time until she makes her career decisions. and just really quickly, on behalf of the staffing industry, the staffing industry serves as a bridge for the employer and the employee. so a good number of people are coming to staffing because they're reentering the workforce, they're coming to the workforce for the first time. they're veterans returning from service, and they need a foot in the door. these are people who might find a job because there are some available hours from a client employer and that client employer no longer has those available hours to give and those people are going to be denied work through by this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Patty Blosser: good afternoon, patty mike blosser, california state council assurance state director, and we are opposed.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Lane: Jason Lane, California Bankers Association we're opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matthew Allen: good afternoon. matthew patty allen, western growers association, we're also opposed.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Rodriguez: Karen Rodriguez, The Right Choice Staffing out of San Bernadino County, opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Connie Delgado: connie matthew delgado with the california hospital association in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brittany Sitzer: brittany connie sitzer with civil justice association, also in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lauren Greenwood: greenwood, california cable and telecommunications in opposition.
[]
Steve Wayne: Steve Wayne, AMN Health Care, nation's largest healthcare staffing company, opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Broth Buckley: broth brittany buckley with the personal insurance federation opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tyler Blackey: tyler broth blackey with the wine institute. we are opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicole Rice: rice, california manufacturers and technology association, and we're opposed.
[]
Michaelina Hernandez: good afternoon, michaelina tyler hernandez on behalf of the retail industry leaders association, the family winemakers of california, and the western car wash association, in opposition. thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Reyes: Hi there, Michelle Reyes on behalf of The California Travel Association, in opposition. Thank you.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dennis Albiani: Dennis Albiani on behalf of The Family Business Association of, California, on Alliance of Calvert and Greater Feed, we oppose.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matt Roman: matt, california trucking association, we're opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Miller: Good afternoon, Michael Miller, California Association of Winegrape Growers, we're in opposition, thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bruce Wick: Bruce Wick, California Professional Association of Specialty Contractors, opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Pelot: Mr. Chair and members, Mike Pelot for the California Employment Law Council in opposition. Thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Craig Ryder: ryder, a local business owner here for pridestaff as well as pridestaff inc, headquartered in fresno, opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katherine Pettibone: katherine, american insurance association respectfully opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Shirikian: Sure, Mr. Chair and members, John Shirikian again with the Association of California Life and Health Insurance Companies. Just wanted to thank the author for bringing this bill and also for accepting the amendments. And with that, we're in support.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Shriken: Mister Chair and members, John Shriken, representing the Association of California Life and Health Insurance Companies. We had an oppose unless amended position on this originally, and if you'll indulge me for a minute, I'd like to explain that. There are two parts of this bill, the supplier diversity part, as outlined in AB 53 and we did in 2012. Our members are in complete support of that expansion, of this categories. Another part of the bill deals with, boardroom and boardroom diversity. While we laud the efforts of the author and what he's trying to do, we did have some initial concerns with personal privacy. So based on the amendments that we've now seen, we're happy to go ahead and remove that opposition, and look forward to working with the author as we move forward.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Gunning: mr chairman, members, michael jonah gunning, personal insurance federation. i want to echo all the comments you've heard from my colleagues and the other trade associations and truly look forward to working with member ridley thomas to make sure this is a good bill. thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 219, 'end': 232, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Shriken: mr chair and members, john with the association of california life and health insurance companies. we didn't have a formal position on this bill, but wanted to offer some comments for the record. start by thanking the assembly member for his efforts and engagement in this area. as we stated earlier, our members are in support of the coin program and the tax credit extension and we look forward to continuing this conversation as the bill moves forward.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Gunning: mr chairman, gunning, personal insurance federation, here in support as well. we didn't take a position but certainly appreciate the author's willingness to listen to our concerns and we look forward to work with him in the next phase of this bill, thank you.
[]
Catherine Pedibow: Catherine Pedibow in American Insurance Association. I echo my colleague, look forward to working with you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert Herrell: mr chairman, seeking a little clarification. robert michael herrell with the department of insurance. to the extent that the amendments reflected in comment number two of the analysis are put into the bill, the insurance commissioner and the department of insurance would reluctantly then oppose the bill. we believe those are unwarranted and unnecessary restrictions that have nothing to do with the coin program on the ability of the department to gather information from insurers on issues relevant to consumers. and so if that's in fact the action, then we would oppose that provision of the bill. thank you.
[{'start': 45, 'end': 67, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Armand Feliciano: Good morning Mr. Chair, Members of the Committee, Armand Feliciano on behalf of the Association of California Insurance Companies. We support AB 1679 because it addresses the rising cost of car repairs in California, which is ultimately paid for by your constituents, our policyholders. As an industry, we are concerned about the rising cost of car repairs, distracted driving is real, 32,000 crashes last year, more accidents in California. And as Assembly Member Burke alluded to, last year the California Department of Insurance adopted a one size fits all approach in conducting labor rates survey. Based on our early estimates, the CDI labor rates regulation could increase overall cost of car repairs anywhere between 280 to $300 million. AB 1679 will provide another choice in conducting a labor rate survey without the potential consequence of adding millions to the system. Let me quickly address the arguments raised by the body shops and CDI. The labor rate regulations are final. This bill does not repeal that regulation. This bill does not require shops to provide direct repair rate. So the argument that this bill artificially lowers labor rates does not apply. Does not allow insurance to use underground economy to establish labor rates. Shops that do not meet the Bureau of Automotive Repair Standards can be excluded under this bill. This bill does not allow insurers to cherry pick, page six of the bill. It has to be at random. Let me just close with this. If you look at the opposition letters, the message is that these are solely CDI issues, we respectfully disagree. We believe that the Legislature has a say in this important public policy issue that could raise the rates for your constituents. Where is your aye vote? Thank you.
[{'start': 50, 'end': 66, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 465, 'end': 470, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Gunning: Thank you Mr. Chairman, members. Michael Gunning, Personal Insurance Federation. I think we can all agree that an informed consumer makes the best choices. Whether that's buying a vacuum cleaner or buying a car, getting your car fixed, information is critical. It is our belief that the Department of Insurance Regulations on steering prohibit truthful, non-deceptive, non-misleading statements by insurers to their insurees. The regulations hinder communications between insurers and policy holders during the car repair process and therefore need to be addressed by the Legislature. This Legislature, in 2009, with Assembly woman Mary Hayashi in AB 1200, decided how steering would be handled in the car repair process. Insurers can share truthful, non-deceptive information about the benefits of an insurance auto policy. Simply put, this body has decided and no agency regulator, or has the authority to usurp the decision unless this authority has granted that to that body. AB 1200, as you've heard already. It says that insurers cannot require anyone to go to a specific body shop. Allows insurers to discuss the benefits of going to a shop that has a contract in direct repair program and allows communications about warranties, timeframes, repair processes. Members, most consumers only get in an accident once a decade, this doesn't happen a lot. So there are critical questions and issues that a consumer should know before and going into this. AB 1679 outlines these issues and allows consumers to learn key knowledge about the claim process. As we've heard from Assembly Woman Burke she outlined some of those things that we discussed. Mr. Chairman if you'd indulge me, I would like to quote from my friend Robert Petterson of Santa Clara University School of Law, who pointed out in his comments to your Committee, a broad reading of Section 758.5 is consistent with the purpose of the 2009 amendment to section 7585, which was to assure that claimants could be fully informed when exercising their right to choose a body shop. It is also consistent with the disclosures required by paragraph three, which goes so far as to encourage the claimant to seek a second opinion. We recommend, and this is in the statute, you contact any other automotive repair dealer you are considering to clarify any questions you may have regarding their services and benefits. As Professor Peterson points out, it's worth noting that independent repair shops are under no similar obligation to suggest that potential customers contact any other automotive repair dealer or even recommend that they inquire of their insure about the full ambit of repair benefits under the policy. To close, in the department's opposition letter, they state, legislation in this area should support and enhance these consumer protections, not undermine them or undermine the authority of responsible entities to enforce existing law and regulations on the insurance industry. It is our opinion that they've done exactly what they state. Undermine the authority of responsible entities to enforce the existing law, the Legislature. Please vote aye, and I thank you.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 632, 'end': 644, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1590, 'end': 1595, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1720, 'end': 1736, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2386, 'end': 2394, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Shane Lavigne: mr. chair, members, good morning. lavigne on behalf of the american insurance association, in support. thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Edwin Lombard: good morning, edwin robert lombard with the california black chambers of commerce, in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
MC Townsend: good morning, mr. speaker. mc edwin townsend, president and ceo of the regional black chamber of commerce in southern california. i'm representing over 500 small businesses, and additionally chair emeritus for the los angeles business federation, 150 organizations with over 10,000 employees, and, of course, the california black chamber council of chambers, with about 35 local chambers. fully in support, and graciously ask your aye on this 1679. thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marti Fisher: thank you, sir. marti mc fisher on behalf of the california chamber of commerce, also in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eddie Jones: Pastor Eddie Jones, President of the Los Angeles Civil Rights Association and also the Eddie Jones radio talk show, which is a civil rights show that talks about things like this. I want to see that bill get passed. Thank you.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 87, 'end': 98, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Torchia: morning, mr. chairman and members of the committee, john marti torchia, former owner of the direct repair shop network. 23 years in the industry. in support of this bill, i went out and did some surveying of shops across the state-
[{'start': 52, 'end': 70, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert Harrell: Good morning, Mister Chairman and members, Robert Harrell Deputy Commissioner for the Department of Insurance for Legislative Affairs. We respectfully oppose Assemblymember Burke's bill and would like to make a few points to the Committee. I'm joined this morning by Tony Signorelli, deputy Commissioner for consumer services and market conduct, who was one of the architects of the regulation, in case there's additional questions that need to be answered. These are brand-new regulations, they just took effect. And generally speaking, the approach we think makes more sense for the Legislature and other interested parties is to wait and see what the impact of the regulations are. If there is a problem down the road, then the Legislature has the ability to revisit any issue that occurs. I will tell you that these regulations were developed over a period of years with dozens of meetings with all interested stakeholders. And so, the notion that this is some sort of hastily put together thing just is not accurate. And so, we would note that they're brand new, and literally a couple months old, and give them time to take effect first. I would note that on page three, lines five to ten of the Bill, it says that the intent of the Bill to quote supersede in their entirety, the amendments to subdivision E of section 2695.8 of title 10 of the California Court of Regulations adopted on November 9, 2016. And the supersede any provision of that regulation in effect prior to November 9 2016 that's in conflict with section 758.5 of the insurance code. So there is a wiping out, particularly in the area of anti steering of the regulations. And let's not pretend that that is not the case. We will also note that if these regulations were not lawful and appropriate with the statutory authority that exists with the department, the Office of Administrative Law would not have approved the regs. If there's an issue or a conflict, that is why the office of administrative law exists. Now, to pivot a little bit to more substantively, in terms of consumer impact we are concerned that the anti steering part. The new regs that clarified and enhanced consumer protections which allow consumers to not be steered by the insurance company to the repair shop of the insurer's choice, and allows the consumer to pick the shop of their choice, would be eroded. By eliminating new protections for consumers with significantly weaker provisions, some of these protections are wiped out. This means that, for example, to make it real, some consumers will have to wait a week or more, or will have to drive more than 15 miles in urban areas or 25 miles in other parts of the state to merely get an estimate or an inspection of their damaged vehicle. Pivoting to the labor rate survey provisions of the legislation, ultimately, the labor rate survey provisions are really about insurers not particularly wanting to pay the prevailing wage to a body shop. Despite their currently unfettered ability to negotiate any rate they wish with any shop that they wish in the State of California. They can do that right now under the regs, they can negotiate whatever rate they want with whatever shop they want on a bilateral basis or whatnot. They can do that right now. That's unfettered by the regs. The labor rate provisions also treat as trade secrets, some information that in fact is not a trade secret. And that would not only shield it from the public, but in some cases, shield it from the department. We don't see how that is in consumers' best interest. Finally, it grants the equivalent of a Good Housekeeping seal of approval, the rebuttal presumption, on virtually any survey methodology. Irrespective if it's statistically valid or logically sound or mathematically accurate, and that's obviously a concern. So we respectfully, we would welcome the opportunity to speak with the author and the sponsors in more detail about this bill, but we respectfully oppose this morning, thank you Mister Chairman.
[{'start': 43, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 173, 'end': 178, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 267, 'end': 282, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alyssa Lair: good morning, my name is alyssa john lair. good morning everybody, thank you for your time. i own a very small auto body shop in gilroy, california. these regulations have, that just went into effect this year have been in the works for about 15 years now. i have a tiny shop. i'm not a director of parent network shop. the reason being is it has nothing to do with quality, has everything to do with agreements, it's a business agreement to get in. okay, i provide my own warrantees, i take care of my people. i used to be a paramedic, i care about people. i want people's things done right. what they are proposing takes away our ability to make sure things are done fairly. right here, unfortunately my printer died on me last night, so i'm not able to get a copy for each and every one of you. i have an example of an estimate from an insurance company, my estimate, the letter from the insurance company denying, not only rates for procedures to correctly repair the vehicle. if you're in a direct repair network, you don't have the ability to say, i'm sorry insurance company, this procedure needs to happen to make this vehicle correct and restore it correctly. i don't understand why this is even necessary when this entire process is a voluntary deal. you are not required as an insurance company to conduct a survey. it's not a requirement, it's voluntary.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Douglass Marshall: how you doing? my name is douglass alyssa marshall from oakland, california. i'm also vice president of california auto body association. i'm opposed to this ab what is it, 16? i'm opposed to this bill passing because i've been in the auto body business 30 years. and i was originally opposed to any sort of regulation that tries to set prices on, make everybody's price the same as far as what insurance company can come in and say what they're going to pay your auto body shop to do a repair. because like any other business auto body shops have different costs, different investments into their businesses. so i've worked on this bill with the standardized labor rate with the california department of insurance for the last few years and i think that's a fair compromise by the shops that their willing to accept and all we asked was that the labor rate surveys be done in a fair manner or for every all the facts to be seen.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jack Mulladonna: Good morning. Jack Mulladonna representing the California Auto Body Association. We're opposed to the bill. The two big reasons that you've heard are the labor rate surveys. We feel as though the requirements, that these alternative requirements that are set in the bill will lead insurance companies, and allow insurance companies to perform surveys that result in an unfair and unreliable rate. Which in turn, if it's an artificially low rate the consumer ends up getting hurt because they have to pay out of their pocket. The second item is the steering, and you keep on hearing the steering issue. From our perspective, there is no problem with the insurance companies promoting or advertising their direct repair program. In fact, our Association, we represent almost 75% of the DRPs. All we're saying on that is we just don't want insurance, this bill will allow insurance companies to disparage the other shops, when consumers are selecting. So, that's our opposition overall. Thank you very much for your time.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Aaron Lewis: Good morning, Aaron Lewis with the Consumer Federation of California in opposition, and want to align ourselves with previous comments. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nancy Drabble: good morning. i'm nancy douglass drabble with consumer attorneys of california. in particular, we'd like to focus on the steering portion of the bill. as we read the language, it does significantly undermine the steering statute that has been in effect for a number of years. there's a reason there was a steering statute, because consumers were being pressured when they had a crash to go to certain places. we would like to work with the author, but as we read the language right now, we believe that it permits the insurer to continue to pressure people to go to a particular place, even after the consumer has expressed his or her preference. it also, since it says it occupies the field, i believe that it takes away our general consumer protection statute of section 790.03 of the insurance code. so we think it has a significant defect in that respect. thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 32, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cliff Costa: thank you, mr. chair and members. cliff nancy costa on behalf of the california new car dealers association. we are also opposed. we would like to continue to work with the supporters and the bill author mrs. burke. we've had a long working relationship with mrs. burke. we respect her and appreciate her open door-ness and we hope to continue to do that. we'd like to continue to work with the committee as well. we have specific issues, i will not go into them for purposes of time, thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 209, 'end': 214, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 264, 'end': 269, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ray Britain: Good morning, and thank you for this opportunity to speak. My name is Ray Britain. On December 2nd, 2015, I was the Interim Division Chief for the Division of Environmental Health Services in San Bernardino. County. At approximately 10:50 AM that morning, my whole life changed forever. We were taking a break between presentations, staff were mingling at their tables, some were outside taking pictures and others were in the restroom. Suddenly, we heard five to six very loud popping sounds coming from the east glass conference room door. This got everyone's attention. We were trying to process what the noise was when suddenly the door flung open, a person dressed in black with a ski mask came into the room. As soon as they entered the room, they began to shoot my staff. I sat frozen in disbelief at the front of the room watching all my staff as they were hit. Some fell immediately, some were thrown out of their chairs. I could see their bodies contort in unnatural ways. At some point I took cover and there were two now in the room. Everyone was lying on the ground, the concrete was vibrating as they swept the room and shot everyone lying defenselessly on the ground. The feeling that we had in that room of helplessness consumed us all. Anyone that moaned got shot, anyone that moved was shot. There was nowhere to go, we were trapped, we were helpless, we were vulnerable. I will never forget the feeling of helplessness that consumed me that day. The things that I saw, smelled, will haunt me for the rest of my life. What I witnessed that day was inhumane. I didn't believe that a human being would be capable of such an act. The helplessness and vulnerability that I felt that day has never left me. In fact, it has been worsened by the helplessness and vulnerability that I'd made to feel at the hands of our employer and the workman comp system. Consistently since the day of the shooting, we'd have to fight with both our employer and their self-funded workers' compensation program just to receive the basic care that we need. What we have gone through is unconscionable and has directly had a negative effect on our healing. Our treating physicians, psychiatrists, and therapists have all stated that the continuous fight we have had to endure has been detrimental to our recovery and has delayed and/or prohibited our ability to return to work. I returned to work the day after the incident, and remained until mid-January. I was not physically injured, but the psychological impact of this incident has been tremendous. I have been diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder by my personal physician, my workers' compensation psychiatrist, and a therapist who I had to seek out on my own. Despite these diagnosis, utilization review has denied psychotherapy appointments for me and counseling since day one. I was then required to undergo a qualified medical examination to validate my PTSD diagnosis. Not only did this QME validate, for the fourth time, my PTSD diagnosis, the QME psychiatrist also recommended psychotherapy, again, which I've been denied since day one. Is it really hard to believe that we are actually traumatized from what happened that day? Here we are 16 months after the incident, and still we're struggling for basic health care needs. I wonder if we received continuous treatment the entire time, without delays, without denials from utilization review, would I have been able to return to work? I believe I would. Other members of my staff, they still have shrapnel and significant scar tissue that remains in their bodies. They, too, are being denied psychotherapy and treatment as a result of utilization review. In closing, I would like to reiterate the fact that how the workers' compensation system has been applied on these cases, does not make any sense. The process is failing to treat PTSD and the complex and undeniable physical and psychological injuries that occurred that day. You would think that with all the information available regarding PTSD and trauma, that care would have been provided. Instead, there are still staff members of mine that have not received psychological treatment because they have been overwhelmed fighting for treatment of their physical injuries. On December 2nd 2015, the Division of Environmental Health operated with 114 full-time employees. Today, of those 114 full-time employees it is my understanding that only 10 to 15 people have returned to work full-time without work restrictions. This is less than 13%. If the purpose of workmen compensation is to treat uninjured employees and return them to work as soon as possible, then clearly you can see by the numbers the program has failed. I have been assigned a case manager, my staff who have been physically injured have had case managers from day one. The case managers become just as frustrated with the process. It's the process. This is why I support AB 44 and I thank you very much for your time and your consideration.
[{'start': 70, 'end': 81, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barry Broad: mr. chairman and members, barry cliff broad with the teamsters, we represent these employees from san bernardino county and my union leadership asked me to look into this situation as it was unfolding. so i had many conversations with all kinds of people on both sides. what happened here, unfortunately, is a sort of dramatic version of what happens every day in the workers' comp system. but it's made more clear, in a sense, by the start nature of the injuries involve here. the workers' comp system has evolved into an adversarial system. in an adversarial system, people play adversarial games. and that happens every day in the workers' comp system. utilization review, instead of working right, turns out to be part of a strategy to deny, deny, deny until you litigate some more in the hope that you force somebody to settle and all the things had happen in an adversarial system. terrorism and adversarial systems just don't go together very well. it's just not a humane way of dealing with the process. it's not that the process operated here differently than it does, but that the process so starkly fails in a situation like this. the logic of the adversarial nature of it makes no sense, it's irrational. and so i understand that the nature of the committee's concerns and what kind of a precedent is this, and what kind of games would people play in other situations, etc., i understand all that. but the truth is that maybe when we're dealing with an act of terrorism, we've gotta sort of suspend the adversarial nature of the workers' comp system and just treat people as quickly and efficaciously and to the fullest degree possible. maybe the employer will spend a little bit more money, they could save a little if they fought more and maybe there'll be a person that somehow is taking advantage of the system that will kind of get away with something. but that might be a very, very small price to pay for the vast, vast majority of these workers who are suffering, who are, essentially through no voluntary moment of their own, put on the front lines of a combat situation without any of the tools that soldiers have to defend themselves. and so, we would urge an aye vote on this bill and hope that as the bill moves through the process, we can find the right balance that will allow a more humane approach in the workers' comp system to take over in a situation like this. thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christy Bouma: mr. chairman, members of the committee, christy barry bouma on behalf of the california professional firefighters. with your indulgence, just two quick points. to barry's point, all injured workers suffer from the same issues that these victims faced. and that is when the spotlight's gone and people stop paying attention, the friction escalates. and so that's happening to these victims who are struggling to get their lives back on track and happens to every injured worker, including my members. when the inital incident has passed and no one is paying attention. and then the adversarial system just propagates. so, we urge your support today and also would like to be helping to make this bill a little more substantial for our injured workers and firefighters.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 163, 'end': 168, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Randy Perry: Randy Perry with Aaron Read & Associates on behalf of California Highway Patrol Association. We'd again reiterate we'd like the bill to move forward. However, I mean, our position is if an officer is shot by a gang member or shot by a terrorist, they're still shot. So we'd like to deal with that issue, dealing with a bomb or dealing with a blowing up meth lab, it's still an explosion so that's what we'd like to move on language...
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Schmelzer: Thank you, Mr. Chair and members. My name is Jason Schmelzer. I'm here on behalf of the California Coalition on Workers' Compensation, also today speaking on behalf of the California Chamber of Commerce. First, we obviously want to thank the author and the committee, we've talked to both of you extensively over the past several months. The author took took an hour to sit down and speak with us. You all know that that's an extraordinary thing. Frankly, her chief of staff has been available to us at every turn in this event. So we just want to thank you for all the work that you've done and Mr. Chair and the committee as well. With the amendments, we will remove our oppositions to the bill. And it's for a very simple reason, we think that the solution identified in the amendments will work. We don't think it for any other reason than the objective analysis done by the Division of Workers' Compensation and the Department of Industrial Relations shows that it works. It demonstrates. It's the report, it's available to all of you. The reason that we do not support what was in the bill initially is the same reason that this committee has not supported the approach of dueling doctors and litigation to resolve medical disputes. I'm going to read you, Mr. Chair, if you'll indulge me, one quote from the SB 863 analysis of this committee from 2012. And it says the system of dueling doctors with lawyers and judges making medical decisions has resulted in an extremely slow, inefficient process that many argue does not provide quality results. Long delays in obtaining medical treatment result in poor outcomes, reduced return to work potential, and excessive costs in the system, none of which are good for injured workers. Labor and management have sat down and negotiated the UR and IMR process because sending injured workers and employers to judges and lawyers to resolve medical disputes has been demonstrated for decades in this state to simply not work. The approach in the amendments has worked, according to the Division of Workers' Compensation, in this situation and that's why we support the amendment. So we're happy to remove our opposition and we're also happy to continue working with the author as the bill proceeds.
[{'start': 45, 'end': 60, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julianne Broyles: thank you mr. chairman, members. julianne here, on behalf of the california association of joint powers authorities, certainly associate myself with the comments made by mr. schmelzer on how we view the amendments coming into the bill today. we had been opposed, we are pleased to be able to remove our opposition to the bill as proposed by the chair and adopted by the committee. we did have major issues with the bill in its prior version. we have also reached out to ms. reyes' office, i know faith lane has been in there talking with your staff and your chief of staff. and we also wanted to note our appreciation of your staff, mr. chairman, in helping us find a reasonable solution. case management does work. i think maybe there'll be fine-tuning down the line on who the case managers are and making sure they have adequate training to help these people who have been injured in the workplace in such terrible ways. but for this bill as it is now amended, we are pleased to remove our opposition and ask for an aye vote.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 174, 'end': 183, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 474, 'end': 479, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 496, 'end': 506, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jeremy Merz: mr. chair and members, merz on behalf of the american insurance association. we would associate our comments with mr. schmelzer. we, too, have had lengthy conversations with the author, we appreciate her time and her consideration, this very, very tough matter and incident. but we, with the amendments, do remove our opposition from the bill today.
[{'start': 118, 'end': 127, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark Sektnan: sektnan, association of california insurance companies. with the amendments, we remove our opposition.
[]
John Norwood: mr. chairman and members, john christy norwood on behalf of liberty mutual insurance company and zenith insurance company, we also remove our opposition. thank you very much.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jolena Voorhis: Mr. Chair, we weren't opposed. Jolena Voorhis on behalf of the Urban Counties of California. We had a concerns letter on file. And since the committee, we do, we will remove those concerns. We really appreciate the amendments to address this situation. And we'll remove our concerns position. Thank you.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dorothy Johnson : good morning, dorothy john johnson with the california state association of counties. i'll align my comments for second time with my colleague from the urban counties, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 34, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Scott Sporty: Good morning, my name is Scott Sporty, thank you for having me. I am Chief Lending Officer at Capital Impact Partners.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Herald: mr chair, mike dorothy herald with the western center of law on poverty. i actually have a long history with the coin program. i was one of the people who worked with senator polanco, couple of decades ago to create the program originally. and over it's time in existence, it's achieved some of the goals that we set out to do. which was to help insurers get into community investments, and to get them into creating jobs, building affordable housing. and coin has played an instrumental role in doing that by bringing insurers, cdfis, housing advocates and others together looking at investments, learning more about them. and actually, the thing i remember most is talking with one of the state farm executives who said, you know, we're actually making money. so that was the confirmation for me that it was working, and i strongly encourage your vote today to approve this bill.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 175, 'end': 182, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Shriken: Mr Chair and members, John Shriken representing the Association of California Life and Health Insurance Companies. Wanted to say thank you to the author for bringing this measure and for accepting the amendments. With those amendments we are in support of reauthorizing the COIN program and the data call, and the tax credit.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Augusta: briefly, mr. chair and members, augusta on behalf of the sponsor, capital impact partners, and also the rural community assistance corporation and self-help enterprises. i want to thank the chair and his staff for working with us on the amendments, and we urge an aye vote.
[]
Melissa Gareth: good morning, melissa with the department of insurance here in support, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : Thank you.
[]
Katherine Pettibone: Katherine Pettibone, American Insurance Association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : Mr. Chairman, Michael Gunning, Personal Insurance Federation also here in support of the bill.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 29, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Yolanda Betson: good morning, yolanda mike betson on behalf of the banker's small business development corporation in san diego, and many other non-profits who represent and have the coin program.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : in yolanda order yolanda to yolanda perform yolanda their yolanda promise, yolanda they yolanda need yolanda to yolanda have yolanda a yolanda robust yolanda portfolio yolanda to yolanda pay yolanda for yolanda those yolanda promises yolanda in yolanda the yolanda future. yolanda traditionally yolanda insurers yolanda therefore yolanda are yolanda supposed yolanda to yolanda put yolanda their yolanda money yolanda into yolanda very yolanda blue yolanda chip yolanda sorts yolanda of yolanda investments yolanda to yolanda accumulate yolanda the yolanda capital, yolanda pay yolanda for yolanda those yolanda promises yolanda in yolanda the yolanda future. yolanda this yolanda bill yolanda found yolanda a yolanda way yolanda working yolanda with yolanda the yolanda insurance yolanda department yolanda and yolanda the yolanda legislature yolanda to yolanda vet yolanda outstanding yolanda opportunities yolanda in yolanda low yolanda and yolanda moderate yolanda income yolanda communities yolanda that yolanda were yolanda deemed yolanda socially yolanda important. yolanda they yolanda may yolanda not, yolanda on yolanda the yolanda face yolanda of yolanda them, yolanda look yolanda like yolanda a yolanda blue yolanda chip yolanda investment, yolanda but yolanda super yolanda intended yolanda by yolanda the yolanda financial yolanda capacity yolanda of yolanda the yolanda insurers, yolanda the yolanda insurance yolanda department yolanda and yolanda the yolanda folks yolanda on yolanda the yolanda ground yolanda in yolanda the yolanda communities, yolanda they yolanda turned yolanda them yolanda into yolanda outstanding yolanda investments.
[{'start': 3, 'end': 10, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 17, 'end': 24, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 28, 'end': 35, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 44, 'end': 51, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 58, 'end': 65, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 75, 'end': 82, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 88, 'end': 95, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 101, 'end': 108, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 112, 'end': 119, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 125, 'end': 132, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 135, 'end': 142, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 150, 'end': 157, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 168, 'end': 175, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 179, 'end': 186, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 191, 'end': 198, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 203, 'end': 210, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 217, 'end': 224, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 234, 'end': 241, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 245, 'end': 252, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 257, 'end': 264, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 273, 'end': 280, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 295, 'end': 302, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 312, 'end': 319, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 330, 'end': 337, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 342, 'end': 349, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 359, 'end': 366, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 370, 'end': 377, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 382, 'end': 389, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 396, 'end': 403, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 410, 'end': 417, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 423, 'end': 430, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 436, 'end': 443, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 449, 'end': 456, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 462, 'end': 469, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 476, 'end': 483, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 507, 'end': 514, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 518, 'end': 525, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 537, 'end': 544, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 549, 'end': 556, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 566, 'end': 573, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 578, 'end': 585, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 590, 'end': 597, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 604, 'end': 611, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 621, 'end': 628, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 632, 'end': 639, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 644, 'end': 651, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 660, 'end': 667, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 668, 'end': 685, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 686, 'end': 693, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 700, 'end': 707, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 710, 'end': 717, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 722, 'end': 729, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 738, 'end': 745, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 751, 'end': 758, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 800, 'end': 807, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 812, 'end': 819, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 844, 'end': 851, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 855, 'end': 862, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 867, 'end': 874, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 887, 'end': 894, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 909, 'end': 916, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 920, 'end': 927, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 932, 'end': 939, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 944, 'end': 951, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 961, 'end': 968, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 976, 'end': 983, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 996, 'end': 1003, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1009, 'end': 1016, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1022, 'end': 1029, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1037, 'end': 1044, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1054, 'end': 1061, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1073, 'end': 1080, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1086, 'end': 1093, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1098, 'end': 1105, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1111, 'end': 1118, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1122, 'end': 1129, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1134, 'end': 1141, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1147, 'end': 1154, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1158, 'end': 1165, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1172, 'end': 1179, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1185, 'end': 1192, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1198, 'end': 1205, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1206, 'end': 1215, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1254, 'end': 1261, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1266, 'end': 1273, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1280, 'end': 1287, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1297, 'end': 1304, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1308, 'end': 1315, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1320, 'end': 1327, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1338, 'end': 1345, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1355, 'end': 1362, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1366, 'end': 1373, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1378, 'end': 1385, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1396, 'end': 1403, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1445, 'end': 1452, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1457, 'end': 1464, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1469, 'end': 1476, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1483, 'end': 1490, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1494, 'end': 1501, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1506, 'end': 1513, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1521, 'end': 1528, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1544, 'end': 1551, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1565, 'end': 1572, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1578, 'end': 1585, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1593, 'end': 1600, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1606, 'end': 1613, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Terrence Nelson: Terrence Nelson, Saddleback College. I am counseling faculty down there, and I'm a civilian, but I've been in the veterans services world since right before the post 911 GI Bill came into play. I hope you know.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael McGee: thank you, mr. chair and members of the committee. michael jonah mcgee, of the california community college chancellor's office. we don't have a support position on this bill, however, we did put in a request for a $30 million augmentation to the budget, to support veteran's resource centers. thank you.
[{'start': 51, 'end': 70, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Austin Webster: thank you. austin, on behalf of the faculty association of california community colleges. we'd like to thank you author for his service to veterans and the veterans themselves for their service to the country. we're in strong support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Barth: Yeah, so my name is Randy Barth, I'm the founder and CEO of Think Together which is the largest provider of after school programs in California. And as Senator Leyva mentioned, the flat funding up against sort of rising costs in general, but now rising minimum wage as we've sort of marched to $15 an hour in 2022, it really puts these programs in a vice. And so we get $7.50 per student per day, and we have kids for two thirds of the length of the school day, and so a school gets $55 or $60 per student per day, and so our challenge is how do you drive quality through that, and that's getting to be a tighter and tighter vice. And by comparison, subsidized child care programs, which have fewer programmatic requirements, are funded at 16.34 per student per day, so we're getting less than half of that. So these programs are basically going to go away if there's not some augmentation, and so there's been bills that passed the legislation the last couple of year, and the Governor has not incorporated them into his budget, basically saying, that this is a local control issue, but as many things get pushed down to the local level, there's a lot of competing forces for those funds. And we're in 50 different school districts, and so we see the local conversations across a broad section of the state, from San Acidra to Daily City up in San Mateo county, and so in many of, about 48 out of our 50 districts, there's declining enrollment. So even though there's rising per student funding for education, up against declining enrollment, it still puts pressure on school district budgets, and so this is really a state program, there's state mandates around the program requirements. And the state has mandated the cost increases through minimum wage and things like the mandatory sick leave for part time workers. It was $1 million line item for us with no revenue offsets. And so we believe that the state mandates that have been put upon the program providers require a state solution, and so we believe that Senator Leyva's bill is a very fine solution to our challenges.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 160, 'end': 165, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2026, 'end': 2031, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brian Lee: and i'm brian michael lee, i'm state director of fight crime, invest in kids here on behalf of 400 police chiefs, sheriffs, district attorneys and crime victims across california and 5,000 nationally. as mentioned before, one of our members sacramento county da anne marie schubert, disapointed she can't be here today, she was here this morning for the extended hearing, but had other matters to attend to in the afternoon. i'll be quick. we rely on scientific research, what works to keep kids away from crime and after school programs are crucial to public safety. the evidence shows in two ways. first, they help cut crime immediately by keeping kids off the streets and away from gangs during the prime time for juvenile crime, which are the after school hours. for crime by kids, against kids, kids are mostly likely also to use to smoke, drink, use drugs, get in car crashes, during that time. second, after school programs also.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 262, 'end': 281, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jason Weiss: Good afternoon, Jason Weiss with the California Alliance of Boys and Girls Clubs. And I specifically wanted to mention the Boys and Girls Clubs of Fontana in Senator Leyva's district. Boys and Girls Clubs of Kern County In Senator Vidak's district- Boys and Girls Clubs serve almost 30 to 40,000 kids every day, after school, as a direct result of the ASES program.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 166, 'end': 171, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 231, 'end': 236, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Pamela Gibbs: Pamela Gibbs, representing the Los Angeles County Office of Education, in strong support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christina Marcellus: marcellus on behalf of the boys and girls clubs of whittier, in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kris Lev-Twombly: kris with california state alliance of ymcas, serving over 30,000 students daily through the ases program, strong support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Enrique Ruacho: Enrique Ruacho on behalf of the Los Angeles Unified School District, in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tia Nguyen: tia on behalf of public advocates, here in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carol Kocivar: carol brian kocivar on behalf of the california state pta, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Dietrich: Jennifer Dietrich, on behalf of Partnership for Children and Youth in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christopher Castrillo: thank you, mr. chair, christopher carol castrillo on behalf of los angeles mayor eric garcetti in support.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 81, 'end': 94, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jake Ferreira: Good afternoon, Jake Ferreira, Mission Readiness, Military Leaders for Kids, representing over 700 retired Admirals, Generals and senior military leaders across the nation, here in California in strong support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Egan: mr. chair and members, good afternoon. i'm mike from the california teachers association. senate bill 78 seeks to grow the after-school education and safety program grants to keep up pace with increases in the minimum wage. the current ases program was created by the voters when they passed proposition 49 in 2002. the california teacher's association supported prop 49, both for the objectives of the program and because it was carefully crafted to not crowd out funding for public education guaranteed under proposition 98. prop 49 ballot materials made this clear. the official title and summary explained that the measure quote requires that new funding for before, after school programs not be taken from education funding guaranteed under proposition 98. likewise, legislative analysts stated that the annual grow funds appropriated would quote, depend on the growth in general funds spending outside of prop 98. in reviewing the text to prop 49, the findings and declarations state, quote, although new funding of after school programs is extremely important, revenues guaranteed by law for a public school system pursuant to proposition 98 should first be fully appropriated, and therefore not be used to increase the funding of these after school programs. the new funding for after school programs will therefore be funded above the legally required educational funding. the stated purpose of prop 49 was to fund programs only out of growth and state revenues, and only after state revenues that are otherwise legally guaranteed to fund education programs have already been fully appropriated. this intent was memorialized in california education code section 8483.6 which states that the additional money for after school programs shall not be appropriated until a legislature has appropriated sums sufficient to fully fund the requirements of prop 98. and to be appropriated in addition to the sums required by and shall not be considered toward fulfilling the funding requirements of prop 98. sb 78 as currently drafted would automatically fund additional appropriations from within 98 adversely affecting funding for all california students in other critical public education programs. cta believes this would both violate the intent and letter of prop 49. the expansion of funding for ases must come from the general fund outside of prop 98. considering the proposed pre-k, 12 education budget, cta believes prop 98 funding must prioritize to local control funding formula and must oppose sb 78 as currently drafted. we would like to continue to work with the author, but at this point, must respectfully ask for your no vote.
[{'start': 43, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Austin Webster: thank you very much. austin christopher webster on behalf of the california community colleges association for occupational education in strong support. thank you.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Cowe: Awesome, thank you. Good afternoon now, it was morning earlier. Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and Members. So I'm Karen Cowe, I'm the CEO of Ten Strands and the Project Director of the State's Environmental Literacy Steering Committee. Our community supports the 300,000 public school teachers in California, the 6.2 million students they teach, and the thousands of non-formal providers and community based organizations contributing relevant expertise and resources to their communities. California's education system actually already supports environmental literacy in its new science standards and frameworks and also in its new history and social science framework. Also thanks to Senator Fran Pavley in 2004, California identified several critical understandings called Environmental Principles and Concepts, that examine the interdependence of human societies and natural systems as part of core academic subject instruction. As Senator Allen just said, California has a large, diverse world class, non-formal sector of NGOs, including science centers, museums, and local community based organizations. Some examples from around the state, Lawrence Hall of Science, California Academy of Sciences, Monterrey Bay Aquarium, the San Diego Natural History Museum. Fresno's Discovery Center, Redding's Turtle Bay Museum, and Bakersfield's Buena Vista Museum of Natural History. These organizations are deeply experienced and prime to support the formal education sector to advance its college and career readiness goals, especially in STEM related fields. The proposed Creek Network, this little piece is sort of linked in for the environmental literacy community. So the proposed network is a cost effective way of bringing the formal and non-formal education systems together to advance the state's education priorities as laid out in SB 424. It's important to fund the Creek Network at the state level and not leave it to district by district implementation, because statewide coordination is necessary to move quickly and avoid unnecessary duplication of effort. While primarily motivated by supporting the state's education goals, as we just laid out here, I'd like to stress that for California, it's important to continue to lead the nation in its commitment to having a population that is literate in the fields of science, civics, and the environment. At the same time when science is coming under attack by the federal government and some states are moving to pass new laws encourage teaching climate change denial. It's even more critical that California's young people become informed citizens with an understanding of science and scientific principles.
[{'start': 110, 'end': 120, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 690, 'end': 701, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 940, 'end': 945, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Juanita Chan: good afternoon, i'm juanita austin chan. i'm the district science lead for rialto unified school district, it's in the inland empire, and of course, i'm in support of sb 424. i've been serving my community for over 14 years and we service 30,000 students. 80% of those qualify for free and reduced lunch, about 76, excuse me, percent are hispanic and 12% are african american. our job base in our community has shifted from hog and citrus farms to transportation and logistics. and as we make that transition, we're mindful of the environmental impacts on our community. i work with a committee group of over 50 teachers within our district that are dedicated to advancing science and illustrating how science and the environment provide real world context that give flavor to all of the other subjects. i'm also the project director for my district's mathematics and science partnership branch. and i've worked hard to infuse environmental literacy into all levels of the k12 curriculum and to ensure that all students get the chance to love their community bio-network. i could not have given our students as rich an educational experience, including exposure to future job opportunities, had i not partnered with our community-based organizations. these partnerships are vital to rich educational experiences. and our students conducted waste audits, we modeled water usage. we planned campus xeroscaping and designed a community garden for low-income seniors. not only are my students doing science while they have these experiences, but these real-world contexts give students skills and ideas for jobs in the fast-growing green collar economy. in fact, we've written integrated high school science courses that not only prepare students for college, so they're a through g, but also prepare them to take the california water board exam. so there are also cte classes. i consider myself fortunate because the math and science partnership grant has given me the time to expose these options to my district. but my colleagues in other districts are feeling under significant pressure to prepare students for the next generation science standards. and without support from community expertise, it's a difficult undertaking for them and it's a less engaging experience for the students. strengthen creek network will be an incredibly valuable resource to me as i continue to advance this science agenda in our district, and also to my peers around the state. if a creek coordinator was able to work with my district to help us to connect with non-formal providers and community based organizations, we would be able to provide so much more crucial access to hands on real world environmentally based science for our students. so i urge you to pass sb 424, to fully fund the creek network, to support the teachers all over california implementing the new science standards. and to support all students that deserve access to powerful learning experiences, and secure jobs in the future.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Candice Dickens-Russell: Good afternoon, I'm Candice Dickens-Russell, I'm the Director of environmental education at TreePeople in Los Angeles, and I strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Vyduna: good afternoon, i'm rebecca juanita vyduna, the stem center director at the san mateo county office of education, and we strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Andrews: Good afternoon, Bill Andrews. I represent the California Environmental Education Foundation, and we strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Olga Rodriguez: Thanks again for the opportunity to testify here today. My name is Olga Rodriguez. I'm a research fellow at the Public Policy Institute of California. PPIC is a non-partisan policy research organization that doesn't take, Positions on legislation. So my comments are based on our research that was decided. As you heard during last months remediation hearing, California's community colleges identify hundreds of thousands of students as not ready for transferred courses in math and English. Because these courses are required to transfer to a four year college, students deemed underprepared are required to take basic skills or remedial courses in order to prepare for college course. These placement decisions have profound effects a sizeable proportion of students that go into these remedial courses never actually complete the college level courses and subsequently completed degree. Despite the critical role of assessment and placement for placement to math English and ESL there's actually little clarity like Senator said. To help address this gap, last Spring PPIC conducted a survey of assessment and placement policies across the 113 colleges. We had 86 of the two colleges participate in the survey, and they had their chance to report on the policies and practices in place in 2014, 15 academic year. And the prodigal of this survey was, to provide policy makers and practitioners with a landscape of this, has made a placement policies in place across the sea. Among some of the findings, I'll highlight some of the findings from our report. First we found that colleges vary widely on how they assess and place students. We found that 100% of the colleges base their placements on the assessment instruments. Which assessed students math, English, math, reading, and writing skills. However, there's a wide variation on how colleges use these tests. We find that even though over half of the colleges use the Accuplacer the way they use this instrument varies. For example, in math we found that colleges, the variation in the cut scores could range from 25 to 296 out of 120. When you have a median of 58, this means that half of the students with a score of 58 would be deemed college ready, at half of the institutions. But was needing remediation at the other half. Yeah, and I also wanted to mention that there's wide variation in the retesting policies, as was cited in the legislation. Some colleges allow students to come back and retest immediately, while other colleges require students to wait three years. We also found that the use of multiple measures continues to sparse and unsystematic. I can say more if you have questions about that. There's some positive movement in that area. We also found that assessment and placement for ESL students needs more attention. Every year about 30,000 new ESL students enroll in these courses. And we find that these students are particularly disadvantaged because they have fewer opportunities to be examined from assessment and placement. We also found that they have fewer test prep opportunities, for example when we look at test prep in terms of test prep test, 40% of students in ESL were offered these were over 70% for math and English were offered for test prep opportunities. We also want to note that there's a lot of exciting reforms however there's still some opportunity for more uniformity and consistency because we found that when we do have this wide a variation. Where students enroll largely determines whether they are going to get access to college level courses or not. So there is some equity implications here. Because students of colour we found enroll in higher shares in college set more strict policies for access to transfer courses. So I just want to summarize, that assessment and placement policies should help students reach their academic goals, not stand in the way of these goals. As colleges work to enhance the efficacy of developmental education, implementation of evidence-based practices are accurately assessed and place students into, assess students' college readiness will be critical. And a more equitable and efficient system for assessment and placement is a vital step in helping all students achieve their goals.
[{'start': 67, 'end': 81, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John McGuiness: Yes, sir. Thank you. Good afternoon. My name is John McGuiness. I'm a member of the Board of Education of the Long Beach Unified School District, and I'm here to speak in support of SB 390. SB 390 will benefit students, teachers, parents and principals, because it will add school library standards to the menu of academic content and performance standards from which, we may choose to develop our local accountability plans. The operative words are, may choose. There is no mandate now, under current law, to address every single content standard in our LCAPS. We choose the standards we believe best meet the needs of our students. Likewise, there will be no mandate under SB 390, to address any or all of the school library standards. What this bill will give us, are additional tools from which we may choose to enrich our students learning skills.  I say this as a local school board member, who would oppose any mandate that might constrain our local control to meet our students' unique needs. Those of you who know our Superintendent, Chris Steinhauser, who has led California's third-largest school district for the past 14 years, know that he would mount the barricades to oppose a bill that imposed such a mandate. Instead, he wrote a strong letter in support of the bill, which I've just given you. We believe the California model school library standards adopted by the State Board of Education, and aligned with Common Core standards, as well as California's content standards, can be used to benefit our students. Why? Why, in this age of the Internet, with bountiful access to digital resources, why will students benefit by including school library standards? They will benefit precisely because now, more then ever, students need the skills to intelligently distinguish between legitimate information, and fake and sometimes unsafe information. California school library standards helps students become responsible in their research practice, confident in their technology skills, and respectful of others when using digital devices.  Furthermore, California school library standards are unique among state standards, because they apply to all curricular areas at all levels, Kindergarten through 12th grade. SB 390 will put school library standards on the menu of standards, from which we may choose to better our students. We, at the local level, support it. We respectfully request that you support it. Thank you.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 62, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1042, 'end': 1059, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jeff Ross: mr. chair and members, jeff, representing the california school library association. i guess the first comment that i would make is, why are we recommending this, and what is, sort of, the state need in doing this, as opposed to leaving it to local control. and our sense is that, based on the data related to school libraries and some of the actions that you've even taken today, your fake news bills, other committees who are dealing with cyber safety, digital safety issues, these are the components of the model school library standard. these are the components of a practicing teacher librarian, and if the guy who was just here, he's like a dying breed, he's one of the handful of teacher-librarians that are left in the state. our administrators, quite frankly, don't know what a quality school librarian is. they need some assistance, and then they can make their own decisions, from a local control standpoint. so, digital literacy is a mandated component. media literacy is not, but the only people who can teach it are teacher-librarians. a regular classroom history teacher can't. and so that's something that i think we need to deal with. we believe placing the model school library standards, which are sort of unique standards, because they intersect with virtually every other standard out there. they're not really stand-alone. and for those reasons, we support the bill.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Toni Trigueiro: toni rebecca trigueiro, on behalf of the california teacher's associations. we believe that a successful library program not only provides a very safe haven for students, but they assist teachers with curriculum assistance, expertise in digital literacy, training, and academic research, all of which are critical in the 21st century. for the reasons that have been stated before, and because of the length of the committee hearing, i'm going to stop there, and ask for your aye vote. thank you very much.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Martha Alberts: I will be short. Good afternoon, Martha Alberts of AXA. So we have an oppose on the bill. We don't think it's necessary, as the staff and house has indicated. We have made a lot of changes to the LCAP over the last three years since LCFF became enacted in 2013. This and there's other bills pending legislative review will just continue to add on additional requirements. When we talk about the content standards, we do have 10 that we do have to think about, consider in our local LCAPs. This is just setting a precedent about every single thing that is may be not in statute outlined. It's going to open the door for others to come behind, and ask to make modifications. I mentioned there's been three revisions to the LCAP already, so this bill becoming law would just require the state Board of Education to go back and make another fourth revision to the LCAP. What we need right now is consistency. We need the local school districts to be able to adapt to the current LCAP template that they've been using since November, and if we keep going back to the field and asking them to add more requirements to their existing plans, it's only going to make those documents longer. Just one last reminder to the Committee, when the Legislature adopted this back in 2013, the purpose of the LCAP was for it to be a strategic planning document. Strategic, thinking holistically about the entire school district. This is just one of the components that should be considered, but I don't think that the bill intent would be addressed by what it's trying to do. We need more librarians in California public education, we need more resources for public education, but this bill is not going to address that need. Thank you.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 233, 'end': 237, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nathan Libecap: Yes sir. Hi, my name is Nathan Libecap. I'm the teacher librarian at Casa Grande High School in Petaluma, California. By the end of every year, I teach over 1700 students, digital literacy and media literacy lessons, from 9th grade to 12th grade. Due to my position that is embedded in all subjects, from English to even Art. What I see are students are very versed in using their devices and with socializing and commerce. They have their own techniques, just like we did. When we were interested in someone in school, we might have asked friends or passed notes. They use social media in similar ways. The problem is that a lot of times, even though I'm a teacher librarian and I have a special classification that allows me to be the teacher of record in classes that teach digital literacy and social literacy and news literacy. Often those classes are on ad hoc basis as requested by the teachers. What SB 135 would do is ensure that these standards are embedded in actual subject areas, like social sciences. As a librarian I have to bring up some quotes from books. But in her book, It's Complicated by Dana Boyd she says the "digital natives rhetoric", so we've heard students being called digital natives, but the "digital native rhetoric is worse than inaccurate it's dangerous. Because of how society has politicized this language, it allow some to avoid responsibility for helping youth and adults navigate a networked world. In other words a focus on today's youth as digital natives presumes that all we have to do as a society is be patient and wait for generations of these digital wonderkines to grow up. These attitudes will not empower average youth to be more sophisticated internet participants". If you paid attention in 11th grade American literature you know that teenagers naturally hate phonies and the lessons that I teach, especially in this realm of media and news literacy, are some of the most high-interest lessons that I have. Students are more interested in news than ever before because of it's readily available on their phones. The problem is that even though everyday over 2.5 exit bites are created, which is equal to 250,000 libraries of Congress or 90 years of HD video. And every minute 2.5 million Instagram posts are sent or 7 1 million Instagram videos are sent, the human brain can only comprehend 300 words per minute and that's from now well into the past. The most important part of this legislation is that it will take these ad hoc lessons that only some teachers have and it'll establish standards written by teachers and experts involved in the field. And allow school boards to create professional development. And get these lessons into the classrooms whether there is something whether teachers can do everyday. So called fact news is not the biggest threat to us students future. The inability to see our fellow citizens point of view based on facts and not emotional really reactions to manipulative information might be. This bill will give students the skills necessarily to close the growing gap being created in the rest of the country.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1110, 'end': 1119, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Melissa Emmel: Goog afternoon, Melissa Emmel on behalf of the National County Board of Supervisors, here in support Thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nikki Moore: thank you moore with the california newspaper publishers association. just want to say that we think this is a good approach because it fights speech that we don't like with more speech. and not regulations.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicholas Thomas: hi, my name is nicholas toni thomas. thank you, chairman allen and members of the committee. i did want to relay that i graduated from cal poly, pomona, california state polytechnic university in pomona, and i studied food and nutrition. in the fall i'll be attending law school. i'll remain in california, and one of the things i wanted to emphasize is that i experienced the very policies that this bill would prohibit on college campuses, is the restrictive idea of a free speech zone and bureaucratic and unconstitutional restrictions. and i am testifying in support of sb 472 because i believe that colleges should foster an environment that welcomes free speech and doesn't quarantine students into a free speech zone in order to speak about something that they're passionate about. in 2014 and 2015, i had been at cal poly when i started the animal rights club, the first animal rights club on campus and i was leafleting animal rights literature. it was a fairly innocent literature to promote a vegan diet. and in doing so, i did so where i felt there was an area where students were populated. it was out near about the parking structure and i would reach many students, many of my classmates and speak about something i'm passionate about. and college administrators and police would, eventually, or the majority of the time i would do that, i would get, they would tell me you know, you either have to leave campus or you have to stop, or they would tell me, you need to go to the free speech zone over there. if you wanted to speak about anything you can go to the free speech zone. the problem with that is the free speech zone was 144 square feet. the campus itself was 1438 acres. so if i wanted to go to the agricultural building where my nutrition students are, i couldn't speak over there. so this is really restrictive and just clumped me together with any free speech zone and in order to get into the free speech zone i needed to get approval first. i needed to go to the office and check in, i needed to get advanced approval, get my material and content approved, and i needed to wear a badge. and i have that badge with me today, and i had to wear it and show that hey, i'm speaking on something which was the classic case of a free speech zone. and not only did these policies exist on paper, but they were actively enforced, which was perhaps most concerning to me, was that they tenaciously went after me, a passionate student ,for speaking about something that i felt i was passionate about and i wanted to express as a food and nutrition student. and i felt that these policies in the free speech zone really hindered me and handicapped my ability to engage academically. having just started a club, having been honor student most quarters of school, and trying to voice something that i'm very passionate about, i felt i was very silenced for the years of 2014 and 2015. and to end, i just want to say that i am asking for your support in sb 472 because i don't want others passionate students to no longer feel that they can be passionate and speak about what their passionate about. and i want, even those who i disagree with, to be able to speak on campuses and voice their passion. so, thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 57, 'end': 62, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Joe Cohn: Hi. Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee, my name is Joe Cohn, I'm the legislative and policy director at FIRE, the Foundation for Individual Rights in Education. We're a national non-partisan, non-profit that deals explicitly with University student and faculty constitutional rights, like free speech and due process. And the second most common form of censorship on college campuses in 2017 is the restriction of students to quarantined zones that are misleadingly titled free speech zones. And in fact one in 10 colleges across the country do that according to our most recent data. What that tells me is two things. It's a significant problem, but that 90% of schools managed to deal without them without the sky falling and without any of the kind of chaos that people claim sometimes would happen if you were to allow people, gosh forbid, to engage in leafleting about vegan diets in other places on campus. So, we're really proud to be sponsors of this bill. It doesn't change at all what is and isn't protected speech. It just says that if you're engaged in the kind of protected speech, you should be allowed to do it freely on campus. It allows schools to have significant and reasonable time, place, and manner restrictions, so long as they're in furtherance of significant interests that they have and their content and viewpoint neutral, and leave open ample alternative modes for communication. So what means is if the school has a reason to keep students from having a huge, loud event immediately outside of the library, courts are going to agree that's a significant interest. That makes sense, or right outside of classrooms. But they can't use that justification on a school of 1,400 acres to say you're only allowed to speak in one spot. So, we want to flip the mindset. We want schools to decide, where are the few places where we have to have narrowly tailored rules? And all of the other places people are allowed to engage in speech as long as it is protected. So, that's the genesis of the bill. And the only other thing I want to add to this, because I think it's important for you to know is, why there's a need for the bill. Courts routinely strike down these policies, but it's very hard for students to really get into court. And these policies easily evade judicial review because students graduate and that moves out court cases. So one of the key features of the bill is it improves the mechanism here, by saying that there's a $500 automatic penalty when it's used against a student or when it's challenged, so the court still has to issue an order. And they can't go back and forth and just constantly put them in place, take them out of place temporarily. So, that's one of the key and most important features of the bill. And I really appreciate your attention to it, and I'm here to answer any of the hard questions you might have about how the first amendment interacts in this area.
[{'start': 58, 'end': 66, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Balla-Hawkins: Senator Allen, Senators, David Balla-Hawkins with the Leadership Education and Advocacy Development Program, Learn, Lead, Change, and we ask for your aye vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 13, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 25, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa McVesby: Hello, my name is Melissa McVesby. I'm a fifth-year animal science major UC Davis, and I brought with me a letter from my roommate. Her name is Rebecca Cannon, she's a second-year, and she can't be here today, because she is currently in class, using the scholarship to help her through University of California at Davis. And this is her letter, it says, my mother is a single mom of two kids. She currently lives with her own elderly mother, who at 70 years old, still has to work. Her struggling to avoid bankruptcy, and neither can survive on their own. Although my mother is considered middle class, based on her own earnings, does qualify me for the Middle Class Scholarships. She's still living pay check, to pay check as she uses every last cent to support the tuition of two children, and the rising medical bills of her elderly mother. Without the scholarship, I would not be able to attend University of California at Davis. And with no savings of my own, I would be forced to drop out of school, even with only one more year to go. I and others like me implore you to pass SB 326 to renew the scholarship and keep students in school. We're not asking for a budget increase, we're asking to help keep the scholarship that already exist so that hard working students like Rebecca Cannon continue to attend a University. The middle class parents struggle to support themselves and their families, students like Rebecca Cannon need help, and they need this scholarship. Thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 73, 'end': 81, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 144, 'end': 158, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1281, 'end': 1295, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1419, 'end': 1433, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Larry Waters: Larry Waters, California Student Aid Commission. I apologize, the Commission kind of ended before we could get a letter out in support, but we do support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sydney Adebayo: All right, my name's Sydney Adebayo, as she said I'm a student at the University of California Davis. My hometown is actually Oakland, so basically, SB 236 means a lot to me growing up in Oakland being in California. And then in 2013 I remember when they started increasing the out of state students which to me was just, that was chaos, honestly. I have literally thought about so many of my friends, so many families that pay their taxes or whatever that go to, we fund the school but then they're not prioritizing us. It's a terrible shame, and hopefully that ends right now with SB 236. We definitely want that, we definitely want this spending to be correct again. I looked it up, and it's like they spent over $4 million trying to recruit non-state students, out of state students. Which to me is like, again, we're the ones in California paying for the school, but we're not being prioritized the way that we should be. I remember the good old days out of state the percentage used to be 10% now, it's a lot higher which to me, we have to make it right again. We have to prioritize California again, love California, love the people here.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nadia Leal-Carrillo: chair members, nadia nicholas leal-carrillo with the university of california and respectfully, i must oppose this bill. absent of a guaranteed funding, a state support funding for the university, we believe that the tuition freeze and the non-resident cap proposed in the bill would actually greatly reduce, not improve affordability and access at the university for students. the revenue from uc's predictable tuition adjustment is critical to maintain a quality education at the university, specifically since tuition has remained flat for the last six years and resident enrollment has increased. we appreciate the authors' interest in access, that is the university's commitment. however, we believe the approach under the bill is far more costly than continuing to partner with the state to fund additional enrollment. as your committee analysis appropriately notes, the additional funding that the state provided to the university for an additional 2,500 students is contingent on the university passing and approving a non-resident enrollment policy. the university is on track for meeting both of those provisions, in order to receive the funding. and for these reasons, we would encourage the committee to continue to have discussions about the university's admission of non-residents and residents, as part of your ongoing budget discussions. thank you for your time.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carol Sanchez: Hello, my name is Carol Sanchez, I am a fourth year medical student at UC Davis, future physician in less than nine months. I'm pursing my dream of becoming a doctor, I've had this dream since second grade. I was raised in Compton and I always knew that I wanted to be a doctor. I don't know where this drive came from. We didn't really have access to health care, but my parents came with a determination to work hard and provide for my family. My mother did everything that she could to keep me and my siblings out of the hospital. She was our doctor and our nurse, but I believe that our community deserves and needs more representation. We need more than luck. We need doctors who have the training and language skills, and the desire to practice in areas that are under served, like the ones that I grew up In. The success of the Affordable Care Act for all children had brought health coverage to millions of adults and kids. And these children need physicians, like myself. Yet the system is almost impossible to navigate for people that have very limited education and resources, as well, and they need physicians like myself to advocate for them. Family medicine is where we get to be advocates for our patients and for the community. Yet, nationwide, we continue to have a gap of more than 43,000 primary care doctors by the year 2030 according to the Association of American Medical Colleges. The shortage of primary care physicians already contributes to California's 168 medically underserved areas. This bill, Senate Bill 396, will help create the California Medical Residency Training Pilot Program. I have TPS, Temporary Protected Status, that allows me to go into the Federal match program and place myself into a residency program. According to the data provided by pre-health dreamers, as many as 10% of current qualified medical students are not eligible for immigration relief under DOCA or are there similar bills or executive orders. To add to that, others who would be encouraged by SB 396 to attend medical school with the hope of becoming a doctor someday. They'll be able to receive this chance, I'm lucky and I'm the exception, and I don't want to be the exception. I believe there's many students currently in undergraduate schools who are ready to become physicians, ready to take that step, or they're in medical school already, and they deserve the chance to continue their education. California has invested a great deal of energy, money, and education in us, and we deserve the right to continue to provide for our communities as well.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Imay Castillo: My name's Imay Castillo, I'm also a fourth year medical student at UC Davis, and like Carols, I decided decided to become a Doctor at a very young age. I was 14 when my father nearly died in a work related accident, and it took him four years of physical therapy to be able to walk again. It was by helping my father through his recovery process that I learned the gaps that we have in our medical system. We know that there is a deficit of culturally and linguistically doctors, and that that is a big barrier in our system. I had no real exposure to the medical profession prior to this, no one in my family had ever been to college let alone been a Doctor. And it was by helping my father, that I was exposed to this beautiful profession, to be able to help people when they are most vulnerable. And that's why, in 2010, I decided to apply to medical school. I was turned down then, this was before DOCA, but my twin sister, she was a great example for me. She had applied to law school and had graduated from law school before DOCA. Due to her legal training, she was able to work when she graduated. Seeing her example is what helped me push forward and to continue to be determined. When I received DOCA, I reapply to medical school and I was accepted. As a member of Pre-Health Dreamers constantly hear the stories of the students who are not DOCA or AB 540 eligible. These students, like every other pre med students are committed, they are driven. But unfortunately, lack a path to get to these professions, and that's what SB 396 would do. It would pave this path for students who moted, willing and intelligent and without this path to move forward who are doing a disservice, not only to these students, but to our communities and to California. Dreamers want to address a very undeserved population. In the medical field, we often talk about how many patients still fall through the cracks of our medical system, even after the Affordable Care Act. Dreamers understand this very well personally, and they are very committed to addressing this issue. This year I'll also be applying to a medical residency program. And I plan to go into family medicine so that I can help people like my parents. And SB 396 would allow more people to be able to do this thing for their communities, thank you.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 86, 'end': 92, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 902, 'end': 906, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1031, 'end': 1035, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1205, 'end': 1209, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1350, 'end': 1354, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Maya Ingram: Maya Ingram, ACLU of California, in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christopher Galeano: Christopher Galeano from the California Immigrant Policy Center, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Cabrera: Michelle Cabrera on behalf of our 700,000 members at SCIU California including our medical residents under the Committee of interns and residents in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jim Nuovo: Thank you Chair and members. I'm Jim Nuovo. I'm the associate dean of Graduate Medical Education at UC-Davis. There are two area of concern, I'll be very brief. The first is work authorization limited by federal law in complying with the requirements of SB 396. Because medical residents are employees, not students and as such must be eligible to work in the United States for wages or other remuneration. In describing compensation of scholarship or stipend instead of salary, or wages, would not permit the University or residents themselves to disregard federal immigration employment requirements. The other area of concern is that as structured, the program is a standalone pilot program. And one of my responsibilities in my role is to ensure that all of my training programs are accredited by the national governing body. For all residency training programs called the ACGME, the Accreditation Council of Graduate Medical Education. As structured, this program is unlikely to receive any approval by the ACGME and could not be implemented. Those are my comments.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roger Stock: good morning mister chairmen, members of the committee. i am roger, superintendent of the rockland unified school district and i'm here in strong support of sb 751. school districts and their locally elected school boards have several core responsibilities. ensuring all student's have a high quality education, and fulfilling their fiduciary responsibility to manage it's school districts finances are chief among these. school districts, including my own school district, are not storing money, putting it away for some far off rainy day. our school board works hard to ensure that every dollar we can spend on the classroom and for programs to benefit students, while also providing competitive compensation for our employees and maintaining a prudent reserve to deal with unforeseen and unexpected economic conditions. this difficult balancing act takes place in each of the over 1,000 california school districts. to have the current state imposed cap on reserves makes no sense and does not allow locally elected school boards who are accountable to their community to make these decisions. a school district's reserve, such as rockland unified's, is for textbooks, buses, technology. these things that can only be funded by accumulating funds for these large expenditures. reserves are also used by school districts to deal with rising pension costs, new or expanding state and federal unfunded or underfunded mandates that land on school districts such as special education and increasingly unstable economic climates that are currently right around the corner. for example the mandated reserve of 3% for economic uncertainties for my school district would not even provide enough funds to operate our school district for a full month. it is a reasonable reserve determined by local school boards allows school districts when funding declines and mandated expenses increase to keep cuts away from the classroom, minimize layoffs for our valued employees most of whom are teachers. it allows a school board to be surgical in how they make cuts, working to keep them far away from the classroom. how awful it would be, to hire thousands of teachers, and recruit many more to the profession, and then turn around and lay them off, because school districts were forced to have an artificially reserve level set by the state of california. with all due respect, on behalf of california school district, students and employees, i urge you to support sb 751.
[{'start': 61, 'end': 66, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle McKay: Good afternoon, Michelle Mckay Underwood on behalf of Schools For Sound Finance, The Association of Community Funded or Basic Aid School Districts. As Senator Hill pointed out, there are unique funding circumstances for these districts that are primarily funded by property taxes just twice a year, and have no safety net from the state when those revenues fall short. We appreciate that the bill Improves the Reserve cap for all districts and has a special exemption for small, many of which our districts are small, as well as basic aid. Thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 40, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 159, 'end': 163, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tia Nguyen: Tia Nguyen on behalf of Public Advocates, here in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John McGinnis: john nadia mcginnis, member of the long beach unified school board, board of education, and i'm here in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pamela Gibbs: pamela representing the los angeles county office of education and we're in support. having the responsibility to approve school districts within the county, numbering 80, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susan Halden: Good afternoon Susan Halden on behalf of the Rocklin Unified School Board, I'm on the school board and we are in strong support of this important bill.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nancy Lacoste: good afternoon nancy john lacoste and i'm representing sacramento city unified school district and cloves unified school district in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 33, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Greg Gating: thank you, mr. chairman and members. my name is greg, i'm vice president of the sacramento county board of education and region six county representative for csba's delegate assembly. speaking for myself this afternoon, i would like to thank you for the opportunity to speak briefly in support of sb 751. modifying the reserve cap provisions is essential to promote sound financial management of our public schools. particularly, our small school districts, of which we have 2 here in sacramento county, with less than 500 students each. capping districts' reserves at 6% regardless of the strength of the state's economy is fraught with peril. it was a bad idea when enacted with virtually no public notice in 2014, and it continues to be a bad idea today. sb 751 provides a much more reasoned and responsible approach.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marc Friedman: Marc Friedman again, the San Mateo Union High School District, and previously on the Burlingame Elementary School District, and a lifelong financial executive. I'm pleased to express my strong support for my Senator's bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brad Strong: Brad Strong, Children Now in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeff Frost: jeff, california association of suburban school districts in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Egan: michael nancy egan, on behalf of the california teachers association, in opposition to this bill. it's been our bitter experience of our members, that in the statute currently provides for a reserve for economic uncertainty for school districts. during the last economic crisis and financial downturn, what we found is many districts not only increased their reserves, but also, at the same time, cut teachers and increased class sizes. we believe that after of the beginning of the economic recovery and passage of prop 30 and subsequently prop 55, that we believe that dollars ought to be spent on students and on kids in the classroom and not be held to increase economic reserve. so we ask for your no vote, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Evelyn Abouhassan: good afternoon chair and members, thank you so much for the opportunity to testify today. my name is, evelyn michael abouhassan on the senior legislative advocate with disability rights california. i want to extend our sincere thanks for the efforts that the committee, that the chair and the committee staff put forward and frafting amendments on this bill, we will continue to work for our parents, we would have preferred a 30 day timeline these are legal documents that layout services that the child gets. and the longer it takes to get those documents, the more challenging it is for the child to get services. so we appreciate the efforts, we'll continue to work, and we thank you for your efforts to move the bill forward, and we'll continue to be actively part of that process.
[{'start': 102, 'end': 127, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cheryl Theiss: Yeah, thank you. My name is Cheryl Theiss, and I'm here on behalf of the Disability Rights Education and Defense Fund, DREDF. We are a national civil rights law and policy center that is run exclusively by people with disabilities and the parents of children with disabilities. And we really want to start by thanking both the author and the Committee for your support on this critical issue of language access. At a time when so many of our immigrant and refugee families are hesitant to push on their rights and to advocate for their children for fear of retaliation. This bill goes a long way in setting a standard for all children in California that make sure that there's an expectation of being able to review the documents, understand them, and rely on them before they put their signature on that IEP. Currently without this law there are two choices that parents face, neither one of them is acceptable. The first is that they sign an IEP that they do not understand. The legally binding document that is in place generally for a year and when they later find out that there were things that were factually incorrect. Or that the IEP contained things they didn't fully understand they have their signature on the document and it's hard to undo that. Secondly, they can decide to wait until the documents' translated in the current climate, as Senator Portantino pointed out, that can be months of waiting. So, that they can provide consent, and no school district can start services until that IEP is signed by that parent. We all know early intervention matters, we all know time matters for our kids. This bill starts to level the playing field and I really want to thank you all for your support on the bill.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1360, 'end': 1370, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tia Nguyen: mr chair, members, tia evelyn nguyen on behalf of public advocates, here in strong support.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Jimenez: Jessica Jimenez, with Western Center on Law and Poverty, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ron Rapp: Good afternoon, Mr Chair and Members of the Committee, I'm Ron Rapp, on behalf of the California Federation of Teachers, in strong support. Thank you.
[{'start': 59, 'end': 67, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carol Kocivar: Hi, Carol Kocivar with the California State PTA, in support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melvin Horseshaw: Afternoon, Senators, my name is Melvin Horseshaw and I represent the National Association of Social Workers, and we support this bill.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ahmed Abozayd: My name is Ahmed Abozayd, I am the Vice President of SEIU Local 87 in San Francisco. And also active for the Muslim community. I represent families not only in my capacity as Union officers but also on both in assisting our members and educate for children with school district. I am here today in support of the legislation that obligate the school district to translate IEP documents within 30 days. Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marina Valera: [FOREIGN] Good afternoon, my name is Marina Valera and I'm a member of Local 87. I've come in support of SB 354 proposed by Senator Portantino. At this moment, immigrant families are under attack, not only by our administration but by school systems. As parents we know a solution out of poverty is good education. [FOREIGN] But the school districts are inadequate of translating our documents so we can understand them. No family should have to wait more than 30 days to be able to participate in their children's academic activities.  The fact that we're immigrant parents does not mean that we don't want to see our kids prosper.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 132, 'end': 142, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Esperanza Ruelas: [FOREIGN]. Good afternoon, my name is Esperanza Ruelas. I'm a member of Local 87, I live in Oakland. I come in support of SB 354 by Senator Portantino. No families should wait more than 30 days to participate in the academic activities of their children. [FOREIGN] In my case, I had a daughter with special needs who, the school district had very little capability to help me out with. The school district is more concerned with the cost than the dignity of our children. If it wasn't for this social work on my daughter, we would have never been able to have the service that my daughter needed. [FOREIGN] The question you should ask yourselves is what happens to the families that don't have anybody who can assert them? Or a union that can help them, what happens to their kids? Thank you very much for listening to us.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 140, 'end': 150, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bob Giovatti: Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and members. Bob Giovatti with the State Council on Developmental Disabilities. We are in support of the bill, but we would like to attach ourselves to the comments of DRC and certainly we'd prefer the 30-day timeline. Thank you.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rafael Pelayo: Good morning, thank you. Invitation. I'm Dr Rafael Pelayo. I'm a physician at Stanford University Center for Sleep Science and Medicine. I've been working on adolescents' issues and sleep over 30 years. There should no doubt that teenagers are sleep deprived. There's nothing controversial here. I've never met anybody who found fault with the peer review data on this. There's solid evidence based medicine on this. The Center for Disease Control, American Pediatrics, California Sleep Society, American Academy of Sleep Medicine. You name it, National Sleep Foundation, all of these professional societies have found that changing the school start times will improve the quality of life of these students. And you should know if you have not been involved in this that professional societies do not write these statements in a cavalier fashion. They have a great task force, people before their board of directors, and then they get published. So this is a big deal for us. You're going to hear a lot of opposition arguments, not a single thing you're going to hear is going to be peer-reviewed. You're going to hear people's opinions about this. The data is solid. I'm happy to go over it with anybody individually if you have any questions on the science behind this. I'll meet with your staffs about this. All the arguments have been refuted and the communities have already changed these laws, changed these school start times. The bottom line is that teenagers have different brains, they are changing. And one of the things that happens to them is they tend to go to sleep later. The melatonin in the brain shifts. They have a later time to fall asleep. At the same time as you go through a growth spurt you still need sleep. Physical lengthening of our bones occurs in sleep. You're not growing right now. You're growing in your sleep when you're a teenager. So they need more sleep, and they tend to go to bed later. So at the same time, they're now sleep deprived. You see teenagers in high schools falling asleep routinely. None of these parents are being notified because they're falling asleep. This is a real issue. You can't hide the sky with your hands. This is a public health issue. This is not a local school control problem, this is a public health problem. So I please urge you to vote yes for this measure. Thank you.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joy Wake: They are. My name is Joy Wake, on behalf of the High School Parent Engagement Group and the California Chapter of Start School Later. We welcome the opportunity to bring a parent perspective to this important conversation. Without SB 328 millions of California children will continue to be forced by local school mandate to wake at a time that has proven to be unhealthy and unsafe. Although as parents we encourage our kids to get to bed early, we can't control their biology. The realization that school start times are a statewide public health issue has not yet been reflected in California State education policy. So each of our state's 1,000 districts is free to put any other interest they want above the health of our kids. Only about 20% of middle and high schools in California start at 8:30 or later. And while we understand that many decisions at the local school district level are collectively bargained, and we support that, we believe our kids' health and safety should not be one of them. Children's public health is too important to be left to 1,000 different local school boards, bargaining tables, where it's treated like any other negotiable school item, and where nobody at the table is likely to be a public health expert. It is literally impossible for a school's operating hours to be convenient for all the limitless variety of work schedules, activities, preferences, configurations of working families, or any other type of family. Whether a school starts at 7 AM or 9 AM, SB 328 won't change that. But what it will do is remove a scientifically proven harmful start time and it will improve the lives of all the children. And as hundreds of secondary schools across the country have demonstrated 8:30 AM start times support excellent, efficiently run schools, healthier and safer children, and thriving and successful athletic programs and student athletes. We ask that you vote yes on SB 328 to help our kids, thank you.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carol Kocivar: hi, i'm carol tia kocivar with the california state pta. and we had written a support if amended letter. and we're very pleased to see that a number of the amendments that we suggested are in the bill. one of the things that in supporting this, because we think the health and safety of our children is paramount, is that we have a bill that thoughtfully looks at how we can implement it to make it successful. and that's what the amendments that we proposed are. and i'm going to take the new bill as it's proposed and bring it back to our board to look at it with these amendments.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Irina Keller: my name is irina, as a sleep scientist, also adjunct professor of child and adolescent development and on behalf of nonprofit national organization start school later. as california statewide chapter leader, i ask you, please give those kids some break. they really need it because schools often, sadly, have very different priorities, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laural Hollis: hi, laural, i'm a parent of a daughter who had just start high school everyday for four years at 10 minutes to 7. and it was not fun, so i hope this stops.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kristina Kerlekov: Hello, my name is Kristina Kerlekov. And I am a high school student at Irvington District in Fremont, California. And I'm here to talk to you guys about how there's a very high cluster statistic of students in my district that are committing suicide due to the severe stresses and the exhaustion to get at their schools. So I support Senate Bill 328, thank you. Thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ria Single: hi, my name is ria, and i'm student athlete at the pasadena unified school district. and i am in full support of this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Iya Keller: hi, my name is iya carol keller, i'm a student and musician at foothill high school. and on behalf of all the students that have dropped out of orchestra due to early start times, i strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maggie Betsock: hi, my name is betsock. and i've been participating in a teen sleep education program for about 10 years at my local high school. we got the school board, we educated a lot of people with the help of stanford on this issue. school board changed its ruling in 2010. our high school implemented at 8:45 start time for most of the students. we still have some period zeros. logistic problems just were there, but more easily solved than anybody thought. and in the past 10 years, as we continue our education probe of faculty, and school board, and parents, and students, resistance is dying down just because of the publicity and knowledge about sleep in the general population. so go for it. thank you very much for all your work.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sue Jilling: hi, i'm jilling, and i'm a former high school parent. and have been working on this at the grassroots level for six years, and i strongly support this bill. i'd also like to underscore that hundreds of thriving athletic programs exists at schools with healthy start times. and healthy and well-rested athletes perform better in sports and academics, thank you.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Suzie McMertre: I'm Suzie McMertre, and I'm the parent of two children and the foster parent of another, and I support SB 328.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Wilma Wilson: hi, i'm wilma iya wilson, i'm a single parent of three children, two in college. one of them was a very sleep-deprived junior in high school, who was fortunate enough to intern for dr. pan. and two are now in college, one is still in high school. i'm an active member of the parent engagement group. and i urge everybody, please support sb 328, thank you.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 185, 'end': 188, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Diane Wolf: i'm diane wilma wolf, as a child psychologist, i see the negative impact of the overwhelming stress that adolescents are faced with. the very least we can do is give them a shot at a full night's sleep, i support this bill.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lori Morales: hi, i'm lori diane morales, i'm a mother of a college graduate and a soon-to-be college graduate. worked on this issue when my kids were in high school. i'm very glad this is before you now, and i strongly support this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tia Nguyen: Tia Nguyen, on behalf of Public Advocates, here in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pamela Gibbs: Good afternoon members, Pamela Gibbs representing the Los Angeles County Office of Education. We joined late in support of the bill. Our board voted to support the bill last night, and we have letters reflecting that position. Thank you very much, and we urge your support.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dana Reikers: my name is dana, and on behalf of my four children in the san juan unified school district, i plead with their sleep-deprivedness that you pass this bill. i have two high schoolers that go to school at 6:45 in the morning and do not return home until 6 pm. my two middle schoolers attend school at 7:25, and they return from school at 3:30. so please, they need sleep, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Costuni: Hi, I'm Amy Costuni, LCAP Parent Advisory Vice Chair. And I'm strongly in support of the bill, as I feel that it will close the achievement gap and benefit disadvantaged students, thank you.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Annemarie Gowan: hi, gowan, i'm a mother of three, 15, 17, and 19. i see it everyday, i live it, i'm also a california teacher. and i also am the chair of college night for san juan unified school district. i strongly support this bill because i know how it has a great effect on these kid's future, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anne Del Core: My name is Anne Del Core, I am on the San Juan Unified Superintendent Parent Advisory Committee. As a parent of three tired teenagers, I strongly support the bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Dietrich: Hi, Jennifer Dietrich, on behalf of Partnership for Children and Youth, in support. Considering the community, our community school support, and the adolescent research. As well as the fact that after school programs on average are running about 20 hours a week, when they were designed at 15 hours a week, due to the early start times for schools, so thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jordan Derrick: afternoon, derrick, the alliance for boys and men of color. we don't have a formal position on this bill, but i do want to just point out some of the other logistical issues that i don't think should be undermined. that families have to take into consideration as they plan for how the students are transported to and from school and from home. and one particular concern is the staggering of times between high school and middle school and elementary schools. so that when older sibling need to pick up younger siblings from elementary school by making the start time later that might impact. so that's just one consideration, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rand Martin : thank you, mr. chair and members, rand lori martin on behalf of the california charter schools association. first, for those of you who haven't been around very long, a little history lesson. this issue has been with us for about a decade. we have been working, roger is nodding his head up there. we have been negotiating this. working through the various pieces of this since about 2009 and what you see today reflects a lot of that negotiation. the negotiation occurred with the california school boards association and the california's teacher association and others over the last decade. so we have made a lot of progress, to the point where ccsa actually agrees, as we have for a number of years. that the political reform act, public records act, and the brown act should apply to charter schools. that level of transparency is critical. some of the other things that are new that senator glazer has outlined in the bill are new this year but we support those as well. what it leaves us with is the one issue that has caused some friction over the years as we've tried to get this issue resolved once and for all. and that's the issue of government code 1090. and i'm going to speak a little bit about that, but my colleague here, marcia aaron from kipp la will also speak to it, because she has personal experience with it. but the important thing about government code 1090 is that it bans absolutely a charter school board member, and some executive staff, from participating in financial actions that accrue to the benefit of the charter school. so if you have a board member who has taken out a second mortgage on his home, and to help keep the doors open, under government code 1090, that board member would be prohibitive from doing that. or would not be able to serve on the board, or if he did, it would go to jail. a board member who has a facility that he could lease to the school for a dollar a year, would be prohibited under government code 1090 from doing that. those are the kinds of people that we want to have on our boards of directors. many of you have sat on nonprofit boards of directors. i certainly have over the years. and i know the demands on us, as board members, is to do everything we can to keep that entity alive. and sometimes that goes beyond just raising funds. it also goes to taking extraordinary actions to make sure that the doors were open. when the state was in the depths of the recession, and the legislature and the governor were seeking deferrals on payments to schools, including charter schools. school districts were able to go out and get bridge loans of 2 and 3%. charter schools were able to go out and get bridge loans of 13, and 14, and 15%. so of course was not appropriate and not helpful. and so, we had board members who were willing to step up and keep charter school doors open until the recession ended and the money started flowing again. so it's critically important that we don't take what we know is a good government measure but in this context is an impediment and a harm to charter schools, and impose that on them. the last thing i want to point on the issue of for profit is that this is an issue we have long believed that charter schools should not be operated by for-profit entities. we are there for the kids. the money is there for the kids. the money is not there to make a profit off of. it's great to have for profit vendors who will work with our schools and we think those should be continued. but the operation of the school itself should be left to a nonprofit entity. we have created some firewalls though to ensure that a for profit contractor can not through backdoor means exert undue influence. and there are three firewalls in there, one that prohibits them through engaging in selecting or influencing who's on the board of directors. selecting, or approving, or vetoing a budget. or supervising more than, according to the amendments that senator glazer has accepted, more than 25% of the teachers on staff in that charter school. so we think that both those deal with some very, very important issues. i do want to raise one additional point because a question has been raised that i want to make sure is answered. there is language in the bill that occupies the field of conflict of interest language. in the print version it also occupies the field of open meetings and public records act. in an agreement with the chair last night we have decided to limit that occupy the field language to just conflict of interest. that means that the authority for a school district to impose additional requirements on open meeting or public records will be restored to the school district in the context of the amendments that senator glazer has just accepted. so it is broadening transparency back to where it was under current law, rather than restricting it on the open meetings and public records. and i will close with that and be available for any questions when appropriate.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 50, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 262, 'end': 267, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 896, 'end': 902, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1238, 'end': 1250, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3944, 'end': 3950, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4724, 'end': 4730, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Marcia Aaron: Yes, good morning, I'm Marcia Aaron and I lead the KIPP schools in Los Angeles. We operate 13 free open enrollment public elementary and middle schools serving nearly 6,000 students in South and East Los Angeles. In 2016, we far outperformed our district and the state on the Smarter Balanced assessment despite serving a more disadvantaged student population. If we were a district, we would have been green in both Math and English on the new California Dashboard. 95% of our exiting eighth graders have graduated high school, and 84% have matriculated to college. Currently, 73% of our exiting eighth graders are either persisting in college or have graduated college. At KIPP LA, our conflict of interest policy incorporates the California Corporations Code, and any potential or perceived conflict is reviewed and resolved based on that code. When a board member offers KIPP LA pro-bono services, we abide by our conflict of interest policy. The board member recuses him or herself from any discussions of the services or contract and abstains from any related vote. As a charter, we do not have many of the tools available to traditional public schools. For example, we do not have the right of eminent domain or the ability to exempt ourselves from zoning laws. We do not have the ability to benefit from the state's credit rating when we issue debt, which raises our cost of debt. We have to pay 5% while LA Unified pays less than 2%, despite their financial challenges and our financial strength. We must pay for our debt out of operating budget rather than issuing bonds paid for directly by taxpayers. Our board members are volunteers who care passionately about our mission and our children. They give it their time, their expertise, and their money to help ensure that our students are on a path to and through college. They often provide us with significant pro-bono support. With SB 806, our organization and board would both be bound to high standards as it relates to conflict of interest. And we already comply to the Brown Act, the Public Records Act, and the Political Reform Act. And at the same time, our board would be able to continue to support us in real and meaningful ways. For example, if 1090 was made to apply to KIPP LA, our board share who has provided us with more than $1 million in pro-bono legal support would need to leave our board or not provide us with these services. Right now, we spend about 15% of our state budget on facilities, and having to pay for legal costs would be significant. Our board members are helping our students and families navigate the immigration issues that we're facing, given the new administration. They would not be able to do this. I believe strongly in operating a compliant and transparent manner and ensuring that we are exercising our fiduciary responsibilities to safeguard our public dollars. And I understand the trust and responsibility that come with accepting those funds. So I urge you to vote yes on 806.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2244, 'end': 2251, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Seth Bramble : Mr Chair and Senators, Seth Bramble here on behalf of the California Teachers Association. We do oppose Senate Bill 806 which the author has named-
[{'start': 23, 'end': 35, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Eric Premack: Mr Chair and members, Eric Premack with the Charter Schools Development Center, we're a statewide organization representing several hundred charter schools. We oppose this bill for very different reasons, some strange bedfellows and sharp elbows up here today. We oppose this bill for very different reasons. Many of our member schools are small to mid sized organizations who lack the technical heft and horsepower to be able to implement these complex laws. We spend a lot of time advising our clients on how to do that currently. because many of them try to do it in practice. And what we find is that most of them mightily struggle to do it. These are in theory very simple laws in practice. In implementation they're extremely complex and very difficult to do. We also oppose this as a matter of principle. One of the fundamental purposes of having charter schools, and if you look in the ed code it still says today that one of the primary intents of having charter schools in California is to shift from a rule based to a performance based accountability system. And most of the laws that you're looking at imposing in this bill are the epitome of rule based and take the focus off of and the energy off of performance based. It's a very complex measure. We think it needs a ton of work, just technically even if we did agree with it. There are lots of ambiguities. I gather there have been some amendments agreed to last evening. I have not seen those. I gather they're not in print. We would urge you to hold this bill over and vote no, thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Branche Jones: Mr. Chairman and members, Branche Jones on behalf of K12, California Virtual Academies and several individual charter schools in strong opposition. Just briefly, the breath of the legislation and how you implement it is a problem for a number of my clients. Not being involved in any conversations. Whatever conversations Mr Martin on is talking about, negotiations, having seen language, having seen the latest set of amendments that were agreed to. We think it's a little more complicated than just amending a bill week after week. This would be the third set of amendments since March 29th, I believe. That's problematic for us. We wish that somebody would think about the more than 1,200 charter schools are out there. How they're structured, they are not all structured the same. We love KIPP, but everybody's not KIPP. There are some individual schools, there are rural schools, there are schools that don't have admin support. There are schools that rely a lot on their accounting back office providers, accounting firms, auditing firms. There are some different for-profit companies that do assist charter schools in a number of ways that would be impacted by this legislation. I second the comments made by Mr. Premack and would ask you to at least slow down and think about what we're doing as we impact all the charter schools throughout the state. Looking at the language, talking to some of the staff from the sponsors a month or two ago. I don't even know what the objective is anymore. If we're going to play around with 1090, then figure out whether it applies or not. But I don't know how you try to work around it and apply portions of it, not apply other portions of it, that does not seem fair. So for those reasons and a bunch of other concerns, we would urge you to hold the bill in Committee.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 325, 'end': 331, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 793, 'end': 797, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 819, 'end': 823, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1220, 'end': 1227, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John McKibbon: mr. chairman, members, mckibbon on behalf of the california association of clerks and election officials. we have an opposed, unless amended, position based on a provision that the bill contains. which is essentially a backdoor amendment to the political reform act, affecting the decision-making authority of not only the fppc, but also more importantly for us of course, boards of supervisors. we respectfully urge your no vote. thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dolores Duran-Flores: mr. chairman and members, duran-flores with the california school employees association. we also apologize for our late opposition. we got our letter in yesterday, but we are opposed to this bill. we agree with the lawyers of alleged counsel that all of these laws currently do apply to charter schools. and we believe that all these exceptions are just weakening existing law and we believe that it must be clear that government code 1090 is also included in this bill. i mean, they're the same conflict of interest laws that all of you also have to comply with and again, we think it's existing law. thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tristan Brown: Thank you Chairman and members, Tristan Brown with the California Federation of Teachers, also apologize that our position is a recommended oppose, but has not yet been ratified by our executive board. But not specifically, but primarily for the lack of public safety that is provided by the government code, and that corporation's codes. And I'd like to mirror the comments by the CTA and CSEA. Thank you.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Renata Sanchez: Renata Sanchez, I'm a teacher at Elena Steinbeck K8 in San Jose. And I rise in opposition to Senate Bill 806 because we believe that tax dollars should remain public.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Larry Hopper: larry rand hopper, eighth grade middle school teacher. we urge you to vote no on this.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katherine Underwood: Katherine Underwood, a kindergarten teacher from La Jolla Elementary in Moreno Valley and I oppose SB 806.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gina Whipple: good morning, gina larry whipple, i teach english, eighth grade in lancaster. i would urge a no vote as well, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Elena Caballero: Good morning members of the Senate Committee and Education, my name is Elena Caballero and I teach first grade at Payne Elementary in El Monte, California in the San Gabriel Valley. I oppose Senate Bill 806.
[{'start': 71, 'end': 86, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chantaine Fauntleroy: Good Morning, my name is Chantaine Fauntleroy and I teach physical education at Brett Hart Middle School, in Hayward. And I oppose Senate Bill 806.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Lucia: mr. chairman, bill with ed voice, we don't have a position, but we would like to make a couple of observations if we could really briefly on the developments with the amendments as we understand them. and that we would say that we've, as an organization, have not a position formally on the issue of for-profit, but would point out that it doesn't appear to take into consideration the third-party transfer of authority by the state board of education. so i don't know if the amendments deal with the issue of the state board of education and its role in not only occupying the field, but dealing with the issue. for reference, it's 47605-8, subdivision c, just to put that on the record. with regard to these other issues of conflict, we think that the bill is going in the right direction and that we commend the author for actually coming through a breakthrough of making it actually very clear. we don't see any ambiguity at all, there's ongoing dispute that's been over a decade. and this is an opportunity for the legislature to weigh in, the state board for five years prior of that. so, it's actually been going on for decade and a half. the state board of education tried to regulate on this, they were unable to by putting this in the education code. not only can the legislature act today, and move forward and do this, but actually give the authority therefore to the state board of education, through the education code to regulate even further. to adjust any concerns about conflicts. and further, with the language that's in here as it relates to the penalty, it actually goes further than the wherewithal that happens under the courts, in criminal court, in any violation that the attorney general brings as a plaintiff under 1090. if any of you were found to be in violation, this whole committee wouldn't have to be off if you violate it. this provides authority for the authorizer to actually initiate it into evidence proceeding to determine that there was systemic, widespread abuse, and go further than the court, actually, and actually take off board members. so i'm actually surprised some of the charter folks didn't even raise that. i mean, so from the standpoint of, can it finally put to bed this issue of 1090 versus the corporation code? the authors really found the way forward, and i encourage you to think about those amendments, keep them favorable. and also on page 11, and is a nancy subdivision, please keep that there. that's about occupying the field and that's very important because if you don't do this, we'll be back here like groundhog day. so it has to be one way or the other and then go forward and get it done, thank you.
[{'start': 2414, 'end': 2419, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jason Murphy: Good morning, Mr. Chair and members, Jason Murphy, on behalf of the University of California. We rise today in strong support of this bill. I want to extend our heartfelt appreciation to both you and the author for bringing this important bill forward as was noted by the Senator and by the analysis as well. The University of California does have significant need in the area of facilities indeed. The University's in strong growth mode for resident undergraduate students and with respect to the needs associated with growth. Student enrollment growth alone, we have an excess of $1.6 billion in need so we're very much appreciative of the effort today. Look forward to working with you as this bill moves forward, thank you sir.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Meuel: thank you, yes. mary gina meuel with the csu would also like to thank the offer for the bill and as the author noted there is a great, great need. for example, 55% of our buildings are over 40 years old. these bonds could provide a great way for us to modernize and update and build additional capacity for students as we grow, thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Kando-Kaiser: good morning, danielle on behalf of common sense kids action, the sponsor of the bill. common sense kids action is the legislative arm of common sense media deleting nonprofit organization dedicated to helping kids thrive in a world of media and technology. we empower parents, teachers and policy makers by providing unbiased information, trusted advice and innovative tools to help them harness the power of media and technology as a positive force in all kids lives. recently common sense media released a census on children's media usage in the united states, which we shared with this legislature and which senator jackson cited some statistics from. and as she said some of our census shows that kids are using up to nine hours of media usage every day, that does not include the usage that they have at school as well. so that's nine hours of their free time that they're spending. the media content they consume and create has a profound impact on their social, emotional, cognitive, and physical development. innovations and technology have placed us all at a crossroads of unprecedented challenges. parsing through the wealth of information available through digital sources has become increasingly difficult with even trusted news sources fallen victim to reporting fake news or unverified facts. the skill sets necessary to discern truth from falsehood, and to identify bias in reporting are not limited to just one course of study. they are pervasive throughout subjects and issues. it's paramount that we develop a whole community approach which mitigates the issues that can arise from social media, reinforces critical thinking skills to discern factual content from fake news and propaganda. and which will leverage the incredible opportunities that media and technology can provide in learning environments. sb 203 builds off the foundation, builds with the introduction of last year's digital citizenship resolution that was acr 103 by assemblymember ed chau. which express the legislatures intent to support digital literacy and the safe and responsible use of technology in school settings. to date, more than 5,500 educators around the country have taken this pledge to assist students in building skills that lead to better decision-making in their online activity. sb 203 is a well crafted and thoughtful compliment to other efforts in this legislature as we work towards building a lasting and strong impact in addressing the issue of helping our students to become educated consumers of digital content. we urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 620, 'end': 627, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1970, 'end': 1977, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Beth Thorton: Hello, my name is Beth Thorton. I'm the communications director for the Center for Media Literacy and the Consortium for Media Literacy. I'm here today to express support for this bill, 203, and also bill 135 coming up a little bit later. We're calling for Media Literacy Education in California Schools. The Center for Media Literacy was founded in 1989 in Los Angeles. We have been working for many, many years to bring media literacy education into K-12 classrooms. We define media literacy has the ability to access, analyze, evaluate, create and participate with media and all its forms. The Center for media literacy works to teach critical thinking skills to students to enable them to better understand and question what they see and hear, regardless of how a message is delivered. In other words, we're in the field of education, not technology although there is considerable overlap. If a message is delivered via social media or cabled news or in a movie theater, students need critical thinking skills to asses the situation and respond or not respond, accordingly. We have hundreds of pages of articles and research documenting not only the field of media literacy, and how it has evolved, but also research studies from around the world illustrating the benefits of media literacy education. CML has three curricula that have been designated by the California Department of Education, and California Healthy Kids Clearing Houses highly recommended for in school and after school programs. Our goal is for students to grow up and become fully informed global citizens who actively and responsibly participate in their democracy. With the Internet and social media everyone is a citizen journalist, this can be very empowering. But we need to teach children to be not only tech savvy but media literate too.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carol Kocivar: Carol Kocivar, California State PTA in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erika Hoffman: Erika Hoffman, the California School Board Association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christina Marcellus: christina mary marcellus on behalf of san francisco unified school district in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Stender: Thank you Mr. Chair and Members of the Committee. My name is Jessica Stender. I'm an attorney at Equal Rights Advocates. We're a non-profit organization based in San Francisco. Our mission is to protect and expand economic and educational access for women and girls. We regularly serve women and girls who experience discrimination, including sexual violence and harassment on college campuses as well as in K through 12 schools. Today I'm going to discuss why SB 169 is so necessary to fill a gap in California, relating to protections against sex discrimination including sexual harassment and violence. And really why it's so critical now more than ever given the likely roll backs of protections and enforcement of these rights at the federal level.. While sex harassment has long been recognized as a form of prohibited sex discrimination under Title IX, sexual harassment and violence in schools and colleges is rampant. You've heard some of the statistics here. You read about it all the time. At least one in five young women will be subjected to an attempted or a completed rape during her college years. On large campuses, this translates to hundreds of attempted or completed rapes every year. While it is often less well-known, sexual harassment and sexual violence also plague K-12 schools. A survey of the American Association of University Women of over 1,000 K-12 students, in 2011, found that nearly half of the students from middle school through high school experienced some form of sexual harassment during their school year. According to a 2014 study by the University of Illinois, 21% of middle school students who were surveyed from the sample of nearly 1,400 students reported that they experienced unwanted physical touching on school grounds. We have a hotline, a nationwide hotline, but particularly focused in California, and we receive calls from students K through 12 and college level who have experienced horrific sexual harassment and sexual violence at their schools. And the calls really demonstrate the need for the kinds of guidance that this SB 169 would require schools to have. One California high school student we were contacted by was raped by a group of other students at a party. When another student reported to the school, a single school administrator was allowed to make a determination after engaging in informal interviews with the student who had been raped and the alleged perpetrators. Without conducting any formal investigation other than these informal conversations. The administrator determined that the victim should take time off from school while the rumors, quote, subsided and the students forgot about what had happened. She was provided with no accommodations to complete her school work during the time she was off, and when she returned to school she was placed in classes with her alleged assailants. Another call was from a California college student who was sexually assaulted by members of the school rugby team in her dorm room. When she reported it to her RA, the school disciplined her and expelled her for having violated their sexual conduct policy by inviting boys into her room. These stories indicate the types of guidance that are necessary for schools in terms of how to deal with sexual harassment and sexual violence. We also receive requests from Title IX administrators themselves, and coordinators themselves, of how to comply with Title IX requirements. Especially at the K through 12 level, Title IX coordinators are often full-time employees whose duties generally differ from Title IX enforcement. And in some cases they're provided little or no training. In a 2014 study and report that we conducted with the law firm of Morrison and Foerster, we surveyed all various school districts. And documented a startling unawareness, lack of awareness, among the area school administrators regarding the basic requirements of Title IX and their duties under Title IX. Some didn't even know that they needed a Title IX coordinator. And some Title IX coordinators didn't even know that they had been assigned this role. So why this guidance is so important, California has analogous laws to Title IX that prohibit discrimination in academic settings. However, California does not set forth how local schools and institutions can comply with these laws. This is why Title IX's implementing regulations and regulatory guidance provided by the Office for Civil Rights has been so critical, and is so critical that it is codified in California law. Title IX's implementing regulations require that schools take immediate steps to end harassment, prevent any discriminatory effects from the harassment, and prevent its recurrence. Thus, the regulations require schools not only to appropriately respond to allegations of sexual violence, but to also take action to address what is often a kind of broader culture of sexual violence in these schools. Finally, the regulations require, as Senator Jackson referenced, prompt and equitable investigation and grievance procedures for the resolution of students' sexual violence and harassment complaints. And this is an area in which schools really indicated the need for guidance. They know they're required under the law to have these prompt and equitable investigation agreements procedures, but they don't know how to do it. And so what the Dear Colleague Letter does, the 2011 Dear Colleague letter does, is set forth how schools can comply with these requirements under the law. It also addresses unique concerns that arise in sexual violence cases. Such as a school's independent responsibility to investigate. Allegations of sexual violence independent from any police investigation of such claims. It discusses proactive measures that schools can take to prevent sexual violence, and examples of remedies and enforcement strategies that schools may implement. And finally, it addresses that critical question of what a prompt and equitable grievance procedure might entail, and provides schools with this guidance that they need. So very quickly, these requirements provide this helpful guidance in saying notice to students of the grievance procedure, application of that procedure. Detailed explanation to students that both parties are allowed to present witnesses and testimony, prompt timelines, and notice of the outcome of any proceeding to all students. So this clear guidance has been critical for schools in knowing how to evaluate their own internal Title IX procedures. Finally, I'll just note that there's a very imminent rollback of these protections and the enforcement by OCR at the federal level. We know from what we've heard that OCR is critical to enforcing these laws. Theyve opened more than 340 investigations regarding mishandling of sexual violence complaints, and more than 200 of these investigations remain pending. Their intervention has been critical for victims to get some kind of relief under Title IX. However, were facing a very likely rollback of these protections. President Trump has said he would eliminate the Department of Education entirely, calling it, quote, massive and largely unnecessary. One of his advisors during the presidential campaign called the Office for Civil Rights unnecessary, and self-perpetuating absolute nonsense. Secretary of Education DeVos testified during her confirmation hearings that it was premature to say whether she would uphold the 2011 Dear Colleague guidance. And her first official policy as Secretary was to rescind federal guidelines related to transgender rights under Title IX. Finally, just last week, Secretary DeVos met with a Georgia State Representative who is suing the Department of Education over this very important guidance. So, all these indications show that this very critical guidance for schools, at the federal level, is likely to be rolled back. And really requires the implementation of SB 169 to guide schools in California as to their obligations under these laws, and to address this epidemic of sexual violence. So we therefore urge your aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 61, 'end': 76, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 4972, 'end': 4979, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7043, 'end': 7048, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7332, 'end': 7337, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7627, 'end': 7632, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jerilyn Stapleton: Hello to my Senator. Morning. Jerilyn Stapleton, President of California NOW. That's the National Organization for Women. We are in extremely strong support of SB 169, please say aye.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tia Nguyen: good morning mr. chair, and members. tia, on behalf of public advocates, here in strong support.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cynthia Castillo: Cynthia Castillo, on behalf of the Faculty Association of California Community Colleges, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christina Marcellus: Morning, Christina Marcellus, on behalf of the San Francisco Unified School District, in support.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erica Romero: good morning, erica christina romero on behalf of the association of independent california colleges and universities, representing the private and not-for-profits. we don't have a position at this time. but we do want to thank the senator's staff for meeting with us, and we'll continue to work with your office, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Gonzalez: Rebecca Gonzalez, National Association of Social Workers, California Chapter, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dan Roth: good morning, chairman allen, vice chair wilk, distinguished members. my name is roth. i am a criminal defense lawyer in berkley. i applaud senator jackson and president pro-tem de leon for taking on the very serious issues of sexual harassment and sexual assault in our schools. equal educational opportunity for people of all sexes and gender identities is a necessity. and harassment and assault can profoundly undermine and even destroy the student experience. senate bill 169 however is not the answer to these serious legal and cultural problems of sex, power, and violence that have challenged human beings since time memorial. i myself am a proud feminist and a fervent advocate for equality under the law for all. i am the immediate past chair of the bay area lawyer chapter of the american constitution society, a nationwide network of progressive lawyers and law students. and a racial justice advocate with black out for human rights and the ella baker center for human rights. today i speak only for myself, but my work with and for these organizations and the values they hold dear informs my testimony. over the past three years, i have represented respondents in title ix investigations at public and private universities around the bay area and beyond, from sacramento to silicon valley. i have yet to see a title ix investigation handled in a way that would make the people of the state of california either proud or satisfied that if their son or daughter was accused, they could get a fair shake. instead, i have witnessed a system that lacks basic due process protections and that is driven by fear. under the system created by the us department of education's office for civil rights' 2011 dear colleague letter, schools are terrified that they will lose funding if they are not perceived as cracking down on sexual harassment and sexual assault. and the schools act like it. evidence is withheld and destroyed, conflicts of interest are bound, and justice is simply not achieved. the disciplinary system created by the dear colleague letter is not the answer to the very real problems sb 169 seeks to address. far from a federal regulation, the dear colleague letter is an informal and vague set of policy instructions that has created a system lacking any of the checks that we as americans normally require when we render potentially life changing discipline against our fellow citizens. the dear colleague letter directs schools to conduct prompt and equitable investigations, but does not provide specific guidance as to how to carry out those investigations. it sets a preponderance of evidence standard, but does not instruct investigators how to weigh and evaluate evidence. there are no rules of evidence at all. nothing to tell inexperienced, untrained investigators what is relevant, what is hearsay, or how to judge witness credibility. and it does not guarantee that respondents will ever have the opportunity to review the evidence used against them or to cross examine witnesses. the one very clear message sent by the dear colleague letter to college campuses was, get tough or you will lose your federal funding. as heroes like michelle alexander and ava duverner have demonstrated in their masterful works, the new jim crow and 13th, getting tough in america always results in gravely disproportionate government enforcement against people of color. we in california have made mistakes, like three strikes, that we ought not repeat. a disciplinary system unmoored from our most basic due process protections and imbued with a clear monetary incentive toward findings of guilt will simply deepen the racial disparities in our educational and criminal justice systems. i, therefore, urge the members of this committee to put a halt to this well-intentioned bill, the effect of which will be to simply strengthen the school to prison pipeline, which we ought to be dismantling root and branch. i urge the committee to oppose sb 169 and would be happy to respond to any questions you may have. thank you for your time and for your service to the people of the state of california.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 28, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 41, 'end': 45, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 81, 'end': 85, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 148, 'end': 155, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 178, 'end': 185, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3167, 'end': 3185, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3190, 'end': 3202, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3255, 'end': 3263, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Andrea Pitts: hello, this is my first time, thank you for your time and attention. my name is andrea erica pitts, and i'm a california resident. and in my testimony today to oppose sb 169, i'm representing other california families and will be reading true accounts of what these young adults and their parents have endured at the hands of the unfair and chaotic title ix procedures. we want you to hear about what happens once a wrongful accusation is made. the madness created by the 2011 dear colleague letter is something we have all seen firsthand, we need you to see it too. a drunk girl became sexually aggressive and came onto our son, he said no. there was one witness, who, without a doubt, could prove our son's innocence. that witness was never questioned by title xi investigator and was not allowed to attend the hearing. our son was expelled. 18 months after a drunken hookup, the girl claimed sexual assault, even though she wished him, happy birthday bro, on facebook a month after the so-called assault. no police or campus security ever involved, expelled. at first suicidal, last two years in weekly therapy, lost his community, his education, his trust, and his happiness. couldn't imagine that with her text message, let's get it on, he was the one expelled.
[{'start': 80, 'end': 98, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marville Stewart: Marville Stewart, I'm a parent of a college son, a male, lack of due process, I strongly oppose SB 169.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Szabo-Kubitz: Good morning Vice Chair, Wolk, and Members of the Committee. My name is Laura Szabo-Kubitz. And I'm here on behalf of the Institute for College Access and Success, an independent non-profit based in Oakland. That works to make higher education more available and affordable for people of all backgrounds. I'm here today to voice our strong support for For SB 539 by Senator De Leon. For California to meet its workforce demands and close racial and socioeconomic equity gaps. It is imperative that more community college students receive the services and financial supports they need to get to and through college. Currently, full time cabinet recipients at the community colleges, many with incomes below the poverty level, and no resources of their own to pay for college, receive a combined Cal Grant of the access award, and supplemental full-time student success grant of only about $2,300. The proposed community college completion grant program would provide eligible students an additional $4,000 to cover non-tuition college costs, including books and supplies and living expenses. All of which combined can total close to $20,000 a year. By allowing students more time to spend in class and studying, as opposed to work and cover their basic needs. This grant will better enable needy students to enroll in 30 credits during in academic year. Of particular note, is the availability of this grant to students who enroll in summer course work, which provides critical opportunities for students to stay on track and graduate on time. Also critically because students cannot be expected to graduate on time if colleges do not make needed courses or support services available to them, we strongly support requirements for colleges to develop clearly structured academic program maps. And strengthen student advising and support services to help students at multiple points from high school graduation through earning a post secondary credential. For these reasons we strongly support SB 539 and urge your aye vote to ensure low income community college students get the financial and service supports they need to successful and efficiently earn a credential. Thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 29, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 72, 'end': 90, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 374, 'end': 381, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brian Rivas: Mr. Chairman and members. Brian Rivas, on behalf of The Education Trust- West, happy to be here in support.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barbara Barren: Barbara Barren, co-director of the California Edge Coalition, the broad coalition of business labor and social justice organizations, we're in strong support of both elements of the package. And are working very amiably with the author's office to make sure there's no unintended negative consequences for CT students.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Mattoon: laura andrea mattoon, with the community college chancellor's office. we don't have an official position on the bill, but we strongly support both pieces of the bill, and the prioritization of limited financial aid dollars for our lowest income students. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Valderrama: Mr. Chair and Members, Tim Valderrama with the Weideman Group on behalf of NextGen California. We're the sponsors of the bill. As Senator Skinner has mentioned, the Governor has set an ambitious goal of 1.5 million ZEVs on the roads by 2025. This bill is intended to support that goal and to bolster California's position as a global leader on reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. We think that this bill will improve public health, will reduce our reliance on fossil fuels, and will generate economic growth for the cleantech industry. We urge your support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 138, 'end': 145, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bonnie Holmes-Gen: Yes, Mr. Chair, Members. Bonnie Holmes-Gen with the American Lung Association in California. We're really pleased to support this bill. The Lung Association has been strongly supportive of accelerating zero-emission vehicles in all different applications as a key part of our state's clean air and climate strategy. But we know that we need to step up these efforts, especially as we look at data from our State of the Air Report. I might have mentioned it earlier, that we released today, that underscores our severe air quality problems here in California. Second plug on that report today. So the zero-emission technologies are moving forward. There are more choices of zero-emission vehicles than ever before. There's are demonstrable health benefits and we have data to present about that. There are demonstrations and deployments going on in the heavy-duty sector. So we're seeing breakthroughs and it's a role that can be played there. What we need is state leadership to step up here in both promoting and investing in ZEVs. And public fleets and private fleets are just a key part of this. So we strongly support the bill and urge your strong support.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathryn Phillips: kathryn jonah phillips with sierra club california, we support this for the reasons stated.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Margo Parks: margo kathryn parks on behalf of southern california edison, in support of the bill, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Murray: mr. chairman, members, mark margo murray with the environmental group californians against waste. our position as we've conveyed to the committee and the author is support if amended and we've provided those amendments. but i have to say that this is an extraordinarily bold proposal, and they are key provisions of this that i think really deserve to be embraced and highlighted. as the author mentioned, the idea of providing calrecycle with the authority to require minimum recycle content on all beverage containers we think is key in terms of building this true recycling future as opposed to simply collecting these containers. the language in the bill that essentially requires the beverage industry to be responsible for all the costs of recycling their containers, the cost of returning their containers to them to be made into new containers, it seems appropriate that they should be responsible for those costs. and third, as highlighted, it expands the scope of the beverage container recycling program to include wine and distilled spirits, something that i have been involved with, unsuccessfully, for almost a quarter of a century. so we are strongly in support of those principles and would like to see this conversation advanced. i think there are a number of elements of this program, this proposal, that need work. i'm not entirely comfortable with the idea of handing the keys over to the beverage industry to run the program but i think that there are ways to make that work and that's thus the general tenor of our amendments but i really appreciate this bold move by the chairman.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paula Treat: mr. chair, members of the committee, treat on behalf of cprc, it's the california plastics recyclers coalition. i represent the six major recycler reclaimers, they were referred to in the analysis as processors, no one ever seems to have an exact definition for us, but for the most part they take post consumer plastic bottles and containers, they make them into flake and pellet that can then be made into other rpet products. we close the loop on recycling for the plastic bottle part of it. i wanted to thank the chair, i wanted to thank the vice chair, i wanted to thank staff for all their hard work on this, it's very complex. and in our case, they expect that, one, they're very supportive of the bill, there are some aspects of it they would like to see enhanced, or changed, or hopefully amended. one of those would be under minimum content, which we think is very important, is that they don't think they'll be in the industry until 2021. they don't think they can hang in there that long. we're hoping for more, maybe, a 2019 date to gear up to minimum recycling. i want to thank senator stone, in one of the other meetings he even said that he thought maybe 50% might be some kind of a goal. i can tell you we could live with 20, but we can't live until 2021, is the problem. many manufacturers use some rpet, naked juice is 100%, costco's water is 50%, their iced tea is an 100%. so it's not as if the industry isn't embracing the idea of making bottles into bottles, but without the minimum content request, mandate will fall into some dire straits with the companies. one's already gone out of business, if all six go out of business, i don't think the program exists anymore, because who's going to go ahead and do the processing and the reclaiming? the pmd is a problem for us, so hopefully it would be phased out after minimum content. it's the only stopgap we have right now. and lastly is our bale quality and we've talked about this in other hearings, too. if it could be addressed, that would be great in this is that right now we pay the entire fee for a bale. well often times, and i have clients who will come up and swear under oath, 30 or 40% of it can't be used. so they're paying this extra money they can't use because the bales are dirty. we would actually like you to consider maybe having the cancellation process at the end of the loop where we are. where if we get bales and there's only 60% of it that's usable, it gets paid 60%, not the 100% we're already paying right now. so with those suggestions, we'd like to work with the author and the chair, the committee, we thank you very much. we think we're the last stop of this that's being hit by both the virgin plastic is too cheap and the fact that we don't have clean bales, we're not making the money there and that's a lot of green jobs that are going to go under. so thank you very much for stepping up, senator.
[{'start': 1100, 'end': 1105, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ralph Simoni: mr. chairman and members, ralph mark simoni, representing the american beverage association. we haven't taken a formal position on this bill yet, it is very, very complex. some of the witnesses have taken very, very tiny pieces of this bill, the previous witnesses. let me just frame it for you. what we're talking about here is the overall administration of this program. now, many of us who have been party to these discussions over the years have criticized calrecycle for the lack of vision. i think senator wieckowski should be commended for his sense of vision, all 129 pages worth, but having said that, we do believe that the concept of product stewardship should be on the table with all of the other concepts that are discussed to try and sort out this program but i'd want to make a couple of distinctions. first, the product stewardship programs that we currently have in california relate to hard to dispose of durable goods; mattresses, paint, and carpet. these have very few manufacturers. they have a discrete channel of distribution, and other attributes. what we're talking about when we discuss bottles and cans is roughly, i think, the figure had been thrown out here, 22 billion containers manufactured by an international market of manufacturers and distributed by hundreds of thousands of retail outlets, vending machines, you name it. i mean, using the capitol as a reference point, draw a mile circumference around the capitol, there are probably 2 or 3,000 places you can buy beverages, no place you can buy mattresses or carpet or paint. so, as we look at administering this program, i think we have to do a very, very thorough, in-depth, long-term look at, can all of these disparate parties be brought together and actually administer a stewardship program. so, the other comment i would like to make is there seems to be a notion of privatization in this product stewardship concept. but actually, when you look at the bill, there is a huge laundry list of responsibilities that calrecycle will retain. i'm not going to go through them but we're not streamlining the process. i would suggest that we are adding several layers of complexity in administering this program and that is going to have to be sorted out. aba and its member companies have a lot of history in this. we will commit to work with the senator and his staff to develop certain principles that can be applied to guide this discussion but at the end of the day it may be one of those situations where we have to accept the devil we know rather than the devil we don't know but we're committed to work.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 512, 'end': 522, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Susan Collins: Hi, I'm Susan Collins from the Container Recycling Institute and we are a research institute that studies the 45 beverage container deposit programs around the world. We've been doing this for 26 years. This is what we do, all day long, we study programs like this one. This bill is obviously a very serious effort to modernize the program and transition the program into a true producer-responsibility program. This program looks more like most of, the vast majority of the programs around the world. There are only 2 programs of the 45 around the world that are managed by state government. So that was message number one. Message number two of the five that I have is a caution to proceed very carefully. As many problems as there are with this program, it is still a highly functioning program, with one of the highest recycling rates in the nation and, indeed, in the world and so the risk of transitioning this to something else is a high risk. It is $1 billion program. It's handling, there are 23 million, 23 billion, billion with a "b", containers in the system. And this is recycling about 18 billion of them with thousands, literally thousands of entities involved in it, thousands of jobs, millions of dollars in tax revenue, $1 billion, more than $1 billion worth of economic throughput throughout the state every year, so a lot of moving parts that could easily be damaged if the transition isn't accomplished very carefully. Other general comments, this is also a litter reduction program and that was in the original title of this program, it's in the original title of many of the other programs around the world and I don't think that should be lost. Right now, the title of this in now changed to a beverage container recycling program, which in one of the important functions, but the litter reduction function is equally important. That shouldn't be lost. There is an expansion in this program, but it doesn't add pouches of septic and gable tops and those are included in some other programs around the world. Another key point is that this bill would lower the minimum recycling rate from 80% to 75% and I think any thing that we do with this program should go forwards, not backwards and look for continuous improvement. A third key point is that as much as this is a serious effort and did look at, it clearly has brought in some wisdom from some of the best programs around the world. It did not successfully include all best practices. One of the programs that I would encourage you to look at if you're trying to get a good framework of best practices is the program in the Province of British Columbia, Canada. In fact, a couple of years ago we wrote a case study. We did a yearlong project, a case study on the British Columbia program, and I have copies of the magazine article that we wrote on that report and the report is available on The Container Recycling Institute's website. So that's just some reference material for you. I would also like to note that as much as this is important to have a long-term vision, we have a very serious crisis in this program today. It's been brewing for the last four years, and that that needs to be addressed immediately. The redemption centers in this state have been underpaid a total of $50 million over a 4-year period and as a result, nearly 900 of them have closed. That's a 35% reduction in the beverage container redemption centers in this state and that is so serious, absolutely needs your immediate attention. The new payment formula that's been adopted, just as of January 1st, makes the program even worse by literally guaranteeing that every redemption center will be underpaid for every container that they collect. It's built in, it's cooked into the new formula. So that's of paramount importance and my last comment.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Louinda Lacey: good afternoon, louinda ralph lacey for the california chamber of commerce. also joining the other tweeners since we have not taken a position on this bill for the same reasons. let's proceed with caution, many of the same concerns raised in the other testimony and hoping to be at the table with the other stakeholders, thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shaina Brown: Good morning, Shaina Brown on behalf of the California Manufacturers & Technology Association, also part of the tweener group. Looking forward to working with the author's office, don't want to sit here and repeat what many people have already said.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Ikerd: Thank you, Mister Chairman, members, Jason Ikerd with Edelstein, Gilbert, Robeson and Smith, on behalf of GPI, the Glass Packaging Institute. I'm going to try and continue to the trend of short and sweet in the interest of time, GPI represents the container glass industry in California. We have long supported comprehensive reform of the beverage container recycling program. We believe that it's important that any comprehensive reform contain a number of elements. And I will highlight a few of what we believe are the most important. First and foremost, we believe that it's important that any program or any reform cover all container types for any covered beverage in the program. It's a matter of parity and competition and insuring that containers are effected equally. And secondly, we believe it's absolutely essential that there is adequate incentive and framework to ensure there is high quality product collection from curbside collection. We're not entirely insured that's included in SB 168 at the moment. We believe it's something that's important, it's highlighted in the governor's proposed budget. And for those reasons, we are opposed. And we appreciate the Senator's efforts though.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dennis Loper: Dennis Loper representing the California Beer and Beverage Distributors and the California Distributors Association. Simply put SB 168 creates an entire new program without the proper vetting or resources. If on day one, 30 years ago, distributors had been given the responsibility of doing what's being suggested now, it may have been possible to do because they would have been starting with the first can. Today, to do it is going to be impossible, and we hear analogies about Oregon. Oregon started on day one, and they're very well funded. We hear analogies about the mattress program, mattresses are recycled every 7 to 10 years, it's a totally different volume program. How do distributors pay for the infrastructure that's going to be required for them to do this program? If you're in the City of Los Angeles and suppress Senator Lara's district, and you have a warehouse that you're landlocked, where are you going to go to increase the infrastructure needs? And who's going to pay for that? Frankly, we're the ones that are being feed in this bill so, we're not only going to get the right to build more infrastructure, but to pay a very large fee. Mr. Aster talked about the stranded assets of what this bill may cause. Are we going to be feed to pay for those stranded assets if they do? The fee is very strongly on the distributor. I don't know what we did to annoy Senator Wieckowski. But frankly, Wieckowski, I'm sorry, Senator. This bill is not well vetted. It wasn't discussed in this forum in the stakeholders meetings. It's comprehensive, that's for sure, but none of these issues were fully vetted during the stakeholders meetings. And it's a whole new process that we think needs a little more thought. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 839, 'end': 843, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1164, 'end': 1169, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1388, 'end': 1398, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1413, 'end': 1423, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Gavin McHugh: mister chairman and members, gavin louinda mchugh on behalf of the distilled spirits council. we would like to echo the comments of the wine institute regarding the concerns they have which are significant and we are opposed to the bill. thank you.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eric Wolf: thank you. thanks for the opportunity to address the committee and respectfully request your support of sb 633. i'm eric with the san gabriel valley council of governments. the current storm water permitting system for los angeles county highly encourages capture and infiltration as a means of limiting downstream pollution. an additional benefit of that system is that it augments local water supplies and both of these are noble goals, and we support them, but we want to find a manner that does this in a reasonable, practical, feasible, and affordable manner. the flood control system for la county is an amalgamation of under-street storm drains, open channels, and riverbeds. most segments of this system are regulated by water quality standards and pollutants are measured at downstream locations, receiving waters, as they're known. any exceedance of a water body pollution standard constitutes a violation. for this reason, the la regional water board is driven towards disallowing the use of the existing flood control system to convey polluted water to sites that more economically capture and infiltrate. as you heard from council member mahmud earlier, to recreate that system at local jurisdictions, county public works has projected that cost at over 20 billion. and just within san gabriel valley, it's estimate about $6 billion. so we worked with the senator's office to draft the bill to continue to use the existing flood control system in order to accomplish our water quality goals in a far more cost effective manner. there's three good reasons to support centralized capture versus localized capture. the first is that we don't really need to rebuild what we already have. that would be redundant. in fact, the cost of capture at the local level is far higher on a per acre foot of water basis. metropolitan water district has calculated that an acre foot of water derived from a local source is 250% higher than water generated from a larger downstream project, a centralized collection. the next reason to support this is that we already have a system. it's been in use for over 50 years, and it's been effective and it continues to be what we use right now while we're sorting through how to create an additional way of capturing upstream at the local level and so before we get rid of that system, we should try and squeeze out every advantage that it gives us. and then finally, 633 is a tool for the regional board to use. they have to maintain water quality standards on one hand and at the same time, they want to enhance local water supplies through capture. 633 doesn't force the board to opt for moving storm water from one place to another. instead, it recognizes and respects their judgement when considering the benefits derived from conveying water through this system in order to maintain water quality standards. if, in their determination, water can be moved and infiltrated at a downstream site with little to no ultimate detriment to water quality, then the board should have that flexibility to consider those proposals. so, senators, thank you for your time, and i ask you for an aye vote.
[{'start': 116, 'end': 120, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1151, 'end': 1157, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Diana Mahmud: Good afternoon, and again, my name is Diana Mahmud, I applaud your stamina. So it's a rough haul here.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Hertzog: hello, chair, and members. i am paul gavin hertzog, i'm the national coordinator for surfrider's ocean friendly gardens program. we strongly support this bill. the watershed approach is a holistic set of state wide standards for landscapes, and we've heard a lot today about standards. the watershed approach standards are just four steps, as the senator has outlined, but i'll make it very clear. healthy soil, contouring for rain water capture, climate appropriate plans, and high efficiency irrigation as needed. and here's an example, in ventura, california. we retrofitted an 800 square foot yard. so we've got the grass, revived the soil with compost, shaped the land to create a dry creek bed, planted natives, added mulch, and directed rain water downspouts into that dry creek bed. every inch of rain falling on the 645 square feet of roof that goes into that front yard, generates 400 gallons of water. the garden grew with rain water, and now at maturity, survives on rain water. healthy soil acts like a sponge to absorb and hold on to rainwater which plants tap into during the dry months. it filters pollution and it locks up carbon from the atmosphere. the benefits are significant. just to name a couple, water stored in the top 6 to 8 inches of top soil far exceeds the storage capacity in lakes and reservoirs. and we get about 53 tons per acre of greenhouse gas reduction for reduced trips to the landfill and the like. typical turf grass replacement programs fall short because of three points. they do not require rainwater capture. they do not require organic mulch. i think everyone's familiar with, what we've heard about gravelscapes for southern california, which end up shedding water and heating up cities. and these rebates do not apply to all landscapes. the current version of the model water efficient landscape ordinance is only triggered by pulling a permit. and it applies to existing landscapes of a fairly large size, 2,500 square feet. now, we know this works, that is, the watershed approach, because right now, in san diego county and la city, rebate programs require the watershed approach. and along with standards, senate bill 780 calls for public education and professional training to help make this transition. i've been involved in installing numerous landscapes and see potential everywhere i go for every landscape to do its part and apply the watershed approach like the victory gardens of today. thank you.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: kyle of circle california in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marine Decomb: Marine Decomb, Association of Professional Landscape Designers and G3 Green Gardens Group, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Lynch: Good afternoon, Danielle Lynch on behalf of Carbon Cycle Institute, Tree People, and on behalf of the Trust for Public Land in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christian Hernandez: good afternoon, my name is christian paul hernandez. i'm 18 years of age. i'm from the san francisco conservation corps and i'm a corps member and i'm in support.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lydia Velazquez: hi, my name is lydia christian velazquez. i am 23 years old. i come from the san francisco conservation corps. and i am in support of sb 780.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kelly McBee: Good afternoon, Chair and Members. Kelly McBee with Californian's Against Waste, in support of the bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paula Kehoe: Thank you, good afternoon Chairman and members. My name is Paula Kehoe I'm the Director of Water Resources with the San Francisco Public Utilities Commission. And I am here to talk about how local communities are developing new water supplies in order to use water more efficiently. And one of those strategies includes onsite water treatment systems to produce none potable water for things such as toilet Flushing and irrigation. Existing law regarding the treatment of non potable water use has established water quality standards that rely on end point monitoring without considering the pathogen load, and treatment processes required to remove these pathogens. So why we're in support and the sponsor of SB 740 is that we want to see risk based standards developed by the State of California that will be protective of public health. And include the appropriate treatment, monitoring and reporting in multifamily, commercial and mixed used buildings. SB 740 proposes to build upon existing law including performance based treatment standards, monitoring and reporting requirements. And that these requirements actually reduce the exposure to the public from these types of onsite water treatment systems. There's strong scientific support with the approach that we're recommending in SB 740. For the past several years, we've have a coalition of public health agencies in California as well as across the country that have been working on the role of onsite water treatment systems as a way of ensuring that they're protective of public health. The coalition collaborated with the National Water Research Institute who led an independent expert panel to conduct research and this is a copy of the report. And the report is entitled Risk Based Framework for the Development of Public Health Guidelines for Decentralized Nonpotable Water Systems. In the audience today we do have a member of the expert panel here if you want to get into specific details on the report. But what's important about the report is that it actually offers a risk based framework that is not currently in place today. And the framework is to reduce the exposure to pathogens. The framework uses a very, very conservative approach to reduce the potential risk of infection, based on a drinking water standard and a drinking water perspective. This framework fits in with the water safety plan approach that's promoted by the World Health Organization. In addition to our work here with the report, we also have nine states and the District of Colombia that are currently continuing to work together to develop policies and guidance. That are appropriate for public health standards and are transferable from state to state. We whole heartedly agree that the state's role is to set appropriate water quality monitoring and treatment standards. As the Senator Weiner mentioned, that with the amendments that one could interpret that it might take away the authority from the local jurisdictions. The role of local agencies really include selecting who should be the appropriate enforcing agency on the local level. A city health department, a county health department. What type of permitting requirements, local jurisdictions should set, fees that are associated with covering costs with permitting. Enforcement in terms of making programs mandatory, voluntary, as well as frequency of cross connection tests. So, we believe that those still should remain with local authorities in terms of their oversight and management. In conclusion, we look to additional water reuse in California, water conservation and storm water opportunities. SB 740 will establish appropriate risk based standards that are protective of public health for onsite recycling. And the mandatory water quality standards will address the potential risk of exposure from non potable water systems by establishing conservative, uniform and performance based standards that adequately protect public health, thank you.
[{'start': 59, 'end': 70, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2839, 'end': 2845, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cindy Clark: and members, thank you very much for this opportunity to speak. is it working? now. okay, well good afternoon. thank you for this opportunity to speak. my name is cindy lydia clark, i'm the chief development officer at sustainable silicon valley. we're a 17 year old non-profit. our membership base is large and small tech companies, cities, counties, agencies all working together to increase sustainability in our community. so ssv supports sb 740. we are concerned with any amendment that could possibly be interpreted in a way that would take away local control of the permitting process. today i'm going to be speaking about why we support this bill. but i do want to clarify one really important thing, and that's developing on site water as a water source in addition to our currently operating centralized water recycling plants. small on site systems can complement the decentralized plants, increasing our supply of recycled water. each offer important benefits, and i'd like to share two examples of where agencies and towns believed a choice of recycled water made sense. santa clara water district has three centralized water recycling plants in their district. but they've also demonstrated support for onsite reuse by sponsoring a task force which wrote a model ordinance that includes onsite reuse for new development believing that onsite reuse increases local water supply. my second example demonstrates how on site reuse can offer a great choice in circumstances where cities would like to connect users to centralize water recycling plants, but the distance and the cost makes this prohibited. the small city of manlow park was allowed to offer connection to, was unable to offer connection to redwood city's water recycling facility. when facebook was requesting a campus extension that would require additional water. the city was concerned about potential lack of sufficient water in the future. but the city ultimately passed the campus approval because they were also installing an on site system. in fact, that city now requires on site reuse systems for all new buildings over 250,000 square feet. for over two years, ssb has been educating and promoting on-site reuse. and this morning, i want to share with you just three things that we've encountered, that demonstrate the importance and need for sb 740. number one, conserving water by installing on-site systems has significant environmental benefits. so many, in fact, that environmental nonprofits are supporting this bill including california sierra club, california coastkeepers alliance, san francisco baykeepers, and many others. number two, many of ssv members are large tech companies, and they want to install these systems to reduce their local water consumption. however, there is no permitting process in our area, and there are no rules to really follow. to give you an example of one of this, one of our members' facebook. they've been in the permitting process since 2015 without permitting guidelines. it's expensive and a time-consuming path for water conservation for our businesses in california. and finally number three, to address this permeating hurdle, ssb was part of that water efficiency task force which i mentioned earlier. cities, the county of santa clara, and the water district, we all developed a model ordinance which implemented on sight reuse, which cities and counties can adopt. so after 14 months of work, creating this ordinance. there still is reluctancy from the county staff to adopt this ordinance. because quote, "potential impacts to public health and a lack of state guidance to make alternative water sources safer". sb740 will address these two obstacles by establishing treatment system performance standards that are protective of public health. today we reach you to pass sb740, this is a smart bill. it will keep the public healthy, it provides guidance to towns and counties. it will result in conserving our precious water for communities and ecosystems as we face a future with a growing population and changing climate which threatens our water resilience. our type of reuse is a really great tool in our toolbox to make water conservation a california way of life.
[{'start': 163, 'end': 180, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Lynch: good afternoon, danielle cindy lynch on behalf of the association for professional landscape designers, california chapter, in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sean Botwon: sean danielle botwon, on behalf of california coast keeper alliance in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: Kyle Jones with Sierra Club California and on behalf of Clean Water Action in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nashelley Kaplan-Dailey: Hi, we appreciate your leadership on this issue. My name is Nashelley Kaplan-Dailey. I work for Imagine H20. We're a nonprofit water technology accelerator and we work to empower people to deploy. And develop innovative water solutions to global challenges. And that includes creating a policy environments that supports and encourages entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurs to bring their ideas and talents into the industry. Innovation doesn't happen in a vacuum and absent guiding regulatory framework, there's no incentive to devote the resources necessary to develop increasingly effective solutions. That's why we support SB 740.
[{'start': 60, 'end': 83, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ben Eichenberg: good afternoon, ben on behalf of san francisco bay keeper in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Blass: Danielle Blass on behalf of the California Municipal Utilities Association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Harris: mr chairman, richard sean harris representing water reuse california. actually, i guess the other pea in the pod. we are the state's centralized recycled water providers and producers and we support the bill and look forward to working with the senator though to make sure we clarify the local control issues that we've raised before so thank you for this.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ben Eichenberg: Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair and members. I would like to add my thanks to staff for your work on this bill. As the Senator said, my name is Ben Eichenberg, I'm with San Francisco Baykeeper. As it's been made clear, by the Senator, California needs additional protection in the event of a spill of tar sands, crude, and other non-floating oils. In response to concerns about the risks posed by tar sands spills, the National Academy of Sciences studied the environmental fate of spilled tar sands oil. It turns out, not all oil is the same. There are substantial differences in the chemical composition of tar sands and its behavior when released into the environment when compared to conventional crudes. Tar sands oil is often more dense than water. Its adhesion is up to 100 times greater than conventional oils. It creates sticky and easily submerged residues when burned and it does not quickly biodegrade. Tar sands will sink into the water column or to the bottom of water bodies as its lighter dilutents evaporate. Yet tankers entering California waters do not announce on their manifest what kind of crude they are carrying, so responders may not know what kind of oil they are cleaning up until hours into a response. The National Academy of Science has found that current emergency approaches are based on floating oil, so regulations and agency practices do not take the unique properties of tar sands into account, nor do they encourage effective planning for spills. Tar sands refining could increase drastically in California if existing pipeline and rail plans move forward, leading to an eight-fold increase in Canadian production. This increased production could mean more than 2,000 additional barges and tankers carrying tar sands crude to and from refineries on the West Coast in the coming decade. Each tanker trip carries an added risk of a spill. For reference, the tar sands spill the Senator referred to, the Kalamazoo, cost over $1 billion, still isn't cleaned up, with only 843,000 gallons. Even the smallest tar sands barge entering San Francisco Bay or the Port of Los Angeles would carry at least twice that amount. Ocean cleanup is far more difficult than a confined river bed. California's $46 billion coastal economy has a lot to lose to a spill. After the Costco Busan disaster spilled 53,000 gallons of oil into San Francisco Bay, the Governor closed the fishery and more than 50 public beaches. All told, that spill cost more than $73 million. Imagine that times 267, the amount of oil carried by a fully laden coastal tanker and instead of over a month to clean up, try five years. If we're going to ship this stuff through San Francisco Bay, we need to put our best scientists into imagining these scenarios and figuring out a plan to reduce the catastrophic damage that could result from an accident. By passing SB 709, the State of California will be taking a leadership role in addressing the regulatory gap identified by the National Academy of Scientists and ensuring that emergency responders have the tools that they need. I also respectfully ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 144, 'end': 158, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Victoria Rome: Yes, Victoria Rome with the Natural Resources Defense Council here in support of SB 709 and we've done a lot of work looking at potential expansion of tar sands oil and coming into the West Coast, there is some coming in now as you may have heard, but were looking at significant expansion over the next several years with additional infrastructure planned in Canada. So we're in support, we think this makes a lot of sense.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Juan Altamirano: Juan Altamirano on behalf of Audubon California, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: kyle richard jones with sierra club california, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Justin Malan: justin for heal the bay, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vern Goehring: Vern Goehring on behalf of Food and Water Watch, in support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathy Dervin: kathy with 350 bay area, in strong support and thanks to the author for this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Graham: Mark Graham, Oak Grove resident, in support. Just want to mention two things, may not be directly related to this bill. What we've learned in the Gulf oil spill was that the oil companies, BP was using something called corexit, which ended up being, I think, an equally big environmental hazard as the oil spill itself and the reason they did it was, I understand, they were going to be reducing the amount of water that was on the surface. Corexit made the oil sink to the bottom and because the fine that they were subject to was calculated based on the amount of oil that was still floating on the surface. So it was set up to lead to a disaster, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeremy Neigher: neigher on behalf of pace avenue in support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Midili: Brian Midili, San Francisco resident, NRDC Council Member, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ria Boner: ria kyle boner, san francisco resident, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Jezienicki: danielle ria jezienicki, san francisco resident, nrdc council and sonen capital, in support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dave Rhoads: dave danielle rhoads, san francisco resident, nrdc council, support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian White: good afternoon, mr. chair and members. brian here on behalf of the western states petroleum association. we are opposed to the bill. right now, california already has the most comprehensive oil spill program in the nation and we're looked upon by many states, and even the world, as having the most comprehensive oil spill program. so this bill is a little bit of a head scratcher for us, and we're not exactly sure what the end goal is since the state already has the ability to address oil spills of any nature, particularly since legislation was enacted two years ago that now addresses both marine spills and inland spills. wspa was heavily involved in that negotiations. we reached an agreement with the ospr agency. we recognize that there are concerns about pipelines, railroads, trucks, shipping, you name it. the state has it now covered. so, we're not really sure if this bill is intended to ultimately be a ban of some type of fuel. i know that it's been mentioned about potential canada tar sands fuel and the definition in the bill is non-floating so, depending on how the oil actually gets treated in the weathering process, pretty much anything can be non-floating at some point. the other issue too is, since the enactment of the oil spill program 20 years ago, we're very concerned about bills that have tried to amend the oil spill program. you have to look at them very carefully, because they can actually end up conflicting, what's called the national contingency plan. the unified command process, the instant command process that responders have to respond to. they want to make sure that all the states are working in concert. right now, in the us coast guard, as was mentioned in committee's analysis, has a policy and a guidance for non-floating oil. ospr is now working with the coast guard on this. there's a technical advisory committee that is actually, they meet almost once or twice a month. we've been engaged with ospr and the technical advisory on a number of issues and this is one of those emergent issues that a lot of folks didn't even know was out there. so this technical advisory committee can deal with a lot things that this bill is trying to do. the committee's analysis mentions a study should possibly be done. we probably would not have a problem of having a study done, but this bill goes more farther than a study. it actually mandates that ospr come up with new criteria, duplicative criteria, that could actually end up competing and conflicting with the national contingency plan. so for that reason, we're opposed to the bill. we can work with the author in potentially doing some type of study type language but the way the bill is written now, we have to oppose it.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
James Lombardo: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. James Lombardo Jr. on behalf of the California Motorcycle Dealers Association, apologize for the late letter and support. We actually sell the parts and also install them and we urge your support.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 43, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sandra Moraz: Good morning, and I appreciate the time that you have given us. My name is Sandra Moraz and I've lived in the community of Alpa for 57 years.
[{'start': 75, 'end': 87, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Johnson: Mr. Chairman, Members of the Committee, thank you. My name is Tim Johnson. I'm President and CEO of the California Rice Commission. Our organization represents the state's 2,500 rice farmers, as well as all the rice mills in the state. We produce rice on about 550,000 acres annually. We have worked significantly over the last six to nine months with the environmental justice community in support of this effort. We Work is still ongoing. I am optimistic that we will reach agreement as we continue to discuss. We are very supportive of the objectives as outlined in this bill. The objective to address numerous water quality challenges in the state, both natural, as had been previously mentioned, as well as man made. And really to make sure that the small disadvantaged communities that Sandra had mentioned issues are addressed. We also support broad funding for solutions on a state wide basis and would also note that we do believe that there will be funding that would be necessary from the agricultural community. We also are supportive of a pathway to compliance for the agricultural community assuming that we would be paying into the fund and that we are fully compliant with waste discharge requirements as well as compliant with ground water programs for nitrate. We do look very much forward to continuing to work in the next weeks and months with the environmental justice Committee, as well as the author to come up with language that would meet these objectives.
[{'start': 62, 'end': 73, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 792, 'end': 798, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kathy Viatella: good morning, chair and members of the committee. my name is viatella, and i am with the water foundation. the water foundation is a non-profit, non-partisan philanthropic entity, that's working to transform how water is managed in california. and we work by bringing together diverse coalitions, and providing technical support, and doing research to address those challenges. we recognize that water is really a precious resource and that it connects all of us. it's nourishing our cities, it's flowing through our wild places, it drives our economy, it supports agriculture and business and so on. and it's without question it's our lifeblood and we believe that our future depends on meeting all of these needs. but unfortunately we really face unprecedented challenges. and in meeting those goals, and especially true for california's most vulnerable communities. you heard about alpa, but as been reported by the board, there are 300 other communities like alpa that are facing the same struggles. we just emerged from an epic drought, and i think during that time, the drought really shined a light on the problem in many of these communities, as wells went dry, upwards of 3,000 wells. but that news and those stories really shined a light on what has been a hidden disaster for years, and that is hundreds of thousands of californians lack access to life's most basic necessity, and that is clean and affordable water. we've read reports about these problems recently, and i just can't imagine the horror of living in my home and having either my water go out and not being able to provide a glass of water to my children. or actually not knowing if the glass of water that's clear, and i provide to my children, has pollutants in it that could cause long-term health problems. having access to reliable water supply is really an important and essential issue in of our time. and i think we are working towards trying to meet that, but we need to continue to make progress. california passed ab 685 in 2012, making it one of the first states in the country to recognize the human right to water, and that guarantees all citizens the right to safe and affordable water and i really want to recognize and appreciate the effort of the parties that are here today that have been working towards finding a permanent solution to this. a lot has been done so far in trying to advance policies and solutions with new funding through proposition 1 and other legislation to try to protect drinking water supplies. but we're really now at a moment that one of the main challenges that remains is having funds to help finance critical infrastructure investments as well as their operation and maintenance in those communities that require assistance. we are happy to see that the governor made this a priority in his 2017-2018 budget proposal. and that we hope progress can be made on this front, this year. we cannot have a complete vision of california's future without a fair honest and comprehensive water policy that recognizes a fundamental right to clean and uncontaminated drinking water. and our state leaders took a large step in 2012 in declaring that safe and affordable drinking water is a human right. and now we all have to work together to make good on that promise, thank you.
[{'start': 61, 'end': 69, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Juan Aldavedan: juan dave aldavedan on behalf of autobahn california and the environmental defense fund in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gale Dillehante: dillehante with western growers association. we're a fresh fruit and tree nut association in california, arizona, and colorado. we are one of the stakeholders at the table with the community water center and we'll continue to work with them as this bill moves forward. we support the bill.
[]
Kyle Jones: kyle of sierra club california and on behalf of the california legal conservation voters, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Augusta: Brian Augusta on behalf of the Rural Community Assistance Corporation and Self Help Enterprises in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alejandra Duran: alejandra juan duran on behalf of next gen climate in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Art Rodriguez: art alejandra rodriguez on public community service district we voted to support a bill that would help the treatment and maintenance fund for disadvantaged communities. we didn't have the legal so we didn't say sb 623, as well as wild places in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jonathan Nelson: jonathan with the community water center in support to guarantee the human right to water for all californians. and with us, we have a number of community members throughout the valley and elsewhere.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Josephine Alvarado: thank you. my name is josephine, and i represent, and i need to guaranteed to human right for the water for all of california, thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bertola Chavez: Hi, my name is Bertola Chavez and I come from the community Arvin in Kern. County. And I'm here because I support 623 and I can't drink my water at home.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Hugo Trujillo: Hi, my name is Hugo Trujillo and I come from Martini Tracks community on Tulare California. And I coming to support this legislation. And I want to say only, you can listen to all these people, each is a community and there's a many, many more communities and you have the power and you can help all these people and my community too.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alex Aleti: Alex Aleti, from the Western Center on Law and Poverty, in support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lilia Garcia: hi, my name is lilia art garcia, i'm from porterville. i'm here to support sb 623, to guarantee the human rights to water for all californians.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Flory Bestiseb: Good evening, I mean hi, to everyone. And my name is Flory Bestiseb, I'm here for Portola Valley. And I would like to, the priority for everybody should be that, clear water.
[{'start': 53, 'end': 67, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cecille Gonzalez: good afternoon, my name is cecille, representing bakersfield in arvin, and i'm here in support of this measure because we need safe drinking water, and on a personal note, my family has dealt with cancer, lung cancer because of contamination in our water.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maria Vargas: hi, my name is vargas, and i'm representing the city of merced, south merced, in particular. and i'm here in support of this measure because i have kids, i have grandchildren who are drinking the water and are getting sick. and the doctor says it is because of the lack of safe drinking water in our homes.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lucy Hernandez: good afternoon, my name is lucy lilia hernandez and i represent the community at west goshen, and i'm here in support of sb 623, to guarantee the human right to safe drinking water for all californians.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lennet Olgens: Hi, my name is Lennet Olgens, I'm from Tulare County. I represent the small community of McClenney Tract. I'm in support of the bill because I'd like to see everybody stay healthy.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stephanie Zaragoza: good afternoon, i'm stephanie lucy zaragoza, and i'm representing livingston, and here to support sb 623.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 66, 'end': 76, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Fearing: good afternoon, mr. chair and members. jennifer stephanie fearing, here today in support on behalf of the pesticide action network and defenders of wildlife. thank you.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 65, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Earl White: hello, my name is earl jennifer white, i'm here because the mission of accountability aid has made this trip possible. also i'm a member of friends against fracking. and oil companies are contaminating our water, drinking water,and farming water and that should stop. also i want to remind everybody that it's not just united states that had this problem but also the un in 2012, declared that this is a right of human being and pass a resolution. so, everybody in the world believes this is a very important situation, not just the low incomes in the central valley, but everywhere. and also let's not take a step back. in early 1900's we had clean drinking water for everybody. with the fountains for all for everybody in public sites. and now, since the mid of the 1900s, this has taken a nose-dive. let's get back to on track. thank you and have a nice day.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maria Marcelle: Hi, my name is Maria Marcelle, from Versad, and I'm here to support this measure. And because we all deserve safe drinking water, and it's personal to me because two of my family members passed away due to cancer.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ricardo Marcelle: Good afternoon, my name, is Ricardo Marcelle, I'm from the City of Merced but today I'm representing all Californians because we all drink water. We all use water, all of our kids drink out of the water fountains. And it's all of our responsibility to take care of such a precious resource.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Patricia Leal: hi, good afternoon, my name is patricia earl leal, and i am representing the eastern coachella valley. as a resident and someone that grew up in the eastern coachella valley, i'm in support of the bill because a lot of our communities in the eastern coachella valley are rural and agricultural, which can be highly impacted by having such measure go forward. especially because the water is, again, we hear it again and again, of having arsenic in our water, there's arsenic and other contaminants that really are a problem, so i'm in support of this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cristobal Chavez: Hello my name is Cristobal Chavez and I come from Photoville California and I'm here to support SB 633 because we can't drink water you know. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Miguel Asin: good afternoon, my name is miguel patricia asin, i'm a resident of alvin. i'm here to support sb 623, lower income communities should have access to affordable and drinkable water. thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ray Conno: Good afternoon, my name is Ray Conno. I'm here from Sanger, east of Fresno, and I live in a small neighborhood of approximately 70 households, residences known as Tombstone. And most of the residents in my neighborhood can't afford to clean their, to filter their water, to process it. And I'm here on behalf of them supporting SB 623, thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jose Gurrola: Good afternoon Mr. Chair, board members, staff. My name is Jose Gurrola, I am the mayor of the City of Arvin, SD 14. One of the most poorest districts in the State of California. We are the seventh most largest economy in the world. We can provide safe drinking water, we should.
[{'start': 59, 'end': 71, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Hunter: Good afternoon, my name is Michelle Hunter, and I am from Alpaugh. I am in support of SB 623 because we can't drink the water. And everybody should be able to drink the water from their faucet, not pay for bottled water. You have a good day, and thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tomas Garcia: Good morning, my name is Tomas Garcia. I'm from Porterville. And I'm supporting the SB 623 for clean and affordable water. Thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tracey Patterson: hi, patterson, california food policy advocates. we're a state-wide policy advocacy organization dedicated to improving access to healthy and affordable food for low-income californians, and access to safe drinking water is a critical foundation of health and food security for all. thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dennis Cuevas-Romero: good afternoon, chairman and members. dennis with american heart association, american stroke association in very strong support of this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Clary: Good afternoon, Jennifer Clary from Clean Water Action in support of the bill. And also speaking in behalf of California Rural Legal Assistance Foundation, Environmental Justice Coalition for Water, and Natural Resources Defense Council. Thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Valderrama: Good afternoon, Tim Valderrama with the Weideman Group on behalf of SEIU California, in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 68, 'end': 83, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Veronica Garibay: Veronica Garibay on behalf of the California Environmental Justice Alliance and the Center on Race, Poverty, and the Environment in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amanda Monaco: amanda miguel monaco from the leadership council for justice and accountability in support of sb 623.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Scott Wetch: Mr. Chairman and members, Scott Wetch. On behalf of the 65,000 members of the California Coalition of Utility Employees, and the 100,000 members of the State Association of Electrical Workers. Mr. Chair, as you know, because you're one of the architects involved in SB 350, we were at many meetings together. The IRP was really part of the cornerstone of SB 350, in terms of ensuring that there would be appropriate long-term planning, to ensure a multi-faceted portfolio. Without having appropriate oversight of every load-serving entity, the IRP becomes, really, a shell for shale oil. But, what we really need is to have adequate oversight. And one of the problems with CCAs is, unlike publicly-owned utilities, is you don't have the level of public participation with CCAs, if you've ever attended a CCA board meeting. The reason for that is, and we've shown, we've brought polling data to the Legislature on a number of occasions. A majority, a majority of CCA customers, still believe that they are a customer of the IOU serving their territory. People just don't know, they continue to get bills from PG&E. They think they are still a PG&E customer, when really they're a Marin Clean Energy customer. We receive hundreds of customer service calls every single day. So to think that simply by having a public hearing, that folks are going to participate, and ensure that sort of robust public involvement, is just not the case. Especially when you have CCAs now looking to expand five, six, 700 miles away. It's doubtful that many customers in Richmond are going to know, or even are going to have the wherewithal to get in their car and drive to Marin. To attend some hearing of the Marin Clean Energy Board, on some day, to discuss their integrated resource portfolio. They're just not going to do it. So, the PUC is the appropriate place. That's where the repair advocates, that's where the stakeholder groups, that's where all the appropriate interveners are. And that's why this bill is so necessary, to fully implement the intent behind SB 350. And so we would urge an aye vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jamie Miner: we just want to, jamie amanda miner on behalf of calcca. we are removing our opposition as neutral, given the author's commitment to take the amendments that he said he will in appropriations. won't address any of the other things that were said about ccas at this point. but i did want to point out that ccas have a combined rps of 47%, so are helping the state achieve our greenhouse gas goals very quickly. so just wanted to point that out, and remove our opposition.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Judy Pope: Thank you, Judy Pope with 350 Bay Area and 350 San Diego, in opposition.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ed Barrons: Ed Barrons, on behalf of the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors, in opposition. The Board did act yesterday to move forward with its own CCA, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ellison Folk: Yes. Good morning. Ellison Folk, and I'm a partner at Chupmahaly and Wineburger. I represent both community groups and environmental groups and public agencies in the CEQA process. And I've been practicing CEQA law for over 25 years. And I will say that one of my eternal frustrations is when an agency uses illegal or unpermitted conditions as part of the baseline for evaluating the environmental impacts of a project. Now as a general rule, CEQA does normally require agencies to look at existing environmental conditions when evaluating the impacts of a project. However, the California Supreme Court has made very clear that existing conditions should not be used where they provide a misleading impression of a projects impacts. If your comparing project to illegal activities or unpermitted activities. You cannot provide an accurate view of the project's impacts or impose adequate mitigation measures. But not withstanding the Supreme Court's directive regarding the misleading use of the baseline, agencies repeatedly use illegal or un-permitted activities as the baseline. Or pressure put on them by applicants to do so. For example, in Napa County, where I do a lot of work, wineries routinely exceed the limits of their use permits, with respect to the number of events they can hold, or the amount of wine they can produce. And then, when they're caught, and they come in for a permit amendment the county uses the illegal or un-permitted activities such as the baseline, finds that there is no significant impact and no need for mitigation. And that system creates perverse incentives that reward people who violate the law and their permits, and it's inconsistent with the ultimate goal of CEQA which is to ensure informed decision making and mitigation of impacts. And I'd like to just briefly respond to the Cal Chambers comments that were submitted on this in opposition. Which focus on the alleged impact of this on development on brownfields or in fill development. Particularly Cal Chamber claims that SB 224 will interfere with existing laws that assign liability for the clean up of contaminated sites. But this is a total red herring. Nothing in SB 224 assigns liability to any parties with respect to the remediation of a site. In fact, under current law and as a practical matter, when someone is developing a contaminated site, they have to deal with the contamination issues. It maybe that a prior responsible party can be identified or not. But CEQA review is not going to change that relationship. And on the mitigation end If something's identified that is the responsibility of another party, and it can be shown that the mitigation would be unconstitutional, or that the agency does not or cannot require it to be implemented, CEQA itself does not provide the independent authority to impose mitigation. But again as a practical matter, if a developer wants to build a residential project on a contaminated site, that developer needs to deal with the problem under existing law. And there's nothing in SB224 that is going to change that reality. Finally, SB224 is a directive to OPR which is part of the resources agency to prepare guidelines to address this issue. This direction to the resources agency is a mechanism that CEQA often uses to address complicated issues like this. For example, section 21083 of the act Is a directive to the resources agency to adopt guidelines, SB 743 did a similar thing with EMT issues, and the resources agency in OPR is more than capable of drafting guidelines that strike the appropriate balance between. That reflect the consistent direction of the California Supreme Court to use an accurate and appropriate baseline while at the same time, recognizing the practical realities of environmental review. Thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: kyle jamie jones of sierra club, california, in strong support of sb 224. as you're aware, ceqa provides critical environmental protections for communities, while also allowing public to know about changes in the environment around them. and what this loophole's created is, as stated, a very perverse incentive for project developers to really front load environmentally damaging activity in a legal fashion in order to avoid having to mitigate those impacts. it also robs the public of the ability to understand what just happened to them, because it's not included in the baseline, it's not analyzed, and people that don't hear about. and so that needs to stop, frankly. we think sb224 does a smart thing by allowing opr to use its stakeholder process, to really aid a public manner. figure out how best to proceed on this issue, and taken to account, everybody is concerns and really find that appropriate balance, and we urge your aye vote today, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Juan Altamirano: juan, in behalf of the audobon california in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Louinda Lacey: Thank you, Mr. Chair. This is Louinda Lacey on behalf of the California Chamber of Commerce in the hot seat. I will admit that I am not an expert as the author had in support. However, I will echo the comments regarding the brownfield developments. I will also note that this gives a directive to OPR to establish guidelines. We don't know what those guidelines are going to be, or what they're going to look like, or how they could impact brownfield development. Also, the other thing to remember is when you're cleaning up brownfields, there are certain standards that you clean them up to. What we're talking about here is a baseline from which you determine how to mitigate the impacts. The practical issue with that is I think first we need to remember that the baseline is the fundamental and foundational tenant of CEQA because that's how you determine what your impacts are and then what your mitigation measures are. And so we have had this baseline standard in play over many years and we know what it is. Now, to try and change that is going to create substantial uncertainty and questions arise, like, would it impose a burden then, to determine what the illegality was? Because how far back are we going to go to determine what the starting point is? Correct? So let's say for brownfields development, what is the baseline going to be? Is it going to be just ground prior to any activity on it? How far back are we going to go to determine when we start? And that's going to be the baseline from which you determine the mitigation that is needed for the impact. That is different from the brownfields requirements in terms of where you need to get it to in order to develop on a property. So, I do believe there are different standards, but I will profess I'm not a particular expert in this and I can always bring an expert to talk about that. The other thing is that we need to think about when we're rolling back baselines, it is difficult to determine, like I said, where that baseline would be, because you're really working with a hypothetical. Correct? So, because how are we going to determine that? It's not something that's on the ground right now, and so the question then becomes do we look at enforcement actions to determine what, are we interfering with enforcement action because they might be determining what the scope of the illegality is? How does that come into play with how you determine what the baseline is? So there's a lot of concerns about that and then what kind of uncertainty that creates for people who do want to develop property in our state and so I think that's how I would respond to the support's comment and those would be the concerns that we raise in addition to those raised by CBAA.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 224, 'end': 234, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sheri Pemberton: Thank you Chair and Senators. Sheri Pemberton on behalf of the California State Lands Commission. The Commission supports SB 44 and thanks Senator Jackson for authoring it. The Commission staff is really dedicated to trying to address the oil in this area, particularly in Summerland Beach, offshore. Their funding is just urgently needed so our staff can go out and quantify the problem and determine next steps. In February of this year, there were new well heads that were exposed, and other hazards that were exposed from recent storms, and two in particular were noticeably leaking oil. So we are really encouraging your support and strongly support the bill, thank you.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 147, 'end': 154, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Evan Goldberg: Mr Chair and members, Evan Goldberg with State Controller Betty Yee in support of the bill, thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 58, 'end': 67, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bill Allayaud: Bill Allayaud Environmental Working Group in support, thank you.
[]
Sean Botwon: Sean Botwon on behalf of the California Coast Keeper Alliance which includes Santa Barbara Channel Keeper in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: kyle the serra club california in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Justin Long: Justin Long for Heal the Bay Surfrider and Seventh Generation Advisers, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Diana Mahmud: thank you senator, honorable chair committee members, this is my second time up, diana kyle mahmud, on behalf of the city of south pasadena and san gabriel valley. council of governments, i speak in support of sb 589 sponsored by the la county division of the league of california cities. this bill is intended to afford flexibility to extend the timeline for compliance with a storm water permit based upon a city's demonstrated financial need. many la county cities face extraordinary storm water compliance estimates exceeding several $100 million each. that's the capital cost alone. these high costs are especially challenging for disadvantaged communities who already struggle to provide basic municipal services. california cities, however, are not alone in facing extraordinary estimated costs in achieving clean water act compliance for storm water. this is a problem repeated in many areas of the country. in response, in november 2014, the us cpa released a financial capability assessment framework for municipal clean water act requirements. in a recent california presentation on funding storm water, region nine epa staff described the fca, the financial capability assessment, as providing regulators with the flexibility to consider a municipal committee's ability to pay for and deliver water services. it considers various measures of a household's ability to pay for services as well as the community's financial ability to deliver services, including the cost of achieving safe drinking water at compliance. the fda does not, as asserted by some, weaken permit conditions. it only allows for an extended timeline for compliance based upon demonstrated financial need. i know an opposition letter critiques the fca's affordability indicator based upon the argument that tenants do not pay water cost through the rental rates. this is fantasy. fca methodology is sound and it should be applied here in california. sba 589 was recently amended to provide for the state board's determination of financial capability assessment guidelines. and to establish a pilot project conducted by an educational entity to assess the la regional board's use for the financial guidelines. the bill directs the state board to make statewide recommendations regarding use of the financial guidelines upon completion of the financial capability analysis. this bill is focused on la county since those cities face the strictest storm water standards in the nation. the state board has importantly already signaled. it is considering statewide adoption of the same approach, storm water capture and infiltration, featured in the la county permit as a means of achieving water quality compliance statewide. so this is of concern for everyone. the regions of the state will benefit, from the knowledge and experience gained through this pilot project. sb 589 offers a common sense approach to the high estimated cost to municipal storm water permanent compliance and will be particularly helpful to california's disadvantaged communities. it does not alter or waive water quality standards and its methodology is sound. south pasadena and the san gabriel valley cog, as well as a league of california cities, la county division respectfully asks for your aye vote.
[{'start': 81, 'end': 98, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erin Evans: Mr Chair and members, I'm Erin Evans on behalf of the League of California Cities here in support of this important measure, thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Jones: David Jones on behalf of the City of Pasadena in strong support of the measure, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Harmon: richard diana harmon on behalf of the city of carson as well as mayor andre quintero of the city of el monte in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 70, 'end': 84, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ben Eichenberg: san francisco baykeeper, my name is ben. we're in opposition. we believe that all communities in california deserve strong environmental protections. and that sb 589 weakens environmental protections for disadvantaged communities.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Ryan: Yes, sir. Mr. Chairman and members. Jason Ryan League of California Cities. Thank you so much for the opportunity today. The Senator did a really great job of outlining what SB 540 is looking to do. The League of California cities and our members are taking housing crises very, very seriously. And for the second year in a row, one of our strategic goals, actually, pertains to housing affordability and housing supply. We've made a very conscious effort this year that we're not going to just say no to proposals. That some of you may think that we do a little too often. That's welcome. And this measure really is part of that package, that blueprint for more housing as we see it. SB 540 is not intended to be the end all be all, it's not a sequal exemption, it's not a sequal streamlining bill, it's really a housing approval process streamlining measure. We're not amending the public resources code, this is all about the government code, and it's about trying to speed up that approval process. We've heard very loud and clear from the Legislature, from the Governor that we need to do a better job on our end of streamlining that permit process. And we certainly want to, and we do that in SB 540, by doing that very specific detailed specific plan that Senator Roth mentioned. Where we outlined all of the mitigation measures, all of the traffic mitigation we need to do with the natural resources design review. We lay the blueprint, the framework for construction in our community out. And then we do that very robust EIR on top of it. And then we provide certainty, we provide those ministerial permits to the development community for a very finite amount of time, five years, for a very limited number of units in our community and for a limited scope. So we think that this is trying to balance the competing extremes that we see. We have those who want all buy rights with no environmental review. We have people that want to do nothing and don't want to change the law. And we're trying to be constructive and try to find some sort of middle ground. And, we see this proposal as doing that. And we have a couple of other speakers here that I think are going to touch on a few of other items. And with that, I would ask for your aye vote on this very important measure.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1271, 'end': 1275, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dan Cobb: Thank you. Thank you chair Wakowski and Senator. My name is Dan Cobb. I'm a member of the Oakland City Council and on the Board of Director for the League of California Cities. First, let me say that I am and have always been a huge fan of CEQA and I've read dozens and dozens of EIRs throughout my career working for environmental organizations before I was in elected office. And I believe by and large, CEQA analysis produce better projects, they may take a little longer to happen but they produce better projects, and I'm the last person who'd want to guide or get rid of those requirements. Nevertheless I also know that we have a tremendous housing shortage, and work force housing often sometimes called or at least a portion of it called moderate income housing is the biggest gap and the most difficult type of housing to get built. For lower income housing you have tax credits and state grants. For market rate housing you have the profit motive and so on. Moderate income housing which is what our workforce housing mostly is or some of it is a huge gap and this could be one of many tools to help make that happen. I want to also note that this only goes for five years at a time so this is not permanent for any one specific plan. And I also, I've seen programmatic EIRs before. And when there is an additional environmental analysis required of a particular project, that is already been covered by a programmatic EIR, usually it's a neg deck, or it's an addendum that has no addition required mitigation. So what are you getting? You're not really getting anything more in those situations, and that's usually what happens for those kind of situations. I'll also note that there's a provision in this bill, section 65623, that gives an additional ability of a local jurisdiction, even after a specific plan is approved to take into accounts health and safety impacts that were not otherwise identified previously. And I call this provisionally because this language that we are referring to almost word for word was in a development agreement that we passed that we adopted in Oakland. And because we had this provision interface health and safety provision that allows us to go back afterwards, we were able to stop the storage and handling of coal in Oakland. So that language allowed us to do something after the fact based on the health and safety of our residents. And I hope we keep that language in this bill as well. Happy to answer any questions, thank you so much.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 35, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 60, 'end': 68, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kirsten Keith: Thank you. Hi, thanks. My name's Kirsten Keith. I'm the mayor of Menlo Park, and I'm on the board of The League of California Cities, also. Thank you for having me here today. I think what we're looking for, as a Council Member in Menlow Park, the high cost of housing is killing us. Transportation issues are killing us. And we need more tools to create workforce housing. It's easy to build the lower income housing with tax credits and other forms of money that we can get, but it's harder to build this workforce housing, and we have a lot of people who are claiming that they want us to build housing, and we need more tools to do so. When I looked at this and I saw, it's only for five years. When we do specific plans, which we've just completed two, a general plan and a specific plan for two areas at Menlo Park, the EIRs are good for decades. And so when I look at this, this is a very limited time. Five years and then if the City Council chooses to reassess and relook at it, they can and extend it for another five years. But this is very limited and it's another tool to allow us to try and create some workforce housing. I think that is important and the other thing, I'm an attorney. CEQA's very important to me too, as Council Member Cald was saying. This keeps CEQA intact. And I want to have a robust community discussion. This keeps a robust community discussion. CEQA is followed but we do it all upfront. And that way when developers come to us and say, okay, we've seen your process. We know what we can do. We can get those projects moving forward. Very few projects go forward in five years. I'll have to say that, too. This, again, is a very short time frame. We are celebrating fair housing month, and we are looking for new tools, and we are hoping that you'll help support us with these new tools and support SB540.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1200, 'end': 1204, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1251, 'end': 1255, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1279, 'end': 1283, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1384, 'end': 1388, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cory Wolbach: Cory Wolbach Palo Alto City Council member and also chair of the legislative action Committee for the Peninsula division of the league of California cities. I want to thank the author, and also the Committee for considering this bill. I think this is an important modest but important critical part of this puzzle of solving affordable housing. And thank you very much for the pressure on ADUs. It's helped us.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gabe Quinto: good morning. my name is gabe richard quinto. i'm a member of both california league of cities, and mayor pro tem for the city of. i strongly support sb 540. this is an important way to streamline, to backlog of building affordable housing, and workforce housing. thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Jones: mr. chair and members, david. i would like to thank the author for his tireless work on this about the city of murrieta and cities of marin county, i would like to ask for my vote. thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christine Guerra: very convenient. good morning again christine gabe guerra representing the la county division of the league of california cities, we are 86 cities in the county in strong support of sb 540.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Harwin: Good morning, Richard Harwin on behalf of the cities of Hayward, San Leandro, Emeryville, Walnut Creek, Pismo Beach, and the City of Asperia in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: Good morning, Kyle Jones of Sierra Club, California. And we have an opposing lest amended position on the bill. And I did want to thank the author and his staff for working very closely with us to address some of our concerns, and some of those have been taken care of. But some of the bigger ones have not yet. And I just wanted to note that we don't believe that CEQA is the main driver of the housing affordability crisis that some folks seem to make it out to be. And that we think that the protections of the environment that CEQA provides are necessary to make sure that California is still a livable place for everybody. We'd note that there's, I think, 14 exemptions in the law for housing, particularly for infill development that we think is the kind of housing that should go forward in order to protect open space and provide a more climate friendly city. Our main outstanding concern with SB 540 is just citing of these workforce zones. The bill only requires that they be consistent with areas identified in its sustainable community strategy. But those areas can be in green field still, they're not necessarily geared towards infill sites. And so we would like to work on finding a way, if this bill moves forward, to locate these areas more towards infill and higher density areas. That we know that there are less likely to be environmental impacts, more consistent with existing CEQA exemptions provided. We'd like project by project EIR, as we think there's just minor things that could happen between this more general specific thing and the project level EIR that might have an impact. And so if those are happening in new green field and sprawl type development, I think that could create a lot of problems for open space environments. And so we hope that we can find a way to address that.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alyssa Stinson: I'm actually an in-betweener, but Alyssa Stinson with the California Building Industry Association. We don't have an official position on SB 540, but we do have some concerns and just wanted to acknowledge the author's willingness to work with us on our concerns. We look forward to continuing that dialogue as the bill progresses.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Alio: bill christine alio, for environmental working group and the other supporters listed on the analysis. unfortunately, we missed out somehow being on there but we should be listed, we'll get there. indeed, this is a good start, as the senator said. my personal experience in working with dtse has been centered around green chemistry, the safer consumer products program, for the last seven years, eight years. but i know problems, issues run a lot deeper that, in a more longer term established programs. and that's been well known to you, and to senator lara, senator de leon, and the independent review panels, pointed these out. to wit, the senator has established a stakeholder group to work on this, we've had one meeting, the second one's coming up, where she's getting all the interested parties together to talk about the best solutions. it's definitely challenging and complicated, but i think it's the right person to do that and it's the right bill to keep moving and have this process go forward, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 554, 'end': 558, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 568, 'end': 575, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 634, 'end': 637, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Gene Urban: i'm gene bill urban. i represent several permitees, applicants, waste management to kettleman hills facility in kings county, and also the exide facility. we are, i guess, technically opposed, but not really. we endorse this effort. it's got to be done. it's a thankless and arduous effort. it's going to take a long time. we do have some concerns. mr. chairman, you've heard some of my comments before, indulge me, i'm going to repeat some of them again. we agree that the department needs reformation, public accountability, public hearings, those types of things. i beg you to devise a system that does not disrupt the hundred of the 118 permits that have never generated controversy, etc, etc. there will always be a dozen more or less facilities that are extraordinarily controversial for reasons of science, politics, committee advocacy, i'm not disparaging any of those motivations, those are all entirely legitimate. but we need a system that can handle those 12 or 18 and not abandon the other 100, which have never generated any controversy, to my knowledge. i am very concerned about the application of a board to a quasi-adjudicatory function, some of these permits go on forever, six, seven, eight years. i believe that's the motivation, in part, is to shorten the time frame. the volume of data is enormous, if we can cut it in half and reduce it to three or four years, i can't conceive of a mechanism by which a handful of political appointees, well motivated, would read that data, would read those documents and be able to make an informed judgment. at some level it has to be reposed in the scientists at the department subject to some review, i agree it's a difficult standard. but the notion that you can have these people read the record is not going to happen. you would know, mr. chairman. did you read the record? no. but you made the decision? yes. there's a problem there. so we need to balance that between the quasi-legislative functions, the quasi-adjudicatory functions and come to some really good and better balance. i commend the author for doing this. i also encourage you to enlist the guidance of mr. gideon krakow, the irp chairman and his colleagues, who have done a lot of work. then lastly, we have a problem. we need to solve these issues. the kettleman hills facility, 80 to 85% of that, which is deposited there is only hazardous in the state california. if it goes to the border it is not hazardous. during the delay on its permit, we stopped receiving 90% of our material because we couldn't close so we had to diminish over time the receipt of this material. no one to my knowledge has ever asked, where did that go? and under what regime was that processed? so delay is very damaging from multiple perspectives, yes in vernon and exide, but also in other applications. so with that i want to participate, i thank the author for the opportunity to participate unless it's been revoked. no. thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2138, 'end': 2151, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Louinda Lacey: thank you, mister chair. lacey for the california chamber of commerce. i notified the author's office that we were taking an oppose unless amended position. with that, we want to thank you for this participation and the stakeholder meetings. we are committed to working with the author through this bill. we took that position based on the concerns raised by mr. urban as well. thank you very much.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 363, 'end': 368, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Shaina Brown: good morning, i could've come in between support and oppose. i'm with cmta, shaina. i'm with the manufacturers and technology association. we've been working closely with the author's office. we look forward to being part of the stakeholder process but have not taken a position at this time.
[{'start': 76, 'end': 82, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Diana Vazquez: sorry, i was in another committee but i'm here to just support the bill, diana gene vazquez on behalf of the california environmental justice alliance. and sorry for being late.
[{'start': 73, 'end': 91, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ingrid Brostrom: yes i apologize. thank you mr. chair. my name is ingrid diana brostrom and i'm with the center on race, poverty, and the environment, and also a coordinator for the people's senate. and i apologize for being late but we are in strong support of a governing board for dtsc because it's a singularly insular body. i represent 13 different communities around the state that are directly impacted by dtsc's failures. and we know right now that decisions are made behind closed doors. there's no accountability, and there's no transparency, and the people that are harmed here are really the residents of the state of california. california is actually one of only handful states in the u.s. that don't have an accountability body for managing hazardous waste, so it is in the minority. with the irp ending, residents really have no place to turn to. and even the irp has expressed reluctance to listen to community specific concerns. so a governing board is very important for the residents that are directly impacted by hazardous waste and we strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 49, 'end': 70, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Magavern: Thanks Mr. Chairman. Bill Magavern with the Coalition for Clean Air in support. I was testifying in gov and finance so I appreciate the Committee's indulgence. I've been working with, and sometimes against, the Department of Toxic Substances Control for the last 17 years. I've known at least six directors and over the years I've become convinced that the department really would benefit from a board arrangement. And that wasn't what I thought for several years. But I think having that public forum and the transparency required by a board would bring significant improvements to this department. I think this bill very sensibly follows the Water Board model, and I think it would benefit the public, most importantly, but also the department and its employees, to have that kind of openness that would be required by a board.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Allayaud: Bill Allayaud for Environmental Working Group, we had a sign-on letter that didn't get in a time, so I think there's three groups in support of it. We supported the bill last year, and is a good cleanup measure and needed. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Clary: jennifer, clean water action in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Genevieve Abedon: genevieve ingrid abedon on behalf of local environmental health directors in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cindy Tuck: good morning, cindy with the association of california water agency we do have an oppose position on the bill, as you know this bill amends a major law that the senator carried last year. and dealing with the replacement of the lead user service lines. our biggest concern with this bill is that one of the changes, we view it not as a clarification but as a subset of change. and it relates to how the final timeline is divided for the replacement of the service lines. we liked what was in the bill last year and we like it go back to that approach and what the bill does now or i should start what it did in the existing law. the public water system proposes a time line for their replacement that goes to the water board. the water board either accepts that or proposes their version back and then if the public water system has problems with that. then, the two agencies have to work together, they have 30 days the to work that out and they come out with a timeline that they totally agreed on. we think that an important approach in that work, it's called a compromised timeline. what 427 will do is say that if they don't reach the compromise in the 30 day period then the state water boards proposed timeline would become the timeline. now that may sound reasonable but the problem is that what we're talking about here are infrastructure projects. when you replace a service line, you're talking about opening up the road taking out the existing service line, putting in a new service line. so you've got the water system having to coordinate with the, it may be in a city but it may be a special district. they've gotta coordinate with whoever's in charge of the roads. you may want to be coordinating with the local schools. should the schools be open? do you have to shut down the water service? all those kinds of things. so these are significant infrastructure projects. and the local agency is going to be the agency that has. it is the expert on how fast this can be done locally. state water board plays an important role, no question, but we think they should work together. so that's our concern, and we'd love for it to, that provision to remain as it is in existing law.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cindy Tuck: tuck with acwa.
[]
Bonnie Holmes-Gen: Good morning, Chair and members. Bonnie Holmes-Gen with the American Lung Association in California. And we're pleased to be here at the strongly support Senator Lawrenceville. The Lung Association has been public Health leader for nearly two decades, and urging the public to move away from harmful burning of wood toward cleaner alternatives, that puts the health of too many residents at risk. And we strongly supported Senator Laura's previous legislation to cut Super pollutants, this is an important next step. Particle pollution from wood burning comprises the majority of Winter time air pollution exceedences in many areas of the state. And it's important to note this as we're releasing our 18th annual State of the air report today, to call attention to air pollution problems around the state, along with our health partner organizations, the California Thoracics Society, the California Nurses Association, The California Black Health Network, and many other health organizations and health experts around the state we commend Senator Lara for this bill. Which will protect our health and our climate and help us move toward achieving our Federal Air quality so we strongly urge your support.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 162, 'end': 175, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 431, 'end': 436, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1048, 'end': 1052, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Krouch: senators, i'm john genevieve krouch. i'm with the hearth, patio, ad barbecue association, the trade association for all wood burning and gas burning and pellet burning hearth products. for 20 years, we've worked with a number of air districts around the state, in change outs from south coast, which focused on fireplaces, to shasta with bernie and i'll be in cortoa on friday, helping them with their change out. the change outs in the state have all been very episodic, because the funding is all come from a great variety of sources. this bill will help organize that, and it keeps the local air districts in charge, and that's where it should be, because each local air district faces different issues, different air quality issues in different constituencies. some have gas. some focus on other things, so, and some have nothing but wood for heat. so we urge your support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 338, 'end': 344, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Genevieve Abaddon: Genevieve Abaddon on behalf of Local Environmental Health Directors in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stacey Heaton: heaton with the rural county representatives of california in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Levie Grow: Lower the microphone for us short folks. Levie Grow, on behalf of families for clean air in support. We're very enthusiastic about this bill and very much appreciate the work that's been done on it. I do want to make one note, it's in a written statement as well, if it's just one area of concern which is that prioritizing using any incentive money. This is as it's stated in the bill, on the most efficient non-wood burning devices including but not limited to heat pumps and solar, electric, and natural gas heaters. The statement prioritizing is open to various interpretations, and as a practical matter, we're concerned that the bulk of incentive funds would inadvertently going to wood burning devices rather than to non wood burning devices. And less specific, guidelines are put in place to ensure that that doesn't happen. This concern is based on the fact that, you know, the hearth products industry is well organized. To capitalize on incentive funds from this wood stove change-out programs, via mailing lists, phone lists, direct marketing programs and in-store materials. While manufacturers and retailers of other clean-burning non-wood devices are not. It's thus, imperative to put guidelines in place. To insure theat the incentive funds are used for the most efficient non-wood burning devices. And I'm going to park that for a minute just to remind you that in the Bay Area the Bay Area Air Quality Management District just spend $3 million in their wood to non-wood Strictly on wood to non wood change of program that was highly successful. And so, a couple of quick suggestions for how those controls could be implemented would be, to set a cap limit on the incentive funds that could be use for wood burning devices or to disperse that the incentive funds and faces. With only non-wood burning devices being incentivized in the early phases. Thank you so much, once again.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 46, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alan Abbs: good morning, chair wieckowski. my name's alan john abbs, i'm the executive director for the california air pollution control officers association representing the executive officers for the 35 local air districts. we'd to thank senator lara for his leadership, not only on the short-lived climate pollutant, strategy that he that he kicked off but also focusing on wood stoves and sb 563. as previously noted wood stoves are highly successful at air district programs and they provide very cost effective reductions. they get down to the local level. they provide reductions not only in black carbon but also local reductions in pm2.5 and toxic air contaminants. but also as mentioned, these programs are very spotty in terms of their being able to be funded, but when they are they're typically oversubscribed. and the bay area program received $3 million, it was oversubscribed on day one and crashed their computer system and so, we look forward to programs like this in the future, we think they're one of the most cost effective ways of reducing black carbon and highly support this. thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 30, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 42, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 237, 'end': 241, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tom Addison: good morning. tom alan addison with the bay area air quality management district here in strong support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gail Delihant: delihant with western growers association in support.
[]
Genevieve Abedon: Genevieve Abedon for Community Alliance of Family Farmers in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Diana Mahmud: Good morning honorable Chairman. Diana Mahmud, I am a City Council member from the City of South Pasadena as well as the chair of the San Gabriel Valley Council of government's policy water Committee and this is the first of three bills that I will be addressing with you today. We strongly support SB 541 sponsored by the LA County Division of the League of California Cities, which authorizes the state Water Quality Control Board and the State Architect to develop best practices for water capture design which can be use during public school construction and reconstruction. And I simply want to take this opportunity to tell you quite frankly, this is a wonderful opportunity for the schools to demonstrate environmental stewardship. Right now the schools have absolutely no responsibility with respect to taking care the storm water which emanates on their facilities. And particularly when you're talking about highly urbanized environment such as those that we have In Southern California. The schools, facilities, and the community colleges, in particular the community colleges, they represent some of the largest footprints of area within our respective jurisdictions. So this is an oversight, one that we believe will be addressed by this bill. Under the 2012 MS4, Municipal Separate Storm Sewer permit adopted by the LA Regional Water Quality Control Board  cities in LA counties, must meet the stronger storm water quality requirements in the country. Estimates the total capital cost not including ONM to comply with the permit exceed $20 billion to construct and upgrade infrastructure and implement storm water capture and treatment technologies. In the San Gabriel Valley alone that cost is estimated at $6 billion. In order to meet MS 4 standards, some build out cities partner with their local park districts to find suitable open spaces to capture and treat storm water. Northeast trees and LA based NGO completed an inventory of sites in the county and also identified school playgrounds and parking lots as high priority sites for capture and treatment of storm water. During construction and reconstruction, a campus can be retrofitted to include the addition of bio swells, rain gardens, infiltration galleries, cisterns, and also the planting of native plants. Again, this is a fabulous education opportunities for our future citizens. Currently, however, many schools remain hesitant to partner with their cities or projects because there are no standards or best practices for school to follow. SB 541 helps to provide guidance for that partnership. Since there is not dedicated funding source for storm water programs, cities in LA County have been grappling with how to best manage and fund storm water programs without compromising other critical city services. In 2014 the LA County Division and Contract City's Association commissioned a study, Storm Water Funding Options, providing sustainable water quality funding in L.A. County. Which found that funding storm water in urban runoff programs is complex and dynamic and the solutions so costly that the cities should consider a toolbox of measures, like SB 541, to encourage partnerships between school districts and cities. You'll be hearing me two other times to discuss two other elements of that tool box later on this morning. SB 541 offers a helpful tool to benefit the states water quality and supply, and helps cities and school districts to partner in that effort. The City of South Pasadena and the San Gabriel Valley Cogs strongly urges your support for this bill.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christine Guerrero: Very excited about storm water. Good morning, Chair and Members of the Committee. I'm Christine Guerrero, representing the LA County Division of the League of California Cities. We have 86 cities in our membership, highly urbanized, built out cities. We are looking for tools to meet our MS4 permits, very costly, as Diana mentioned. We believe that this will begin a strong partnership with school districts and our cities to help meet those MS4 compliance costs. And we hope that you will support our bill today, thank you.
[{'start': 86, 'end': 104, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 317, 'end': 322, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Genevieve Abaddon: abaddon on behalf of heal the bay and local environmental health directors in support.
[]
Ian Padilla: Mr Chair and members, Ian Padilla with the Coalition for Adequate School Housing, the school part of this, in support. We apologize we didn't get our letter in in time for that, we did get it in on the last one. I won't be too long but I do want to, because we representnt the schools, say a little bit about this. We, a Coalition for Adequate School Housing, is one of the ones that worked with the Water Board to negotiate the initial carve out. That was in 2008. Schools were under siege and so we did that. We got the non-designation. We know that that is ending. So we have talked to the Water Board earlier this year and we are getting a stakeholders group together to begin to talk about the next version of the MS4 permit.  Typically, representing schools, we might be a little bit more defensive with a bill like this but frankly we are here in support. Not just neutral, frankly, because of the, we think thoughtful and moderate approach to this. This didn't come, at least this as far as it here, is not coming down like a hammer. It is talking about best practices. Frankly, even at schools we've thought maybe we should have some more structure, framework, state-wide standardization for this, and so we think this is a good first step to doing that. The timing is pretty good, we think, as well. As we work on the permit, also the agencies will work on this piece of it and it very well may work out well. I will say we are a state wide organization, not all of our members support that. Some are a little bit more defensive. They've had maybe different experiences with municipalities. But we do think that the time is now for schools to step up and do their part. And we appreciate this approach to this bill and we'll be happy to work with the authors as the bill goes forward. And we will continue to work with the Water Board. That's our real work is we're bringing the school perspective in both of these and other efforts to do that. So we feel confident. The last thing I'll say is we've been working on this about 10 years with the Water Board. We were much more defensive when schools became included, for some good reasons. I wouldn't apologize for those but we've developed relationships with the Water Board. And what we've done as an organization is really try to get this message out. What I committed to the board members when we did get the non-designation, and I'll wrap up. Is that our organization and others will help schools to build capacity in this five years where the requirement's done. We know requirements will happen. We feel confident that we'll have a voice in that. That's really what we want. A lot of the things that the cities are saying, schools have the same concerns, the cost, this or that. If we can have a more integrated system, we think it will be good for everyone. So thank you very much.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sam Pedroza: Sam Pedroza, Councilman for the City of Claremont, the City of decrees and PhDs. We strongly support this bill with the League of Cities. And this is the best opportunity that we have to utilize, in these built out communities, to utilize the most open space that we do have. So we really hope that we can have this tool to help us meet this mandate.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Lynch: Good morning, Mr Chair and members. Danielle Lynch, on behalf of the Association of Professional Landscape Designers, California Chapter, in support.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Murray: Yeah, Mr. Chairman, members, Mark Murray with the environmental group, Californians Against Waste, and I guess I want to echo the sentiment that you've just really raised, is that this is a policy that was invented, and developed, and perfected, at the local government level, and I certainly want to applaud your efforts 11 years ago. This policy was actually invented, was first developed by an extraordinarily young City Council Member in the City of Berkeley some 25 years ago, and that Council Member is a member of this Committee. So, this is a policy that has already demonstrated its effectiveness, in terms of not just phasing out a type of packaging that is incompatible with our waste management and recycling system, but also beginning the conversation in terms of those alternatives that are compatible. And there are industries that have made the investment to design products that are compatible with our recycling systems, and so, this is an opportunity to take the efforts that have been successful at the local government level, and elevate those to the state government level. I guess this Committee has seen a very similar policy to this previous times and advanced that policy, so I don't want to go into too much detail, but I do want to recognize that this single use packaging, this is packaging that is consumed outside of the home, this is packaging that is very often consumed at a park, or a public space. It is often times, the polystyrene is not available to the recycling system, it's just not, it's not possible for it to get into the curb-side system because of where it's consumed when you think about the polystyrene fast food packaging. Oftentimes, we try and say, well, this is a behavior problem, in terms of the polystyrene being littered, I think we've all kind of witnessed how those polystyrene cups, the burger boxes, they blow out of trash cans, or some of our wildlife friends, as they're seeking their own lunch, pull that packaging out of the trash can and then it blows all over the environment, gets into the marine environment. Ocean Protection Council has identified polystyrene as being one of those problem packages, there are many alternatives available to consumers for, we're not trying to end consumption of food, fast food consumption, but there are options that are compatible with our recycling and composting systems, systems that are increasingly available at the store, commercial recycling, commercial composting operations, so we're not putting anyone at a disadvantage. More than 100 communities have already implemented this policy, we think it's time to extend this policy uniformly across the state, urge an aye vote.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Alio: bill, environmental working group, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Genevieve Abaddon: genevieve on behalf of local environment mental health directors, heal the bay, surf rider foundation, wish foundation, seventh generation advisors, and stop waste, in support.
[]
Jennifer Cleary: Jennifer Cleary, on behalf of Clean Water Action, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Louinda Lacey: good morning, thank you chair. lacey on behalf of the california chamber of commerce echoing the comments made in opposition as well. additionally, chair wieckowski, your comments raised in terms of the items that you had noted when you had implemented a similar ban, providing guidance to businesses, timelines etc, those are very well taken. additionally, i also want to say, we have to remember that this product is used for a specific purpose. and so if we're going to ban that product, we need to give restaurants, particularly small restaurants, the opportunity to find a suitable alternative for the use of that product. then we also have to consider the cost of it, and that in addition to the fact that banning one product may not necessarily limit the litter problem. and with that, the california chamber of commerce is in opposition, thank you.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 154, 'end': 164, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Angie Mineti: Hi excuse me. Angie Mineti with the California Retailers Association in opposition. I just want to be clear, we have supported product bans in the past, mainly the plastic bag ban. But I think when it comes to this specific product, when it comes to food packaging. The alternatives that are in place right now that are being in production, we don't believe solves the litter issue. I think that there are better approaches to bringing California towards zero waste. So we would encourage the Committee to consider those recycle options.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shaina Brown: morning, shaina with the california manufacturers and technology association, also opposed.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Pollack: mr. chairman, randy tom pollack on behalf of the international franchise association, in opposition.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katherine Stainken: thanks. good morning, members of the committee, my name is katherine, and i'm the policy director for plug in america, we're a non profit organization representing the thousands of electric and plug in vehicle drivers and consumers in california today, so thanks for your time this morning. so i think the senator pretty much summed up why we're so supportive of this bill, but california's just so unique that we have so may of these cars on the road right now. and they're typically leased on three year terms so there really is a growing used car market and we have a lot of policies in california that promote the purchase of a new car, of a new ev, but not very many for the used evs, and so we support this bill for three main reasons. first, the sales tax exemption is a very powerful and proven incentive that's been used to help drivers make the switch to go electric, i think uc davis did a study on this that showed that sales tax exemptions are really a powerful policy incentive. secondly, this bill will help california achieve its climate goals in a very substantive way by removing older vehicles and really ensuring only that these clean vehicles are placed on the road into a one to one manner. and finally, this will help achieve the charge ahead california goals of, not only putting 1 million zevs on the road, but also increasing access, and that's really a key point, increasing access to the zevs for the disadvantaged, low income, and moderate income communities. so, in summary, plug in america, the voice of the electric car driver, new cars and used cars, we support sb 79.
[{'start': 59, 'end': 68, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cliff Costa: Well, Mr. Chair and Senators, Cliff Costa, on behalf of the California New Car Dealers Association, we can help sell you a new or used vehicle if you'd like to buy one. Senator, look, we are the people who sell these zero emission vehicles, both new and used, 76% of every zero emission vehicle that's on California's road today has been sold by a California New Car dealer. So, from our perspective, we want to help create and incentivize more consumer demand, we need to do more, we're at 3.5%, we've been stagnant at 3% here in the State of California for ZEV sales. We believe helping to incentivize used zero emission vehicles will help create a much more dynamic and sustainable marketplace for zero emission vehicles, we think this bill is great, we appreciate the Senator for taking the lead on this issue, and for that, I'll keep my testimony short, but ask for an aye vote.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Scott Bernstein: yes, bernstein, public investors arbitration bar association.
[]
Lori Kammerer: sorry, i didn't see that,... right past it. good afternoon members, lori also with small business california, also with national association of women business owners and the california metals coalition. this is a great bill, it's a great work in progress and we urge your support, thank you.
[{'start': 68, 'end': 72, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kelly Hauge: kelly jonah hauge with small business california and as the sponsors, we strongly support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jim Lights: good afternoon, lights representing blackstone and the national home rental council, which is the national organization of large home for rent businesses. we're opposing the bill for a couple of reasons. first, the premise here is that large scale cash buyers are competing with traditional first time home buyers. well, the majority of the homes that the large scale purchasers buy are bought in foreclosure. they're literally on the courthouse steps with cashier's checks in a variety of denominations to come up with the total for the winning bid. so these are all cash deals. you can not look at the home, and you can not inspect the home which is of course a part of the normal purchase process. you typically don't find first time home buyers on the court house steps. secondly, the companies have started purchasing fewer homes in california because our prices are recovering. and so in 2016 the seven companies that are a member of this organization bought a total of 250 homes in california, but now they're also selling. so they sold 150 homes for a net increase among all the companies of 100 homes. that's against sales according to the realtors website of 416,000 home sales, not new construction purchases, but resales. so we are 0.02% of all of the sales that took place last year. so we're wondering why the state would devote resources to study what we consider to be a statistically insignificant segment of the home buyer market place. secondly, a couple of the companies are now selling homes with first ride refusal to the current resident, so no one's being displaced if they choose to buy the home. many of the homes are sold to other investors so that that tenant is not displaced. and one of the company has partnered with calhfa to provide financing for california buyer that are their current residence. so lastly, the organization, the rental home council has contracted with a researcher at uc berkeley that is currently working on a more detailed study than ab 354 would call for. and so we would suggest that it would be wise for the legislature to look at that study which will be ready towards the end of this calendar year. which will give a much more granular assessment of this market place of large scale home for rent business and then give a picture as to what impact as mr. calderon is seeking, what impact that industry really has on our overall marketplace. thank you.
[{'start': 2314, 'end': 2322, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Shawn Topaikin: mr. chair and members shawn kelly topaikin on behalf to the california apartment association. we are opposed primarily because of the definitions in the bill. we're concerned the bill may impact institutional property owners, folks that have your traditional brick and mortar apartment buildings because the language might be too broad. i don't believe that is the assembly members intent not so much the single family home types but anyone that has over 20 properties i think or $10 million, that's thousands and thousands of rental property owners throughout california. so our hope is to either exclude those folks, or craft it in a way where they are not impacted because it is a significantly onerous registration requirements for those folks to register pay fee, and be involved in this process, where they're not part of the issue i believe that the assembly member is going after.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joyce Hayhoe: thank you, joyce jonah hayhoe, director of legislation and communications for california correctional health care services. first of all, i wanted to walk us through a brief description of where we began with medical parole. back in the early days of the receivership we had lots of overcrowding in our facilities. we did not have a facility designed for skilled nursing home care. and so as a result, we housed a number of inmates both inappropriately housed in hospitals where they had 24 hour guard that were very costly. in addition, we placed inmates long term care in our correctional treatment facilities where all of our correctional treatment beds were in and were all full. as a result of that, it created a bottle neck where because of our correctional treatments beds were full, we would send people to hospitals that didn't necessarily need to be in hospitals. and once they were done in the hospital, we didn't necessarily have an appropriate bed back for them in the facility, so they would be kept in the hospital. this all resulted in a very costly issue that was facing the state that we were able to solve with medical parole. and also subsequently with the opening of stockton. however, we've gotten to the point now that we have beds available for skilled nursing facility. that if the state is interested in saving additional money, we should possibly look at expanding it in an appropriate manner, in keeping with public safety. to look at whether or not there are any individuals in our system that might be appropriate for housing outside of our facilities. perhaps with loved ones and family members who can take care of them, instead of costing the state money. as of right now, we have over 9,000 people in prison that are over the age of 60. we have approximately over 200 people that are over 80. and we actually have people over the age of a hundred that live in our facilities currently. so we are very interested, and we've had started discussions with the department of corrections and rehabilitation. over how we could carefully and judiciously look at this population, to determine if there are any other savings that would be appropriate for the state, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Scott Kernan: thank you, madame chair and members. my name is scott joyce kernan. i'm the secretary of the california department of corrections and rehabilitation. and madame chair, i will attempt to address that issue. cdcr submitted emergency regs to the office of administrative law about 20 days ago. it's really a monumental shift in how we are going to incarcerate in this state. we're creating a system of individual responsibility and expanding opportunity for parole suitability and early release by offenders. it requires, i mean it's requiring a sustained positive behavior on our offender population and requiring them to do something with their incarceration. i would not categorize it as soft on crime but smart on crime. the governor has continued to emphasize throughout this process that public safety is a paramount responsibility. we have 160 days from just a couple of days ago, and the possibility of 2 90-day extensions to implement permanent regs. we will go through a process of public comment. we will have public hearings and we will accept information and suggestions from the variety of diverse stakeholders that we have in our state concerning corrections. i'd like to explain a little bit how we got to these emergency regs. senior level executives from the administration and cdcr have met with the variety of stakeholders in a series of meetings. we explained how our credits, our complicated credit system is derived currently. we solicited ideas from a variety of stakeholders and we shared the regs, the emergency regs that we developed and submitted 20 days ago. while this is not a whole list, they included law enforcement, das, public defenders, counties and cities, inmate advocates, victims, labor, legislatures, cdcr staff, and even inmates. we attempted to strike a balance while maintaining public safety. in a couple weeks, on may 1st, 80,000 inmates in our system's dates will change to the positive. i'm very proud of the really year-long effort to implement this historic reforms. and it really has been a herculean effort, madame chair. we've had to develop these regulations through this collaborative process that i mentioned. we've had to completely rework our it system and our sentencing calculation in really a period of 90 to 120 days. we've had to train thousands of staff. we've had to negotiate with our labor organizations to implement these reforms. the fact is we had to do something historic as a state. the old system wasn't working, overcrowding, violence. i think we were turning out a better criminal as a department. we were failing as a department of corrections in my mind. there was not a lot of hope in this system, we had punitive sentencing. and we got what we sowed, bad public policy, expensive correction system, and a failed system. one of the issues that i've been asked many times is, do we have enough rehabilitative programs? and i think including from this panel. and i think the short answer to that question is no. and the corresponding question is, why did we not have a budget request for prop 57? when we met the first time in the scrutiny over our budget, i left that hearing thinking i made a pretty good decision. and that decision was based upon this body has given us a $100 million in current year and $8.5 million in budget year to implement rehabilitative programs in our system. we have been working diligently to implement academic vocational, substance abuse, cognitive behavior, arts programs, innovative grants, college, and many other programs throughout our system. before we were going to ask for more money, we need to be able to spend the money that you gave us and to implement those programs. i feel as if there's a solid base of rehabilitative programs in our system, but i think much more can be done. expanded technology, because of the space and time constraints in our prison, evaluate programs and evolve what works, continue improvements with our staff to accept rehabilitative programs as good prison business. we expect future requests in the future, but we're just not ready to make a budget request for additional rehabilitative programs at this point. i'd like to conclude by saying nowhere the nation has a system so significantly been changed so fast. i think that we have impacted hope into the inmate population. we incentivize participation in programs. we've required achievement to earn parole suitability or early release, and we have required disciplinary-free behavior of our prisons. as a result, i think we're going to have safer prisons for our staff and our inmates. i think we're putting discretion to our correctional professionals who are better positioned to make decisions. we found a durable solution and a path out of our costly court oversight. we've avoided indiscriminate release of offenders by the federal court. we have allowed the return of inmates from out of state, as was mentioned previously. i think that the cost to get to your central point in current year, those costs will be expanded. we expect 2,000 reduction of growing to 9,500 in 2021, but those were based on the jan 10 budget. we've exceeded expectations in my mind of implementation. we are, again, two weeks from now, we'll implement good conduct credits. in july, the parole, non-violent parole process. and in august, milestones, enhanced milestones in rehabilitative achievement credits or self help credits. i think we told you at the last hearing that our projections were very preliminary, and that they will be modified as we go forward. and i believe that in the may revise you will see an update of those numbers that i just mentioned. and as we implement this going forward and we expand our rehabilitative programs, i think we're going to see a greater population reduction and greater cost reductions to your point. so with that, thank you very much, and i'd be happy to try to answer any questions you might have.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 66, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Caitlin O'Neil: sure, thank you, madam chair. o'neil, legislative analyst's office. as you mentioned, the governor's budget reflects the administration's implementation plan that was released with the january budget.  however the emergency regulations which were adopted earlier this month reflect a somewhat different implementation plan. most notably an earlier timeline, which could impact both the resources required to implement the initiative as well as the population effects of the initiative, and the timeframe in which they fall, which would have likely budget implications. so we recommend that the legislature withhold action on the proposition 57 related budget adjustments until the administration provides updated estimates that reflect its current implementation plan with the may revision. i would also note that the administration's implementation plan could still change going forward as a result of the regular rule-making process, and if there are changes between the current emergency regulations and the ultimately adopted final regulations, these changes could have budgetary implications as well. so we recommend that the legislature direct the department to report after the regulations are finalized on any changes between the emergency regulations and the final regulations, as well as justification for these changes, and any impacts on the budget or populations that those changes may have.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Josh Garner: josh, department of finance. that's correct. as the secretary mentioned, there's a new timeline in the emergency regulations that were released compared to the estimance in the governor's budget. we would come forward in the may revision with any adjustments that are necessary to implement that and if to the extent that population estimates change based on the timeline or different policy decisions that were in there, those would come forward through the normal budget process and the may revision. additionally, going forward to the extent that there were any future changes similar to the discussions we're all having now surrounding the budget and the implications those decisions have on the budget. we would fully expect that to the extent a decision is made that impacts cdcr's population or budget, that would come through this committee as part of the normal budget process and budgeting mechanics.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Glen Forman: glen scott forman, department of finance. and i think the important thing to point out is the initiative states that they're eligible for parole consideration after completing their primary term. so what's being asked by the lao here in our interpretation is for their parole to be considered in advanced of completion of that date.  which we think is in violation of what the initiative laid out. so that's really the crux of the issue and then you also have workload and operational challenges that the secretary pointed out.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stanicia Boatner: Good afternoon, chair and members. Stanicia Boatner, with the California State Association of Counties. CSAC had a neutral position on Proposition 57. However we have been very supportive of the pragmatic approach that administration has taken in developing the regulations and implementation of Proposition 57, and we think that this is a very good public safety effort. Thank you.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Sanchez: good afternoon madam chair and members, sanchez on behalf of the chief probation officers of california. i want to thank secretary kernan and the department of corrections on rehabilitation for their work on these regulations, and for the dialogue that cpoc was able to have with them, really focusing on evidence based practices in the programming. we certainly see this regulation as fair and consistent with the mission of proposition 57. research shows us, and we know from our work locally, that when you program in custody you're going to see better outcomes when the person comes out to the community. a few things that i wanted to note, i think as we look at permanent regulations is that we need to ensure that we're continuing to focus on a balance between both incentive and sanctions in order to achieve a true kind of rehabilitative program. it's also very important that as we're looking and talking about programming within cdcr and within custody, that we're also making sure that the resources are there locally at the county level so that when we have those folks come back out to us that the resources and programming are in place, that they have a continuum to continue. and lastly we certainly will look forward to working with cdcr on evidence based programs. those are the programs that research shows and that we know work and have positive outcomes. and it's really important that when we're talking about the types of programs that are receiving credits that we're really focusing on those types of evidence based programs. so we look forward to continuing our work with the legislature and the department and appreciate it. thank you.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 131, 'end': 137, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Taina Vargas-Edmond: Good afternoon, Madame Chair and members. My name is Taina Vargas-Edmond. I'm the founder and Executive Director of Initiate Justice. We're an organization based in Oakland that has a membership of more than 2,500 incarcerated people and their families. So one of the things that we worked on as we created the survey where we survey more than 2,000 currently incarcerated people, and one of the main things that we talked about was programs. So since that with raise I wanted to offer to this Committee today that a lot of people inside they tell us that they had a hard time accessing programs. They said that they were very long waiting lists, and this was particularly true on level 3 and 4 yards where locked down were an impediment to people completing their programs. With respect to savings, I know that we're not supposed to talk about the regulations to much, but based on those 2000 survey results we did come up with five recommendations that we think would increase savings. And a few of them actually align up The LAO's recommendations to include nonviolent third-strikers in Prop 57 nonviolent early parole consideration, because the language says any person convicted of a nonviolent offense. We also want to see increased good time credits, increase it across the board to 50%. We would like to see this credit earning made retroactive. We would like to see for the retroactive educational merit credits, people get recognized for each achievement that they have completed. And the last recommendation is to make sure that any credit earned comes off of a person's first parole hearing dates, so that includes a youth offender parole hearing date or elder parole date. Thank you.
[{'start': 53, 'end': 72, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eugene Day: Hello, my name is Eugene Day I'm a formerly incarcerated activist and I'm a former three striker. I would like to thank the Secretary Kernan for implementing these landmark regulations, but I think that they could go deeper. I agree with everything that initiate justice head and some of the recommendations of the LAO, but I think there's a prime opportunity right now to go little deeper into the retroactivity aspect of some of the programs. Whether they received their AOD certification through offender mentors, or through other organizations like me, the Crop Organization, or any college degree that somebody earned whether it was regional or national. I mean because at the time when you mentioned fairness certain institutions had more programming than others. So it's just an opportunity right now to take another look at these landmark regulations. So that we can go deeper to make sure the offenders get proper credit for what they did at those times when there were really no programs. Thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 134, 'end': 140, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Chinmoy Roy: my name is chinmoy glen roy, and i'm from fremont, which is two constituents in between. so i'm an engineer. and as you can tell, that i'm an american by choice and i'm an indian by chance. and thanks, i mean i can definitely say what has made this country great. okay, and being in silicon valley i thanked my stars that i could retire prematurely. and one of the things that has made this country great is that in this country the sky is the limit. okay, i have experienced that. and we don't put any barriers to success. so when i saw that the proposal was just 12 weeks, i thought to myself, wait a second, this is one of our values. we tell people do a good job, make money, if you want to contribute and distribute it, do it. so i find this notion of 12 weeks serving as a barrier. that's number one. now, we all paid our taxes, right? i made my money. irs would not allow me to pay my taxes next year, they are proposing that you can only get 12 weeks. next year it can roll over. i don't think we do that here. you work hard, you earn this year, you get the credit this year. that's number one. number two is retroactive, and that's my last point. and the retroactive thing is that, if you have already decided to improve yourself, irrespective of prop 57, why are we penalizing them? we need to tell them, okay, you made that decision. no matter what, you get those credits. so there are credits being given, and i am very proud of cdcr. they have been very progressive. and this is wonderful to know. so i have just these two points. and thanks for giving me the time, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Irene Sotto: Hi, my name is Irene Sotto, and I'm with the SC Support Group. It's women with the incarcerated loved ones. I have my son that's incarcerated in Calipatria State Prison. He was given 35 to life, non-violent. And when the people voted for Prop 57, and I would like to see him come home. He's worked on his GED, and there are not too many programs out there in Calipatria for him to do, being that he's a level four. So I agree with LOA and I just want to see him and others that shouldn't be there eligible to come home. Thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 431, 'end': 434, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Josh Garner: Josh Garner, Department of Finance, so we wanted to lay out a little bit of the technical details of the proposal. There certainly are quite a few technical details of it, and it's a quite complex pay differential, and some of the details are still being discussed and worked out with the CalPERS and CalHR. So there's understandably some differences in the understanding of exactly how the proposal would work. So I just wanted to take a couple of minutes to outline how we're currently envisioning the pay differential rolling out. And as the secretary mentioned, it would be four captains, three wardens, and includes additional headquarters positions that are in this chain of command. And it would be a 2% pay differential increase per year for three years. So the first year, an individual in these classifications would earn 2%, the second year would earn 4%, and the third year would earn 6%. But none of the pay differentials would be considered what we call PERSable or would count towards an individual's final calculation towards their retirement calculation until they have served 36 consecutive months in a classification. So that can be achieved a couple of ways. You could envision someone in a classification for only a single year before promoting to the next. And in that scenario, we would envision the pay differential going with them, and they would continue on their path to earning 6%. Meaning, they would earn 2% the first year, promote, move up to 4% the second year, and 6% in addition. However, in that scenario, again, until an individual serves 36 consecutive months in the classification, it would not be considered towards their final compensation. Alternatively, if an individual served 36 consecutive months in one of these classifications and then promoted, we would envision that the 6% that they had worked towards would continue with them on their promotions. So they would still earn 6% in the additional classification. However, the 6% at that new higher salary in the higher classification would not be, again, PERSable towards final compensation until the individual serves 36 months again in that classification. So we not only, as mentioned, the multiple challenges the department is facing, we not only thinking will help incentivize individuals to promote from the lieutenant to captain rank. But we also think it will incentivize individuals to stay and have the department benefit from their expertise and seniority once they have been in a position. So happy to answer any additional questions on the technical details of the proposal.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 289, 'end': 296, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 301, 'end': 306, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Maureen Washburn: Hi, Good afternoon, Maureen Washburn with the Center of Juvenile and Criminal Justice. I would just like to echo many your concerns Madam Chair, namely about recidivism and accountability at DJJ. Our concerns that there's a deepening reliance on DJJ at a time when crime among young people is in all time low, and is expected to continue declining. We released a report on Tuesday looking at the per Capita cost at DJJ over time. And it's astounding that in 2016, 17 per Capita, we're spending over $270,000 per youth. So I would just urge this Subcommittee to critically examine our spending as a state. Thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Miller: All right, fantastic. So my name is Amy Miller, I'm the Associate Director for Female Offender Programs and Services and Special Housing, which of course includes our community beds and specifically those custody to Community Transitional Re-entry Programs. As mentioned, we have four of those currently, approximately 350 beds as of today, 302 of those beds are filled. Of that 350 beds, 60 of those beds are recent expansion beds. So we did, recently, add 30 beds to our facility in San Diego and also 30 beds to our facility in Los Angeles. Both of those areas sought after by our female offenders especially because they're of course closer to where they were incarcerated from and gives them an opportunity to transition a little bit better. Those CCTRP programs, we do consider them to be one of our shining stars in the department. The women get to go out to those programs with two years left in their sentence. When they go out there, they have the ability to enter into programs. Get some extensive counseling services, training, rehabilitative needs get to be met, education goals, also job training. Ultimately in those CCTRP programs, they have the ability to get a job and go out and work in the community and earn money that they then can put away and save for their imminent parole. Even this year, even recently, we're seeing women going out to those communities with over $15,000 saved, which is a huge benefit when they get out into the communities and now have the ability to put a deposit on an apartment, help to pay for expenses as they re-enter a community. So we're super proud of those programs. We hear nothing but great things. The women are always very thankful. It gives them an opportunity to live in a non-prison setting, a much more normal setting, but still, also a controlled environment so they ease their way back out into the real world. And we're pretty confident that when they do reach their parole date, they're getting out there with the warmest of handshakes and handoffs, and are really much better prepared to reenter society than they would be if we release them from our prison gates. So, that's just a little bit about CCTRP.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Whitaker: My name is Jennifer Whitaker and I'm the Chief of the Office of State Audits and Evaluations.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Diana Antony: Hello, I'm Diana Antony. I'm the Audit Manager, I'm also with the Department of Finance State Audits Office.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Gau: My name is David Gau. I'm the Executive Director at the Board of Equalization.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michele Pielsticker: my name is michele jonah pielsticker. i'm the chief of the legislative and research division at the board of equalization.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Kelly: Amy Kelly, Acting Chief Counsel, Board of Equalization.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Hill: My name is Chris Hill. I'm here to represent the fiscal and budget side of the Department of Finance.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Seth Kerstein: seth michele kerstein with the legislative analyst's office. thank you, mr. chair.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : I don't want to put you on the spot. Okay, thank you.
[]
Dorothy Johnson : Good afternoon Mr. Chair and members, Dorothy Johnson with the California State Association of Counties. We want to express out appreciation to the Legislature and the administration for looking into this issue in the near term to achieve greater accuracy, accountability and efficiency with the state BOE. The BOE's central role was sales tax allocation to counties has been a major area of concern as of late. This is in light of the most recent state controller audit. And the revelation that there may be millions, hundreds of millions of dollars in sales tax revenue, that's been misallocated for counties which remains open unfortunately. And in light of our close relationship between the State in terms of delivering services and program administration, we would hope that CSAT can be closely involved in the development and review of solutions, to improve future sales tax allocation and avoid any similar problems that we've experienced. Either with the 2014 review, or again with this most recent incident. So thank you for that time and comments.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 53, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Russell Lowery: afternoon, general roth and senators. i appreciate your time. i'm russell seth lowery, i'm chief deputy for board member harkey. and it's tough listening to some of the tough issues that you've raised, we appreciate the oversight, and look forward to working with our team to get a handle on some of these issues. and i can't speak and won't speak to everything that was raised today but if there's any comfort that i think you hear, you should take, no members would have given a different answer and a different response to a lot of these. and staff felt very comfortable to give answers that members wouldn't have given. but particularly for ms. harkey, i want to speak to the issue of the staff redirection and just state as clearly as possible, if diane harkey or her staff were redirecting 113 auditors and compliance people, we ought to not have our jobs. flat out, how can i say it more clearly. as her chief deputy, that did not happen. i've presented thousands of emails on the planning of this event. we participated in a number of different ways. speakers, event planning, a lot of that different stuff. my staff and i, and my boss do not interact at that level. we have a memo that contrary to some of the procedure that you may have heard, how we deal with our district staff, and it's through senior level management. and our request for help or volunteers or anything that went through this event, goes through legal, goes through the senior staff, goes through the channels for the member protocols for how we're supposed to interact. all of it goes through those channels, and that's what happened with this event, from the size and scope of it, to the staff. the members office role in this was a request for assistance, that's it. the same way we had lanyards, and we say, can we have boe connecting women of power on them? legal said no. the cost of imprinting the cwp on it is outside the scope, it's promotional or advertising, you can't do it. we didn't do it. in the same way we asked for volunteers through the proposal. members are given, a board member communication protocol for who we're supposed to call. and that's our chief of field, and then the district administrators that we're supposed to interact with. that's what we did. and i can document it six ways or sideways. and i explained that, i didn't document it. and they way i would describe it, i don't think that dof is lying, i don't think the people that they talk to are not telling the truth. and general, you know this, i was an e3 in the navy.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 23, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 66, 'end': 85, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 121, 'end': 127, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 649, 'end': 655, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 753, 'end': 765, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jason Gonsalves: mr chairman and members, jason jonah gonsalves representing the cities of eastvale, wildomar, and jurupa valley. we appreciate you hearing the item. it's an item you've heard six or seven times over the last six years, and we appreciate the legislature's continued support. thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dan Kuerig: Mr. Chairman, Members, Dan Kuerig on behalf of the League of California Cities. This measure helps four cities that were negatively impacted by a bill in 2011, so we appreciate this measure.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jean Hurst: mr. chair and members, jean here today on behalf of the riverside county board of supervisors. obviously in strong support of remedying this long-standing issue for these four cities.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Monroe: I'm Mark Monroe with the Department of Finance. Yeah, that's correct, but this is part of a broader package. So when we go to fund a series of projects, these projects have been a part of regional transportation plans and so there are various ways that we fund these, but this is consistent in terms of funding projects overall in various programs.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Magavern: thank you mr. chairman and members. bill with the coalition for clean air in support of section four in the bill, that's the clean warehouse money. warehouses attract and use a lot of heavy duty diesel equipment, so that diesel exhaust is often a serious air pollution problem for the communities. so this funding will help to clean up the warehouse sector and advance zero emission and near zero emission technologies and that will help make the goods movement system in the state more sustainable.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jean Hurst: mr. chair and members, jean jason hurst here today on behalf of the riverside county board of supervisors. obviously in strong support of the investment in the region for the transportation projects, we ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Felipe Fuentes: chair, members, felipe on behalf of the associated general contractors of california and san diego chapters, as well as the caterpillar incorporated companies and their affiliates, in strong support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roger Dickinson: mr. chairman and members, dickinson, executive director of transportation california, also in strong support.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Costa: Thank you Mr. Chair. Good afternoon Mr. Chair and members. Amy Costa with the Department of Finance. SB 131 would approve the memorandum of understanding that has been reached between the administration and the employees of bargaining unit 16, the Union of American Physicians and Dentists. To this end, the bill seeks to make the necessary statutory changes to implement these agreements. The MOU covers approximately 1,600 rank and file employees throughout the state. Over the course of this contract, the MOU will provide general salary increases ranging from 2% to 3% annually, as well as special salary adjustments to targeted groups of employees intended to address recruitment and retention issues. In addition to these economic provisions, the MOU includes agreements to participate in the administration strategy for addressing the state's $76 billion unfunded liability for post-employment benefits. The strategy for addressing this liability includes equal cost sharing between the employee and employer to prefund retiree health benefits, and for new employees extending the period to qualify for retiree health benefits as well as reducing the employer subsidy for retiree health benefits. The Bill also excludes new employees from receiving reimbursement of their Medicare part B premiums. With that, we're happy to answer any questions.
[{'start': 59, 'end': 68, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Greg Krotoll: greg jean krotoll with the department of finance. so, the calculation for opeb contributions is based on looking at the employee group, and their overall normal costs, and the unfunded liability for that group of employees, and then, relative to that, the overall salaries for those employees as well. so, generally speaking, when you have a group of employees that have a larger salary, the contribution is less to pay down that unfunded liability versus those who make a smaller average salary. so that's why you see this group makes a particularly less contribution than others. as well as the fact that they began pre-funding opeb contributions back in 2013. so this group of employees has been contributing 0.5% of their base pay since 2013. so, that's also included in there, and why you see their rate is lower than others.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Hill: chris for the department of finance. these are the only four cities that are currently impacted by this situation. so if this measure's enacted, every city in the state will be treated equitably.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jean Hurst: Madam Chair and members, Jean Hurst here today on behalf of the Riverside County Board of Supervisors, also express our appreciation for the amazing tenacity of the folks who have worked on this issue, urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dorothy Johnson : good morning, dorothywith the california state association of counties. we have supported the efforts to correct this since the beginning, and we are very pleased to see it move forward here today, thank you.
[]
Michael Coleman: Hi, Michael Coleman with the League of California Cities and the California Society of Municipal Finance Officers in support. Been working on this since 2004, when the VLF swap erroneously left out a provision to help new incorporated cities. We thought we'd fixed it Senator Roth has been working diligently. It's a highly complicated issue, so it's somewhat understanding why we've had a difficulty getting it through all these years, but it's about time. And I thank the Senator.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 276, 'end': 280, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Danielle Kando-Kaiser: danielle jonah kando-kaiser on behalf of common sense kids action in support
[{'start': 0, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicole Rice: Mr. Chair, members, Nicole Rice, California Manufacturers and Technology Association. We are actually support, if amended, to include language that would expand the subject areas to include also technology and engineering, as part of the STEM curriculum. We've been working with the author's office, we're confident that we're going to be able to get to a resolution. But as of today, we are still support if amended. Thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christopher Castrillo: thank you mr chair, christopher danielle castrillo on behalf of the california faculty association, in support.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Peter Kellison: Peter Kellison on behalf of the California Hospice and Palliative Care Association, source of the bill in support. Briefly on the fiscal, this bill is intended to be a cleanup to recent legislation that permitted the coverage of palliative care by hospice providers. Unfortunately, the existing law at the time only permitted hospice programs to provide for preliminary palliative care services. So this legislation would simply allow hospice programs to perform what is already authorized to be covered and paid for.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Autumn Ogden: Autumn Ogden Smith on behalf of the American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network, also in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Christopher Castrillo: All right, thank you, Mr. Chair. Christopher Castrillo on behalf of the Solano County Board of Supervisors in support.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dave Nielsen: Dave Nielsen, California Alliance of Child and Family Services, support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christopher Christrie: Thank you Mr Chair and members. Christopher Christrie on behalf of the City and County of San Francisco and the Office of Mayor Ed Lee in support.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rachel Liebman: hi liebman from the w hayward burns institute in strong support. thank you.
[{'start': 3, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Abe Nielson: Abe Nielson, California Alliance Child and Family Services in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gregory Cramer: good morning mr. chair and members. gregory christopher cramer on behalf of planned parenthood affiliates of california in support.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 62, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicole Rice: Good morning, Mr. Chair and members. Nicole Rice, California Manufacturers and Technology Association here just to render our support for the bill, thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Bryant: morning, mr. chair and members. jason on behalf of the california growers association in support, thank you.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jenna Gary: Thank you my name is Jenna Gary, and I'm an Attorney with Legal Aid at Work and we're a nonprofit public interest legal organization that advocates for the rights of low wage workers. I'm here today as a co-sponsor, and first, I just want to thank Senator Jackson for her leadership on this important issue. So simply put SB 63 helps fulfill the promise California made decades ago when it passed the Paid Family Leave program when it recognized that parents need to be their for their children during this critical time. But without job protection, with risk losing your job, paid family leave is meaningless. So we know that studies show that since PFL was enacted, small businesses have actually been more supportive of PFL than large employers. They've reported that PFL has either a positive effect, or no noticeable effect on productivity, morale, profitability, or performance, turnover. Also a recent 2017 survey by the small business majority found that a vast majority, 71% of small business owners, support expanding job protection for family and medical leave to businesses with 20 or more employees, exactly what SB 63 is doing. Similarly, a 2017 survey by the Main Street Alliance of over 1,500 small business owners across 13 states, found that a majority supported paid family leave. Among female business owners and business owners of color, the support rose to 76%. So in short, allowing workers to access Paid Family Leave benefits that they pay for is good for workers, employers, and the state alike. It creates stability for working families and communities when workers are able to maintain their employment while bonding with a new child, and decrease of a need for unemployment and other state funded benefits. So for these reasons, we respectfully ask for your support and aye vote on this important legislation. Thank you.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 256, 'end': 263, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Moriko Yoshihara: Thank you, Mr Chair and Members, Moriko Yoshihara with the California Employment Lawyers Association. I just wanted to quickly give a perspective of a new parent who came to one of our attorneys after losing her job just weeks after having a new child. In response, she wrote a letter in support of this bill. In her experience, after losing her job, she wrote, I was now home with an infant, without work, without insurance, without everything I thought I would have upon returning to work after having my baby. Let me state that this was the scariest, most humbling experience of my life because I was forced to go on government assistance for the first time in my life. I believe this is an extremely important issue and would like to see the legislation pass to ensure women have the time they need after having a child. So we think that SB 63 really helps women with stability, new parents, it also benefits new fathers as well and even there's a minimal cost to the state in terms of enforcement. But when you compare it to the societal and economic benefits providing this job protection, we think it's a very important bill and respectfully ask for your support.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Level: level, association for los angeles deputy sheriffs, association of deputy district attorneys, california college and university police chief's association, california association of code enforcement officers, los angeles county professional peace officers association, california narcotic officers association, los angeles police protective league, and riverside sheriff's association, all in support.
[]
Christopher Gastri: Mr Chair and members, thank you. Christopher Gastri, on behalf of the city and County of San Francisco, and the Office of Mayor Ed Lee, in support.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 128, 'end': 134, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jessica Bartholow: Jessica Bartholow with the Western Center on Law & Poverty, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gregory Kramer: Mr Chair and Members, Gregory Kramer on behalf of Planned Parenthood Affiliates of California, we took a support position after the Committee deadline for letters, but we do support, thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maya Ingram: Maya Ingram, ACLU of California, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Barrera: Good morning, Mr Chair and Committee Members. Jennifer Barrera on behalf of the California Chamber of Commerce, and we'll try to keep our comments related to the fiscal concerns, although we do have policy concerns. We, as employers, support family leave and that's why most of our employers, the majority of our employers, already provide family leave without the threat of a mandate and litigation, as a result of violating any one of the requirements in part of the job. So we are not opposed to the family leave policy. But we are concerned with is the exposure to the litigation for these small employers. As your analysis correctly points out, there's a risk of at least 400 new complaints going through the Department of Fair Employment and Housing as a result of this bill, with regards to small employers who don't have a dedicated human resource staff. They don't have to have dedicated legal attorneys working for them, trying to figure out how they comply with this bill and the challenges that they're going to face as a result of it. There was this study a couple of years ago that said, just to defend a single plaintiff, fair employment and housing claim costs a small employer a $125,000, just to defend it. Employers don't have that kind of profit to apply to a defense case for some claim that may or may not have merit. We have concerns with that, last year we offered amendments to try to mitigate those concerns by having these smaller employers and the employee plaintiff go through a mitigation or a mediation before they went to the civil litigation so that there was a chance for early settlement which would put the employee potentially back to work earlier, and would eliminate the cost of exposure for litigation to the small employer. Those amendments weren't taken, and is one of the basis for why the Governor ultimately vetoed the bill last year which actually was more limited in scope, because it was only six weeks of protected leave instead of the proposal for 12 weeks. So we do have concerns with the costs this is going to impose on small employers and that's one of the fiscal reasons why we are opposed to this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 46, 'end': 62, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matthew Ellen: Good morning, Mr Chair and Members. I'm Matthew Ellen with Western Growers Association, also opposed.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Schacht: mr. chairman and members, schacht, with california rural legal assistance foundation, as sponsors of the bill. just wanted to comment on the fiscal, we give the labor commissioner new tools to attack sexual harassment in the industry, but they're discretionary. so to the extent that she manages her case load and citation revenue offsets cost of enforcement, we'd respectfully suggest that the bill deserves to get off suspense so we ask for your support.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Janice Lin: janice jonah lin on behalf of the california energy storage alliance in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Steve Schiller: Steve Schiller on behalf of the California Efficiency and Demand Managed Aouncil. I'm honored to have the opportunity to support Senator Stern's bill particularly the inclusion of Efficiency and Demand Response to support the reduction of conventional power generation, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 137, 'end': 142, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sachu Constantine: sachu janice constantine, with the center for sustainable energy, we also strongly support this bill. market transformation won't happen by itself. incumbents will carry the day unless we have this kind of visionary leadership, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Noemi Gallardo: Noemi Gallardo on behalf of Sunrun, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Gray: Laura Gray on behalf of California Solar Energy Industry Association, in support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrea Deveau: andrea sachu deveau on behalf of technet, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dan Chaw: chaw with tesla and solar city in support.
[]
Serge Barelson: Serge Barelson with Sunburge Energy in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrea York: Andrea York on behalf of Clean Power Campaign in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Leila Stanford: leila andrea stanford, i am a resident. i was affected by the least of blowout. it doesn't matter if you live near there. i attend restaurants, visit friends, go to the parks. i am in strong support of this bill. i also trained with the honorable al gore. i'm a climate reality leader, so what isn't you personally and to the environment, i back them all the way.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 247, 'end': 254, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Erin Niemela: mr chair and members, niemela representing the energy efficiency and demand management council. i want to thank the author, his staff, the chair and his staff for their hard work on this bill. as senator said, energy efficiency is potential to reduce our greenhouse gas emissions, lower our electricity needs and costs, and fill gaps on the grid is effectively stranded by the current system. right now, california is the only state in the nation in which a customer incentive once it is already approved by a third party verifier hired by the puc to do that once it's approved, can actually be changed by the puc. and a protracted process for re-reviewing that can ensue based on guidelines that aren't even published. there's no other program in state government that works this way. so in the end, this bill probably will make fewer things qualify. because if the puc does the job of making things more transparent on the front end, they will make it clearer to customers what doesn't qualify and what does. and that will probably reduce the number of things that customers will be able to apply for. but from my client's perspective, that's a fine trade-off because it's going to provide a level of predictability to this entire process. and i would guess that that is the reason that some of the folks who don't get paid in this process also support this bill, as you've seen in your analysis. so our hope is that this bill will create a more transparent and predictable process for valuing energy efficiency. it'll unleash its potential and encourage some of the state's biggest energy users to use it a little bit more, thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 867, 'end': 870, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rod Brewer: Good morning, Mr. Chair and members, Rod Brewer for Southern California Edison here in support of Senator Hertzberg's SB370. We believe this bill continues the efforts that were passed on energy efficiency goals and provides some savings to our AG and industrial customers, and helps in lowering greenhouse gas emissions. And for those reasons we are here in support.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 106, 'end': 115, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Larrea: good morning, larrea with the california league of food processors. i can say i really like the senator's statement. it goes far beyond what's happening out there. we are essentially the poster children for the dysfunction associated with the current incentive programs. they are not designed to meet the 2030 goals right now. many of these programs are 30 years old and they are designed to meet goals that are no longer relevant under this. we need to reform, essentially, our incentive programs so that they work together and stop denying incentives to companies that are looking to move forward. things like free ridership, early retirement, and industrial standard procedure are things that just need to be looked at under this new paradigm that the state has put on us. so, thank you. we really support this.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kim Shriner: Kim Shriner on behalf of the Environmental Defense Fund, we're in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Leah Semper: leah leila semper, i reside within senator hertzberg's district, and i'm a trained climate reality leader, porter ranch neighborhood council sustainability committee, and i strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 43, 'end': 52, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dan Jacobson: Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, author. I want to start off by focusing on the environmental benefits of this bill. To start off, my name is Dan Jacobson with Environment California. I'll let my colleagues talk to some of the other key points. I'll keep my comments brief so that we can focus on any questions that you might have. The first reason that storage is so important is because we're going to need it to save some of the solar electricity. There's a lot of talk about our over-production of solar energy right now. Our ability to store that energy when the sun is shining and be able to use that at night is critical for the environmental benefits. The second piece that this is so important is because the alternatives to storage are often times peaker plants. As many of you on this committee know, oftentimes those peaker plants use fossil fuels that contributes to some of the worst air quality that we have here in the state. We've just completed another report talking about California's air quality, and too many of our cities are in the top 10, so we need to take action to be able to reduce that. Third, this bill is based on a model that works. The California Solar Initiative has proven to be a success. We cannot apply that same kind of model to this technology here and help drive down costs. And fourth is we want to make sure that we can set the table for the Pro Tem's 100% energy bill. I'm sure that'll be coming soon, there's no doubt that storage is going to be a critical component to that, programs like this will allow it to happen. Thank you to the author, thank you to the members. We'd urge an aye vote.
[{'start': 141, 'end': 153, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Juliana Mandell: Thank you, Juliana Mandell with Green Charge, in support. Green Charge, based in Santa Clara, is a, develops distributed energy storage systems for consumers across California. The majority of our customers are K through 12 schools and community colleges. Storage enables these schools and community college to save money on their utility bills and reinvest those savings back in their institutions. It provides an avenue for consumer choice and consumer empowerment to determine energy use. And at the same time, these distributed storage systems provide grid stability, increased grid flexibility, and assist, as my colleague was just talking about, in solar integration. Distributed storage provides unique locational benefits to the grid and rate payers. What potential storage customers, and those supporting industry's growth desire, and what we currently lack is markets stability. They type of markets stability and certainty that will drive massive investment in the state and market transformation. This bill will create that market signal, drive investment and innovation in the economy, and foster job creation in California. We view this bill as essential to achieving true market transformation, and a bridge to an energy storage future that is rebate free. Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eddie Ahn: very briefly, mr. chair. eddie, executive director of brightline defense, public interest lawyers dedicated to environmental justice issues. there's a letter being passed around expressing our support for this bill, our belief in storage, and jobs being created for energy storage. we'd like to thank the senator for his vision in this and appreciate your attention to this matter.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rick Brown: Rick Brown, President, TerraVerde Renewable Partners, I was also asked by Ana Ferrara of the School Energy Coalition, we're both in support of this bill. I'm on the Executive Committee, so that's why I could do it.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 74, 'end': 85, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Roemer: Good morning, I'm Michael Roemer.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lisa Chang: hi, i'm lisa leah chang.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sachu Constantine: Hi, Sachu Constantine with the Center for Sustainable Energy. As an administrator of market transformation programs, we strongly support this bill and thank you for bringing it forward.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Gray: gray with the california solar energy industry association in very strong support of this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Delaney Hunter: hunter on behalf of advanced microgrid solutions, a storage company headquartered in senator wiener's district, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 93, 'end': 99, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Andrea Deveau: good morning, deveau for technet in strong support.
[]
Janice Lin: Janice Lin for the California Energy Storage Alliance, we represent roughly 65 energy storage related companies, and we're in strong support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Noemi Gallardo: hello, noemi lisa gallardo of sunrun, in strong support.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roxana Bekemohammadi: roxana noemi bekemohammadi with rising sun energy center, and we strongly support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Darren Bowden: thank you, chair, thank you, committee. bowden with southern california edison. all due respect, no one is doubting energy storage is importance. no one is doubting the role that we all probably believe that energy storage needs to play in the future. but i think we also need to look at kind of where we are currently and where maybe we need to go. from our perspective, we're bullish on storage. i think our record of implementation of storage over the last couple of years shows that. we just don't think that sb 700 is currently necessary. we think the costs of storage are expected to decline by significant amounts within the next several years. there are efforts underway already to integrate storage at the puc and cal iso. we don't think that california needs more storage mandates, at least at this time. at a minimum, sb 700 seems premature and should be deferred. just to remind everybody, there have been at least three recent bills passed to foster increased energy storage adoption. two passed just last year. senator skinner, when she was assemblymember skinner, had ab 2514 which created storage targets for the state. subsequently, the puc directed the ious to procure over 1300 megawatts by 2024. edison's target is 580 megawatts. we've already contracted for over 400 megawatts and it's 2017, so we're very well ahead of schedule. ab 2868, gatto last year required the puc to direct utilities to propose programs and investments including customer side storage. and then just a reminder, sb 1637 was adapted last year which expanded rebates for sgip through 2019. the other thing that i would like to add is that all three ious currently have applications pending before the cpuc that greatly improves the storage economics by shifting peak period pricing to later in the day. in terms of the cost of this program, we believe that it will potentially be costly for customers. depending on the math, from the committee analysis it looks like sb 7 would require somewhere between $660 million or to up of $1 plus billion over the next 10 years. it doesn't necessarily have provisions to ensure that the program meets ghg goals, supports grid needs, or is cost-effective. and on the sb 1637 implementation, just to note, less than 2 weeks ago the cpuc just adopted or authorized almost $200 million between 2017 and 2019 for battery storage in an sgip decision. so i guess the question kind of becomes, why do we need to increase this now? why do we need to create a 10-year program now? i don't even know if i want to spend a whole lot of time in suggesting that it's duplicative of the efforts in sb 350 because i think this committee has probably heard that one a lot with the irp. but we still do believe that that's the issue. and then last thing that i want to say is i don't disagree with anybody in this room that the california solar initiative was a successful program. however, was it the main thing that actually got more pv out there? and was it the main thing that drove that down costs? i would argue no. i would argue a 20% rps, then a 33% rps, then a 50% rps had much more about trying to drop or affecting the cost of pv and dropping those costs. i would also suggest that from a customer-sided, solar perspective, the csi was not the only driver. it was combined with nem tax credits and time of use rates. so that industry was so heavily subsidized to drive down cost, it wasn't just because of the csi. so i guess the question now is, do we need this program now or should we let the existing stuff run for a while and maybe target that as we go? finally, i guess my question is just from our perspective, we're just kind of wondering when enough is enough. thanks.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1033, 'end': 1040, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1070, 'end': 1077, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1360, 'end': 1365, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Gilta Peaty: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Gilta Peaty with the California Municipal Utilities Association in opposition.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
DaVina Flemings: davina, pg&e. would like to associate myself with many of the comments raised by my colleague at southern california edison.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alicia Priego: alicia roxana priego with san diego gas and electric, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eddie Ahn: good morning, senator, eddie alicia ahn again with brianban. we also work in the california public utilities commission context as well. looking at these issues in detail, a lot of our work is with low-income communities of color throughout the bay area, and in fact --
[{'start': 23, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 51, 'end': 59, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Andrea Devough: Thank you Senator. Good morning Mr. Chair and Committee Members. My name is Andrea Devough and I'm here today on behalf of Technet. We would like to thank Senator Skinner for her leadership in authoring SB 356. The bill is not only a measure that is a step forward in the modernization of our electricity grid, but it acknowledgement that data is the key to unlocking today's unknown to the optimization and efficiency maximizations of resources, investments, and system upgrades. If we do not have insight into the problem, then we as California cannot devise a solution. Data is the key here, the key to creating and optimizing the best solution for California and California's rate payers. SB 356 builds on the current dialogue underway in the energy industry on the need for increased transparency and data accessibility. The key here is the data transparency and access is the foundational enabler required to foster innovation in electric grid design and operation. Without data sharing, key stakeholders are sidelined from proactively proposing solutions that could increase the reliability, safety, affordability, and consumer choice of the 21st century grid. Without access, individuals, businesses, and communities can not help meet grid needs with local distributed energy resource solutions even if it is a cleaner solution and saves rate payers money. SB 356 tackles the accessibility problem. We strongly encourage your support for SB 356. Respectfully ask for your aye vote on this important legislation. Thank you for your time.
[{'start': 76, 'end': 90, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 163, 'end': 170, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Steve Shuller: good morning my name is shuller. i'm a professional engineer with over 30 years of experience in the california energy industry. i'm also the board chair emeritus of the california energy efficiency industry council. thank you for the opportunity to speak to you this morning. section three of sb 356 is the nutritional label for state building. it calls for state buildings and buildings leased by the state to utilize benchmarking and energy performance data that's already available with gds to create a, it is time to put on my glasses. that's my first joke for the day is trying to read without glasses. okay, let's start over. so anyways, so the labor what it does is just, it creates a prominent public displayed energy performance label for each building that zone by the state or released by the state over 50,000 square feet which is about one story building covering half the city block. we mean by benchmarking is it's measuring the buildings energy use characteristics and then comparing it to the averages for similar buildings. it allows owners and occupants in the real estate market to understand the buildings relative energy performance and helps identify opportunities to cut waste and improve building performance on an integrated grid. for largely invisible efficiency and demand response and storage, building labels are the visibility of pv on the roof. this is a major step forward at a minimal cost, as the data's already available. data basically unlocks opportunities. i call these nutritional labels for buildings, because they're similar in concept to the labels we have on food products. you compare the nutritional content for different products to establish benchmarks. same thing applies to these building labels. it makes the information available, takes it off the website, off the box, and puts it onto the box of cheerios. okay, so with that i just want to say this is opportunity for leadership in the states consistent with existing legislation and the governor's executive orders and basically have to lead by example. so thank you very much.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anna Ferrer: So we're Anna Ferrer with the School Energy Coalition, we're made up of K12 schools up and down the state. We appreciate the goals of SB 356, data is very important to schools, especially since we've been making investments with the clean energy jobs creation fund, Prop 39 Funding that schools have been putting to good use. We're ready to go beyond, become z and e campuses. And to that extent, we're looking for the technology to be catered to our specific loads and aggregate usage. So, we look forward to assisting and are in support of the bill. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jim Hawley: hawley, co-founder of the mission data coalition, which is about 40 energy management companies, half of which are based in california. very pleased to be in strong support of sb 356.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rick Brown: Rick Brown, President, TerraVerde Renewable Partners, we're one of those companies that works with schools on Prop 39. We have 55 school districts that we're working with. One of our biggest problems though in doing that work is getting accessibility to data. I actually have of one of my 15 employees, I have a full-time employee, a data acquisition specialist, who has to run around to chase down data because the systems is currently set up don't work, and the second really important reason is that over the long term we're going to need to measure the results of both Prop 39 and many other investments that schools make in energy, and to do the kind of accountability where we know how that money has been spent and how it's been used. We need to have a good access to data. So we support this bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julia Kingsley: julia eddie kingsley representing the u.s. green building council national, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Scotch Constantine: constantine representing the center for sustainable energy, we greatly appreciate and strongly support this bill to stimulate innovation and provide customers and local jurisdictions with the tools they need to address our climate change issues, thank you.
[]
Janice Lynn: Janice Lynn, the California Energy Storage Alliance, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dan Jacobson: environment california, dan julia jacobson, in support.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrea York: andrea dan york, clean power campaign in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gil Topete: Good morning, Mr. Chair and members. Gil Topete with the California Municipal Utilities Association. I'm a tweener today. We have an oppose unless amended position, but we definitely thank the author and the Committee in alleviating the language with the amendments that were adopted. I hope to come back with a neutral position letter. We just gotta see if they click through process that's now replacing section two, causes any physical imposition to my members. Thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Edith Eger: wow, wow, i've been crying all morning, which is a good sign actually, because what comes out our body doesn't make us ill, what stays in there does. when i came to america in 1949 i didn't have $6 to get off the boat. my late husband was put in jail by the communists in czechoslovakia because they confiscated a business and he didn't join. i'm a survivor and i don't say, why me, i say, what now. and so i packed up i knew i had to do something. i went to the jail. i took off my big diamond ring. i gave it to the warden. i put this in my little girl's diaper and we fled overnight. so when i came to america, i didn't speak a word of english and i'm part of the fine, i don't know what this was called, the silent something conspiracy. but if you ask me who i was, i would say who do you want me to be, because i worked in a factory doing piece work. i didn't have the verbal capacity. so i totally went underground for at least 20 years. i am very sorry that i have done that, but now i speak all the time. i am totally invested to the young, because i tell them that they are the future, they are the ambassadors. that they are the one's who is going to bring us towards each other rather than away from each other. that we're going to be for something, rather than against. that we are going to unite rather than separate and yes i'm hoping that this morning in a few minutes i can take you to that little girl who was going to be a ballerina, who was going to be prepared for the olympics, and for once celebrating passover. maybe this time in 1944, and when we were done my father got up and kissed all of us on the head and the following morning we were picked up. that was the last passover i had with my family. i was in kasha, hungary and when i met elie wiesel, we thought that we were on the same transport going through auschwitz on may 1944, i would like to really research that more. so let me take you for a few minutes to that journey, when i was in a kettle car my mom hugged me, this is what i tell every school. my mom hugged me and said, we don't know where we're going, we don't know what's going to happen, just remember no one can ever take away from you what you put here, in your own mind. that the best power is the brain power. and that's exactly what happened. everything was taken away from me except i had my brain and i had my sister. my sister clara was a child prodigy. she was the only jewish girl accepted at a music conservatorium budapest and then she was already in the camp. her christian professor put on some kind of a uniform, smuggled her out and he turned until the end of the war. the way i found out that she was alive when i came to prague in 1945, i saw pictures with the violin that she's giving a concert. she never forgave herself that she was not with us in the camp and i never forgave myself because at the end of the line, when dr. mandala asked me is this your sister or is this your mother, and i said it's my mother. so he pointed my mom to go to the left, my sister and i to the right. i followed my mom. he grabbed me, i never forget those eyes, and said, you're going to see your mother very soon, she's just going to take a shower prompted to me on their side which meant life. as we were in birkenau, i asked one of the prisoners when will i see my mother, she pointed at the chimney. fire was coming out of the chimney and said, your mother is burning there, you will talk about her in past tense. the question is how can you find within when nothing comes from without and that's what i want to bring you that power, that spirit. that they could torture me and they did, they could threw me in the oven every minute but i could never, ever murder my spirit. after two beautiful girls, god has blessed me with a son with special needs and i was told, when he was four years old, that i have to prepare my son to go to school for retarded, we used those words then and i asked, well do i get a second opinion? and they told me to go to johns hopkins and a beautiful doctor clark took my son a week later said your son is going to be what you make of him. and i, what are you doing now, i said i'm a student at the university where your son is going to do speech therapy, occupational therapy, you name it. how much do i owe you sir? and he charged me $10 in 1960 and that defiant power, that spirit, that'll never, ever give up. i took my son to the clinics, and i want to tell you that my son, john, who is disabled today, whose blind, who goes to washington, who fights for the disabled, and he said, you know, i come from good stock, my mother is a survivor. and i guess we are all good survivors, we jewish people, because our ancestors must have been strong. because, that's why we are here today. i wanted to dance this morning when the music came, i'm so happy. not to be a strong woman, but a woman of strength. so i want to bring you that strength. my son john graduated as a top 10 student from the university of texas. so i have no time to be a victim. yes, i was victimized. no, i will never forget what happened. i will never, people say to me, you overcame. no, i didn't overcome i can't demonstrate it, that's my cherished wound and what i have learned in auschwitz, that there were choices even then, when we were shaved completely. my sister magda was alive and well, who is 95 years old. he even played bridget on my ..., she's a bridge master. and she was the pretty one in my family, clara was the super star, and i was the runt. and my mom told me when i was a 10-years-old, i'm glad that you have brains because you have no looks. so i became a very erudite teenager. many people call me the anne frank who didn't die. i studied french. i studied german, french, so on, greek, latin, and it didn't hurt me any because i graduated with honors. and i never finished high school. so that's a definition of a hungarian that we come in last in the revolving door and we come out first, okay? and i'm here today as a mother of three, as as a grandmother of five, and a great-grandma of three grandsons, and the little one calls me gg baby. and let me tell you, that's the best revenge to hitler. so i'm here now, to also tell you that when i became magda's caregiver, we were all there in our nakedness. she asked me, how do i look? and i had a choice then, as you have a choice now, whether you are going to pay attention to what you lost, or find some ways, i always look for the gift, the light, that there is something there and i became ... and instead of telling her how she looked, i said to her, magda, you have beautiful eyes, and you know what? i didn't see your hair when you, didn't see your beautiful eyes when you had your hair all over the place. that night dr. mengele came to the barracks wanted to be entertained, my friends threw me in front of him, i ended up dancing for dr. mengele. i remember, i closed my eyes, i remember that the music was tchaikovsky, and i was dancing the romeo and juliet at a budapest opera house. i disassociated, he gave me a piece of bread. i shared it with the girls. i was on the top. one had one foot, one had one foot. cooperation was the name of the game as today, not competition, not domination, because all we had was each other then, and we had was each other now. we never knew what's going to happen, because when we stood in line 4:00 in the morning, they told us we can stay behind if i am ill. that they're going to take us to the hospital, there was no hospital, there was only the gas chamber. we held on to each other. when we took a shower, we never knew whether gas is going to come or water is going to come out and in december i stood in line to get my tattoo. i asked how come they're not giving it to me. i was told because i'm going to the gas chamber and they don't have the ink to waste on me. i saw them, they was in one pile, i was in the other pile. i began to do some cartwheels, so we can be together. i was out of auschwitz december, 1944. i became a slave laborer, we went through villages as the americans came from one end, and the russians from the other, we were evacuated and then one time, we were in a german village, they put us on the top in a community hall and told us, if you leave the premises, we're going to be shot right away. but magda told me if i don't get some food, she's going to die. i went outside. i saw some carrots in the next garden. i jumped, i stole the carrots, and i met the guard with the gun. i began to actually pray for him when i heard the clicking so he won't kill me. and there was that look on his eye like a father who's going to teach me a lesson. he turned the gun around and push me inside. the following morning he came, he wanted to know who dare to break the rules. i crawled to him i told him it was me, he gave me a piece of bread and he said, you must have been hungry to do what you did. i found the diamond, you know even then i wish i could see that man today. things got worst after that, i found myself in mautousin, we were going to be in the crematoriums soon, and then they changed their minds and i survived what is called today the death march. and i began to slow down, i did revisit that place, i did revisit auschwitz as well. there's no time for me now to tell you about it. but i began to slow down, and i talked to god that i don't think i can move anymore and that the girls, that i shared the bread with in auschwitz, they formed a human chair, and they carried me so i wouldn't die. isn't that amazing, that the worst can bring out the best in us? and yes, in gunskirchen, austria, we were going to be blown up, and on may 4th, 1945, the saints came marching in, and the 71st infantry and this guy, i looked up, i saw the big lips. i saw eyes, the tears, and i saw m&ms. wish i could meet this man today, the one who saw my hand touching. so you see, every moment to me is so precious. everything is so appreciated. i want to tell you that nothing could give me more joy than being here with you and let you know that a couple of years ago i was asked as dr. edith eva eger to go to fort carson, colorado to lecture to 4,000 military people about the psychology of post traumatic stress disorder and i arrived in fort carson, colorado and is the home of the 71st infantry. so see you never give up. there is hope in hopelessness. and i can see to it that, when i will be on my deathbed, i'm going to be so satisfied, because i go to every school, i show up everywhere, and i let them know that they are the future. they are the ambassadors, and i yes, want to be sure that we are going to hopefully empower each other with our differences rather than kicking each other into submission because that would be beginning of end of the democracy that i came here for. when thomas jefferson said all men are created equal, he didn't say all men are created the same. there'll never be another you, there'll never be an edith jonah eger. and when i went back to auschwitz, i asked my sister to come, and she told me i'm an idiot. not only that, i'm a masochist. but i had to go back to the lion's den, i had to declare my innocence. i had to assign ... to the perpetrator and then begin to forgive myself that i survived. so today i'm going to really hope that as my birthday is coming up and it's going to be 90. i'm going to do everything in my power that we can empower each other with our differences. that we can hold hand in hand and create a human family so we can finally survive on this planet, thank you.
[{'start': 1764, 'end': 1775, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2381, 'end': 2386, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2892, 'end': 2899, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4041, 'end': 4046, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4463, 'end': 4467, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4933, 'end': 4937, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5327, 'end': 5332, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5472, 'end': 5477, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5678, 'end': 5692, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6172, 'end': 6178, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6233, 'end': 6238, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6588, 'end': 6593, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6757, 'end': 6768, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6880, 'end': 6887, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6949, 'end': 6960, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 8313, 'end': 8318, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 10094, 'end': 10108, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 10804, 'end': 10820, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 10946, 'end': 10965, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Richard Bruckner: Thank you, Mr Chairman, Committee Members. My name is Richard Bruckner. I'm the Director of regional planning for the County of Los Angeles. To give some context, the County of Los Angeles is 2,000, the unincorporated area is 2,000 square miles and contains a million people. So, it is a very dense area. This bill, I look upon as a cleanup as we stated just now. The cities can take advantage of those streamline sequel process unincorporated areas cannot. And what that leads to is, a disproportionate amount of housing being built in disadvantage communities, because those advantage communities can challenge the project and sue and the easiest path is to the disadvantage communities. We have a policy and a need to build affordable housing throughout our communities in both the disadvantaged communities and the advantaged communities. So we think this is a one of several tools in our toolbox. As Assemblymember Ridley-Thomas just stated, the county has put its money where its mouth is. The voters have approved measure HHH in the city and H in the county. And the county is also committed to funding up to $100 million a year for affordable housing out of its own comforts to meet its needs. This sequel streamlining bill will see that those happen in an efficient manner. So with that, I'll close and answer questions.
[{'start': 54, 'end': 70, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 920, 'end': 933, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kyle Jones: good evening, chair, members of the committee. kyle of sierra club california, and also on behalf of clcv, in opposition. we just, we start by disagreeing with the premise that sequel is the reason that there is an affordable housing crisis. we know that there's about 14 exemptions between the statute and categorical exemptions that already do cover infill projects. we think that with this, the analysis points out that 1,000 people per square mile is rather low. noting that, the town of angels camp is about that size which is up in the sierra foothills. we're concerned that, this expansion of the definition of urbanization as applied all over the state could present problems, particularly in rural areas, with sprawl and the impacts there. we also have this committee move forward ab 1404, which addressed modifying the categorical exemption for infill development to urbanized counties. and that one, we still have concerns have with that. but we are more supportive of that approach, because that exemption does require that, services be able to be provided, that there be no noise traffic, air, water, or cumulative impacts. and, usually with housing projects, the biggest concern are cumulative impact. so again, by lowering the density requirements, we are concerned that there will be more cumulative impacts and sprawl impacts associated with this bill, and we must oppose. thank you. anyone else in opposition?
[{'start': 47, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alex Jackson: Good evening Members of the Committee, Alex Jackson with the Natural Resources Defense Council. Pleased to speak in support of the bill today which addresses two of the most daunting challenges we face, climate change and air quality. And from a perspective that we should integrate and align our strategies to achieve both GHG criteria and toxic productions wherever possible. You will likely hear that reduction approaches for these multiple pollutants should not be conflated. That yes, we can and must do something about air quality but not here, not now. I would submit that these issues are intertwined. And the basic Proposition this bill asks is, whether California should continue to provide a production subsidy in the form of free allowances to industrial facilities that have not done their part to clean up. Particularly when those facilities as we know are disproportionately concentrated in disadvantaged communities. You also likely hear that California can't solve climate change on its own. And this approach will make our program less attractive as a model for others to emulate. Again, I would submit that for California to lead on climate, as any other issue it must lead by example. And that means a commitment to take care of our states most vulnerable. As the Court of Appeals in the cap and trade decision recently reaffirmed no entity has a vested right to pollute. Least of all those that are exacerbating air quality. We absolutely support extending the cap and trade program as a tool to hit our climate goals. But urge the Legislature to take an opportunity as this bill embraces to drive air quality benefits for those most in need, thank you.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bonnie Holmes-Gen: okay, and mr. chair and members, bonnie jonah holmes-gen with the american lung association in california. the american lung association strongly supports this bill. climate change is, of course, one of the most important public health issues of our time. and climate pollutions impacting vulnerable communities, and we're seeing pollution across the state. we recently released our state of the air report and los angeles, unfortunately, topped the list of the worst polluted areas, 17 out of the past 18 years of our report. unfortunately, dirty air is affecting us all and especially vulnerable individuals, those with asthma and lung disease, living near refineries and free ways, and this adds up to huge public health costs. so, the lung association and other groups have always worked hard to ensure that climate programs work together with and support our air quality efforts, both locally and regionally and statewide. but there's an important gap here and ab 378 fills that gap where we need more integration to ensure air quality benefits in impacted communities. so we strongly support extending the cap and trade program as a key part of meeting our climate targets. and we think it's critically important to establish new tools and protections to help communities that are living in close proximity to cap and trade facilities. so, i also want to mention that the public health institute center for climate action and health also supports this bill, and other health organizations urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Vanderwarker: Good evening, Amy Vanderwarker with the California Environmental Justice Alliance. We would like to extend our appreciation to the authors and particularly Chair Garcia, for their leadership in addressing environmental justice concerns related to carbon pricing. We're here today in a supportive amend position. Climate change is impacting all of California that hits low income communities and communities of color first and worst. Recent research has shown what environmental justice communities have always known. Pollution from large greenhouse gas emitting facilities are disproportionately located in, and impacting the health and quality of life of low income communities and communities of color in California. It's time for our state to take bold steps to tackle the urgent air quality and climate crisis impacting our most vulnerable communities. The recent amendments to AB 378 take important steps toward maximizing the multiple benefits that can be achieved to reduce pollution at the source. The greenhouse gas reduction cap would directly improve air quality and health of communities most overburdened. And the inclusion of no trade zones is a critical step towards redressing historic legacies of pollution in environmental justice communities. To ensure the bill meet the critical crisis in our communities, we were urge this Committee and the author and the legislators to take even more bold steps and ensure that these no trade zones are mandatory. And the facilities specific declining caps, mentioned in the bill are actually implemented by the Air Resource Board, and to strengthen the proposed clean air standard. These are strategies to really address the many environmental justice concerns that all the witnesses here, and the authors, have highlighted in the Bill. It's time to clearly link local air pollution reductions with California's global climate leadership. We, AB 378, takes important steps in this direction, and the authors have shown their commitment to working with the environmental justice community, and we look forward to continuing to work with them. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 162, 'end': 168, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jason Barbose: jason bonnie barbose, union of concern scientist, strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alejandra Duran: alejandra jason duran with the weiderman group on behalf of nextgen california in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jena Price: Jena Price with the California League of Conservation Voters, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathryn Phillips: kathryn, sierra club california, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Fenstermaker: Mark Fenstermaker, on behalf of the Environmental Defense Fund. We are in a support in concept position. Very appreciative to the author of the process she's employed. The attention of the GHGs and air quality. But do have some concern about the specific facility caps on GHGs we hope to work out with her. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eloy Garcia: Mr Chairman and members, Eloy Garcia for the Western States Petroleum Association, representing the state's major refiners in the Bay Area and Southern California. The state's major oil producers, some of the largest obligated sources under the cap and trade program And while we do support an extension of the cap and trade program as the most efficient tool for realizing our very aggressive climate goals, we can not support this bill because it is inherently and internally inconsistent. This bill proposes to extend cap and trade while completely undermining cap and trade. We just heard some of the proponents support cap and trade, at the same time, support not trade zones. That's not a cap and trade program. This program fundamentally misunderstands the operation of the Clean Air Act of the ambient air quality standards for the hotspots program. Those are all policies that are in place now, all the most rigorous climate change policies that all the proponent has just spoke have advocated for and have successfully passed in this Legislature over the last 30 years, those policies have worked to reduce emissions of Knox, socks, PM2.5. I would invite you all to look at the data. Not just statements but look at the data. Every air district maintains air quality almanacs. The air board maintains an air quality almanac. All of those programs are either working or they're not. Those programs and the almanacs all show consistent reductions, significant reductions, so either those programs are working or they're not. There is absolutely no and I didn't hear one proponent say exactly how it is that cap and trade program, somehow is undermining those laws. There is nothing in the cap and trade program that allows any obligated party, any facility to somehow violate that whole regime of air quality law in California. What is it about cap and trade that allows somebody to violate their permit, to exceed their permit levels? Permit levels that have been derived through an extensive process with the air district. Need you to wrap it up. Okay, let me just say this is inherently inconsistent. I would just invite you to take a look at page four, line five allows for reductions in the aggregate. That is how the climate change program works. Reductions in the aggregate. The very next line calls for facility specific reductions. That's inconsistent within one line in the same statute. How do we reconcile that? That we have a cap and trade program, and then we have facility caps. Finally, Mr Chairman, I'll just note real quickly, this bill calls for facility caps. Each of you have facilities in your districts that are obligated parties under the cap and trade program. This bill arbitrarily sets a cap. The Committee analysis notes the same thing. We look forward to working with the chair, and will continue to work. I think we understand where she's trying to get, and we appreciate that. And, we will continue to work with you on that.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Shaw: Thank you, Mr. Chair, Members of the Committee. Michael Shaw, California Manufacturers and Technology Association. I will keep comments brief because some of it has already been said. We appreciate the author's effort here to deal with this issue, and to extend the cap-and-trade program into the future. I think one important distinction that needs to be made, is the program that would be operated under AB 378, as currently drafted, is not, as Mr. Garcia pointed out, a cap-and-trade program. That we believe would maintain the cost-effective nature of the program that was proposed under AB 32. And the Governor has called for extending, with a two-thirds vote, in the most recent budget proposal. And there's a few different ways that that happens. There's the facility caps that are proposed, under the aggregate cap in the economy. There's the no trade zones that are also proposed in AB 378. But additionally, and perhaps most egregiously, in our view, is tying the allowance allocation of GHG emissions allowances to meeting new criteria pollutant standards that are not the standards that the companies. When they began the facilities and operate the facilities, had planned on, nor is it what they were permitted for locally as well. So tying into these new air pollution standards, we think further undermines the cap-and-trade program that's been proposed. We think that there's much that can be done under a properly operated cap-and-trade program, to address issues in the air quality sectors as well. And that's something this Legislature hopefully going to deal with this year in terms of the allocation of revenue, from those funds, again, under the guides of a two-thirds vote on exceeding the program. So we think there's much that can be done there, but the purpose of- I need you to wrap it up, please. The purpose of those emissions allowances was to protect against leakage of those emissions to other jurisdictions that do not control their greenhouse gas emissions such as California is doing. So, to link this to the air pollution standards is essentially to say that we're going to impose these new standards. And now, if you don't meet these new stricter standards, then we'll put in place when you begin and operate your facility. You're now going to lose the allowances, that puts further pressure on the cost of operation. Those facilities, the jobs, the economic activity, the tax revenue that flows from that are more likely to go elsewhere as well. And considering California's overall impact on global climate change, not having control over these emissions is as damaging to the climate as having California continue to have, or more damaging state, than having California continue to have control over these emissions here in the state. In addition, the air quality impacts that maybe associated with those facilities are no more controlled in other jurisdictions, either. So, we are now shifting both problems elsewhere, and not doing as much as we could to contribute to the global climate change solution. So, because of that, we have to oppose AB 378, but we do appreciate the authors, effortsto address this issue. T And we do it for to continue working with her on that
[{'start': 48, 'end': 60, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 451, 'end': 457, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Heidi Barsuglia: Heidi Barsuglia, on behalf of Sempra Energy Utilities including San Diego Gas and Electric and Southern California Gas Company. We do very much support a post 2020 extension of cap and trade and believe that it provides very strong foundation for GHG rejections moving forward. We also appreciate the need to address not only air quality and air toxic concerns of impacted communities. We think the intent of this bill is a step in the right direction, as it tries to address all of those issues. We look forward to working with the author and the stakeholders, to ensure a stable market and real, quantifiable emission reductions.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Valerie Turella: hi, turella of pacific gas and electric company. and we have not taken a position on the bill and i would associate myself with my colleague's comments and just say that we do support a well designed cap and trade program that if we had more time, i would love to talk to you more about.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Darren Bowden: Darren Bowden, Southern California Edison. I'm going to align myself with those comments as well. I guess the two only other things that I would say is-
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julee Malinowski-Ball: julee alejandra malinowski-ball on behalf of the california biomass energy alliance, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julia Kingsley: Julia Kingsley representing California Compost Coalition and the Community Alliance of Family Farmers, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Mason: Paul Mason with Pacific Forest Trust, really appreciate the forest refocus.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Feinstein: I'm Doctor Laura Feinstein. I am a senior research associate with the Pacific Institute. We're a global water think tank. I was one of the lead authors of the SB for scientific assessment of well stimulation that was commissioned by the California Natural Resources Agency. At the time of the report, I was affiliated with California Council on Science and Technology. And they've asked me to speak about the report today. CCST does not endorse bills. I'm here to describe the findings and recommendations made in the report that are relevant to today's discussion. In SB 4 report, we were tasked with evaluating the impact to the environment and human health by well stimulation, specifically the practice of hydraulic fracturing or as people commonly refer to it, fracking. We found that we could not accurately assess the hazard of chemical releases to the environment because of the number of data gaps. One of these gaps was that we did not know the identity of all chemicals used in the oil and gas production process. As you may know, SB 4 requires disclosure for chemicals that are used specifically for well stimulation. SB 1281 requires reporting of the treatment and disposal of waste water from oil and gas production wells. However neither one of these bills requires that producers disclose the identity and quantity of chemicals used for purposes other than well stimulation. To remedy this data gap we made recommendation 4.2, which was that the state require reporting of all significant chemical use including acids for oil and gas development. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Keith Nakatoni: good afternoon, keith julee nakatoni, clean water action. i'd like to provide two basic perspectives of why ab 1328 should be approved. the first perspective is this is common sense and needed legislation. the bill requires, as ms. feinstein just said, the disclosure of chemicals used in oil and gas production. it's not public advocates saying this, as you heard it's the ccst that says all chemicals that are being used must be known to appropriately manage oil and gas operations. we don't know that now. this information will help to protect ground water from oil and waste water disposal. it will help to determine if using waste water to irrigate crops and recharge aquifers is safe. it can help to protect communities especially disadvantaged communities living close to oil and gas fields. the second perspective is that there have been mischaracterization of this bill. for example, you may hear that this bill is duplicative, that this information already exists and that there are already laws and regulations requiring the information. that is not correct. chemical disclosure is only required for fracking, and fracking is a small percentage of oil and gas production in california. for the vast majority of oil and gas production there is no requirement to disclose chemicals, so there's a huge data gap. there's a huge data gap, because current lost in regulations are limited. this bill result in the new and important data which can help to more effectively manage oil and gas. it can help to protect the environment and communities, especially disadvantaged communities. we ask for your aye vote, thank you.,
[{'start': 16, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 232, 'end': 241, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Victoria Rome: Good evening, Victoria Rome with the Natural Resources Defense Council in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: Kyle Jones of Sierra Club California, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jesse Marquez: Jesse Marquez, Coalition for a Safe Environment, representing 15 EJ groups also in support. And I live where there are over 100 operating oil wells, and 100 new ones planned in the next five years.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian White: good evening madam chair, members. brian keith white here on behalf of western states petroleum association. we must respectfully oppose ab 1328 for a variety of reasons and we really take issue with the narrative that has been presented on this bill. we don't oppose the fact that there needs to be chemical disclosure, there is a existing laws to do that. what we do take issue with, is the extensive amount of prescriptive requirement that this bill will require that go way above and beyond what an existing already requires at very little benefit, i might add as well. as the committee announces or points out existing law already includes a requirement for full chemical disclosure, it lists a number of different laws that have been enacted over the years, including federal epa guidance on underground injection control. state water board authority over sb 1281, [unknown] authority over sb 4. there's numerous laws on the books to deal with this issue. we think the authors intent of the bill is, as she explained to us, to get at the research. there's no problem with the research. we can research this forever. the problem with the way the bill reads and i'll point out that there's existing language in the bill that tries to get at alleged data gaps. it says that the bill required a state water board to evaluate and revise as necessary current minimum water quality standards that must be met when issuing permits for surface discharge of oil filed produced water. and also require those standards to address the potential presence of chemical constituents injected or added to the well related to bio products. this is very superfluous language that we think could lead to eventually a de facto ban, which would be likely the next bill that is introduced in the legislature. on using produced water, for things such as irrigation, or present litigation road blocks, that we think would stop oil production. the state water board has already reviewed this. there is no reported adverse impacts from the use of produced water as a result of low concentration of chemicals that have been used in the production process. it's important to remember that operators are now in compliance with the most stringent requirements to regulate oil production and are operating under an entirely new state regime since sb 4 and sb 1281, have been enacted. ab 1328, duplicates and complicates this new existing regime that was created with long withstanding negotiations including those that were presented by the sponsors of the bill. who weren't on those bills and are now coming back to the table and looking for more data that we think is really a set up to eventual ban for produced water. so for those reasons, we are opposed to the bill. thank you.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Louinda Lacey: Please, opposition. Louinda Lacey with the California Chamber of Commerce in opposition.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Shaw: thank you madam chair. i'm michael brian shaw, california manufacturers technology association. i think the author said it just clearly as anyone could. this is about providing good information to help the legislative committee of climate change policies understand, what is going on with this program, how it's being implemented and the impact that it's having. also looking at what other states and countries and jurisdictions are doing on this issue as well to understand what we may gain from others in this area. we certainly, as california maintain a strong leadership role in the area of reducing greenhouse gas emissions and affecting hopefully for the positive global climate change. however, there are others out there who are also doing other things that we may gain some experience from as well. so having that information, having that data, having that report from the air resources board simply gives some more tools for this committee to assess what could be done to improve on what we already have in place. and i think that's the point of this bill and something that we can certainly take away from this discussion as being a move forward for the better. regardless any individuals, particular position on the issue or the pecular policies gives us a dataset to move forward from it. and i think especially in the environment that we're debating in today, having a common set of fact and understanding is important for moving the discussion. thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eloy Garcia: madam chair and members. eloy michael garcia for the western states petroleum association also in support of the bill. and like my colleague, mr. shaw agree that good information, good consistent reliable information to you as policymakers is going to be absolutely necessary as you move forward and make additional determinations along the way of implementing sb 32 in achieving the 2030 targets. and i'll just make a quick note that information related to the impact on transportation fields from the cap and trade program, for the low carbon fuel standard program is available now. the problem is it's available in a multitude of different areas. department of finance estimates information onto website, the california energy commission has some information, the lao has some of this information. it's all over the place. and i think it would be to your benefit to have a consistent set of datasets, consistent methodology, consistent information, and available to you in a consistent way so that you can use it as you develop policy going forward. the bill does that and we think it'll be a necessary tool for you going forward. for that reason, we support the bill. thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 146, 'end': 150, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tom Scott: tom, national federation of independent business california. means strongly support the assemblyman. i mean, in all of these bills, we ask about what the cost, what the impact is on working families, small businesses? this seems like a reasonable, pragmatic approach so we strongly encourage your support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: kyle of sierra club california in opposition. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chuck Helget: Madam Chair and Members of the Committee, Chuck Helget with Republic Services and also not with Waste Management. Republic Services owns and operates solid waste facilities across California, including composting operations. In recent years, the Legislature has passed recycling mandates including AB 341, a 75% recycling goal, AB 1826, which amended the commercial organics recycling and most recently SB 1383, setting a state goal of 75% methane reduction by 2025. Republic Service supported these bills with the caveat that each, in turn, would require a massive investment in recycling infrastructure. In our estimate, to achieve these goals in five short years, the state will need to add additional organics infrastructure that would include 120 composting facilities, 12 to 15 anaerobic digestion facilities at a cost at around $3 billion. This estimate does not include the substantial additional cost to collect, process, and deliver organic specifically to these facilities. In our view, this infrastructure will not be built without substantial policy and financial support from state and local government and from the private sector. The current funding mechanisms for Solid Waste Infrastructure Development includes Include residential and commercial garbage rates, the landfill tip fee that funds CalRecycle. Neither funding mechanism is capable of raising the estimated $3 billion needed to fund this massive solid waste infrastructure expansion. AB 1288 provides the much needed opportunity to effectively explore all funding options so that we can reach these environmental goals with a minimum impact on rate payers. We urge your support.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cara Martinson: martinson on behalf of the california state association of counties in support. i'll be very brief. as we work to divert more organic material from our landfills, we need to develop the necessary infrastructure to deal with this portion of the waste stream and we are committed to working with the author, the administration, and other stakeholders to develop this sustainable funding source that will be necessary to fund this type of infrastructure. we urge your aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Justin Malan: justin eloy malan for the compost coalition. a rare occasion, i actually support what i've just heard. urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: good evening, kyle justin jones of sierra club california opposed to this measure today. we don't think that the ceqa exemption is needed. we feel that it's covered in the existing law. many repairs and maintenance for projects that don't expand that their existing use are already exempt. and we just note that the original exempttion was only used once in 10 years. and so we just think that this is needed and urge a no vote today.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nika Lapis: Nika Lapis with Californians Against Waste. We're in support. I won't repeat what was said. But the OPC adopted the set of policies in 2007, which is nearly 10 years ago now, and we have not seen any kind of report as far as what has come of the policies. They're pretty far ranging, everything from enforcing litter regulations to phasing out single use products such as the bags and polystyrene takeout food containers. So the bill asks the OPC to report back on update on the status of the items they've identified, and it also asks them to report back on the material that is collected during beach clean-ups, which is information that's already provided to them on a regular basis. Again, it's not actually even a study. It's a report back on the information they already have. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Arturo Rodondo: thank you, chair and members, rodondo on behalf of azul, a marine conservation group focused on developing latino leadership in its space, in strong support.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: jones of sierra club california, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julia Kingsley: Julia Kingsley representing Seventh Generation Advisers and the Plastic Pollution Coalition, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Emmel: melissa on behalf of the california product stewardship council, here in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Shestak: Madam Chair and Members of the Committee, Tim Shestak with the American Chemistry Council. We're sort of in-between position. We provide the letter to Mr. Bloom, of late last week, a support if amended we believe that if you're going to look at the issue of developing policies to reduce marine debris, you ought to take a comprehensive look at, look at all different material types. I think that would bring this effort in line with the trash policy that was adopted by the state water resource and control board requiring a overall reduction in trash, not just a plastic-specific trash focus. In fact, the OPC later this week, is looking at funding an effort to develop a scientific model to measure compliance with the Water Resources Control Board trash policy. So we just think an overall look, by focusing just on plastics, you result in, I think, a distorted look at what possibly would be in the marine debris stream, and if we could take an amendment on that, we would be very supportive of this overall effort. So thank you for your attention.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 155, 'end': 160, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cory Bullis: good afternoon, cory kyle bullis on behalf of valley clean air now, we'd just like to respectfully ask for your aye vote on this measure.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Lynch: Danielle Lynch on behalf of Fresno Economic Opportunities Commission in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Reed Addis: reed on behalf of central coast energy services in support.
[]
Mark Fenstermaker: Mark Fenstermaker, for Environmental Defense Fund in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Mason: good afternoon, madam chair, members of the committee. mason with pacific forest trust. we very much appreciate assemblyman woods taking on this issue and really trying to raise the profile of the opportunities to invest our natural working lands for greenhouse gas mitigation where it is, indeed, one of the most cost effective ways to meet some of those goals, but also for the adaptation purposes. that we are not going to avoid hotter, dryer, more extreme weather and what we're doing now is going to very much make the difference in how prepared the state is to make it through these more difficult conditions in the future. and our investments in natural and working lands or, as i think of it, nature, is really where we can make the biggest difference. they've been out there working away for years, slowly bending the curve, slowing the rate of global warming that we would otherwise be seeing but that sort of benign neglect that we've been utilizing in many areas is starting to catch up with us and we're seeing, i'm particularly familiar with our forest areas really succumbing to many of those stresses. we heard a lot about this at the february oversight hearing on forest and forest health and, while we're seeing these really dramatic forest collapse, if you will, in the south sierra, we're only shades away from that in many parts of the state, where long term lack of attention is really putting some of our very fundamental infrastructure at risk. most of our water comes from these forested watersheds throughout northern california and the sierra and if we're not taking more active, thoughtful steps to make these watersheds resilient to climate change, we're really taking a risk with the security of our future water supply and that's why we've been supportive of this effort to try and draw more attention to the need for more than 2% of our funds going here and to try and implement that through a more focused program at the wildlife conservation board with input from different agencies. so, respectfully ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 55, 'end': 60, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 124, 'end': 129, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Reed Addis: chair and members, reed on behalf of the carbon cycle institute in strong support today. as we've reviewed the science that's out there, we've been really impressed with not only this carbon sequestration on top of the land, but what goes on below the land in the soils. this work can be done in rangelands, it can be done in wetlands and meadows. it can also be done in urban areas if applied appropriately and that means you can get not only water benefits but you can also get recreational benefits in some of our communities. so, we're really intrigued by this concept. i'll just cut it short and say that we also appreciate the effort to have the funding go through the wildlife conservation board. we've worked with a number of state agencies, coast conservancy, cdfa, department of conservation, on these types of projects. we think the wildlife conservation board is well suited to not only work with nonprofits and grants, but also work with other state agencies to provide these funds to do these projects throughout the state. thank you very much.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Passero: Michelle Passero of The Nature Conservancy in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alfredo Arredondo: Alfredo Arredondo on behalf of the Sonoma County Ag Preservation and Open Space District as well as the Big Sur Land Trust in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Juan Altamirano: Juan Altamirano with Audubon California in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Lynch: lynch on behalf of the ocean conservancy in support.
[]
Julia Kingsley: Julia Kingsley representing the California Climate and Agriculture Network in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Fenstermaker: madam chair, mark cory fenstermaker on behalf of the california association of resource conservation districts, the california tahoe alliance, and the mountains recreation and conservation authority in support.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Justin Malan: justin mark malan for the community alliance of family farmers and the california compost coalition in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bruce Magnani: Madam Chair and members, Bruce Magnani on behalf of the Sierra Business Council and the East Bay Regional Park District in support, thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Smith: madam chairwoman, mark on behalf of the grassland water district in support. i also have a support if amended, would now be the appropriate time?
[{'start': 18, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Smith: Okay, Mark Smith on behalf of California Trout, we do have a support if amended position on the bill. We would like to see one of the eligible projects defined as mountain meadows. They have been specifically identified as part of the GGRF funding by the Department of Fish and Wildlife over the past four years and we would like to see them included in the list of eligible projects in the bill, but we do thank the author for bringing the bill forward, thank you.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert Garcia: Thank you very much and good afternoon. My name's Robert Garcia, I'm the mayor of Long Beach and I want to start by thanking Assemblymember O'Donnell for supporting and sponsoring this measure, and of course to Chair Garcia and the Committee for their consideration. Long Beach is a city of about half a million people. We're a leader in recycling and efforts to reduce environmental impacts to the community or city, does prioritize waste reduction recycling and composting over landfilling. We've been a leading municipal recycling and support and developing a zero waste policy for the city. I'm here today to advocate for critical piece over our waste management system. It's currently at risk. Long Beach's Waste Energy Facility, also known as SERRF, is a critical component of a comprehensive waste management plan. Over 80 local cities use SERRF, the facility currently in Long Beach. And these cities include Los Angeles, Torrance, Lakewood, Bellflower, Norwalk, Cerritos, Linwood, and many other cities. And I want to be very also clear about an important component of this. Our SERRF facility enables Long Beach and many of these cities to divert almost half a million tons of waste from landfills to waste energy facility and generate electricity. There's also a public safety component. It's important to remember that the vital, safety role that SERRF plays in our region. There are only actually two of these facilities in the state that do this. In Southern California, SERRF being the only one. In 2016 state and local law enforcement agencies brought in 87 tons of confiscated narcotics, and drugs for disposal. US Customs and Drug take back organizations brought an additional 164 tons. Since SERRF began our partnership with State Department of Justice, we've destroyed 12.5 million pounds of confiscated narcotics. In total, 120 cities, 10 sheriff agencies, 13 CHP offices and the Department of Justice used SERRF to safely dispose of the contraband. In Southern California, there is no other area to actually do the disposal and it would have to go out of state to do the work. Also, from a state wide policy on waste disposal, it's important to remember that energy produced at landfills is already considered renewable. We'd love to have your support. Long Beach has 100% of its waste conversion here at the SERRF facility as well do a majority of these cities. Forcing Long Beach and other cities to truck more waste impact roads, causing more truck traffic on the roads. And also more pollution on trucks. Finally, in order to prevent half a million tons of waste existing per year from going to landfills and continuing to provide a safe way to dispose of the confiscated narcotics, I will respectfully ask for your aye vote on AB 655.
[{'start': 50, 'end': 63, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 140, 'end': 149, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 217, 'end': 223, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kevin Norton: good afternoon, my name is norton. on behalf of ibew local 11 representing 13,000 local construction workers and civil service workers in the county of los angeles, we stand here in support of ab655 by assemblymember o'donnell. we think it's important to qualify three existing ways to energy facilities as eligible to participate in the california renewable portfolio standard. the serrf facility located in the port of long beach is an important part of the solid waste infrastructure in long beach that helps reduce the amount of waste it's landfilled and long hauled to landfills. so without these. i feels like if these facilities close, where's that stuff going to go? it's going to go on the freeway, it's going to go 70 miles up to freeway and dirty truck to the valley or out to the riverside county or where were else. there's guns and ammunition that gets disposed of in only two locations in california. where's that stuff going to go? so we need to think about this before we vote, when we're taking in consideration this bills. it's very important for the workers that work there. we have a couple of hundred workers between the facilities that earn very good wages, a lot of union jobs, a lot of people in middle class jobs. and we think it's critical, in california, to have these kind of jobs protected. we need to keep the facilities open. and additionally, since 1988, serrf destroyed 11.2 million pounds of confiscated narcotics and drug paraphernalia for over 121 cities, counties, state, federal, and law enforcement agencies. this is an, i repeat, 11.2 million pounds of narcotics and confiscated drug paraphernalia. so where are we going to put all that stuff is we close this facilities? where are the jobs going to come from? we need to think about that before we make our move in this decision today, it's important. and the workers that i represent at the facility are counting on your prudent decision today just so they can pay their mortgage. a lot of them had been at these facilities for 20 and 30 years. why? because the facilities work. they're excellent facilities and we think they could certainly be improved, but it's critical that we keep them open. thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 217, 'end': 226, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ellie Booth: thank you madam chairman and members of the committee. my name is ellie justin booth and i'm with covanta. covanta is the largest owner and operator of waste energy facilities in the world. if you look at the us there's about 80 of these facilities in the us. in europe there's under 430 of these facilities in europe. and if you look at countries like northern european countries with higher recycling rates, you'll see a predominance of these facilities. and that they're generating energy from the municipal solid waste instead of putting it in the ground. waste to energy is well recognized by the international scientific community and the scientific community in the us as a greenhouse gas reduction technology. they're recognized by ngos and the other european union, davos the inner governmental panel on climate change, power cycle, the center for american progress, third way and other researchers. critics of waste energy express concern that waste energy in the rps will quote, unquote, compete with recycling. but if you look at the data around the world and both in california, both stanis and long beach have some of the higher recycling rates in the state. additionally, what communities that don't have waste facilities have and have landfills. it's really landfills that competes with recycling, not waste to energy. we are a highly regulated industry, we have very strict emissions standards. we have health risk assessments that continue to be conducted by some of the new regulations in california by capcoa, the arb. those are ongoing, looking at all the health impacts of these facilities. and if you look at these facilities' impact on their air district, you'll see there below a half of percent on total air impact. so these facilities are not what they used to be. they are a very different facilities now that highly control mega amounts of pollution control equipment that's in there. and our biggest challengers in the business is landfilling. is landfilling is renewable in the state, landfilling is cheap, landfilling is incentivized. while california moves towards the more progressive movement with its short lived climate pollutant, at the same point, we still continue to landfill 30 million tons of waste. and i ask for your support for this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 66, 'end': 84, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 740, 'end': 744, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sharon Green: madam chair, members of the committee, i'm sharon. i'm here today from the sanitation districts of los angeles county and the commerce refuse-to-energy authority in strong support. thank you.
[{'start': 43, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Devin Osiri: osiri la county federation of labor. on behalf of the 800,000 members we represent la here for asking for an aye vote.
[]
Melissa Emmel: Thank you. Melissa Emmel on behalf of SWANA here in support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rex Pritchard: Rex Pritchard, President of Long Beach Firefighters Associations in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jesse Marquez: Jesse Marquez, Coalition for a Safe Environment.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jesse Marquez: Hello. Okay now it's on. Jesse Marquez, Coalition for a Safe Environment, speaking on behalf of the 15 EJ organizations throughout California that are concerned with this issue. And we're here to oppose it. I live in Wilmington, the surf facility is approximately one mile south and so we're actually down wind has the ocean winds blow inwards towards it. When we look at this facility we have to also realize that there are certain things that have occurred in the pass when they defined, the forefathers in prior legislation, define what was a renewable energy source. They defined it. They did their homework. The sponsors did the homework. The supporters did our homework to make sure that there would be a clear path for the future. When you read the bill analysis it tries to compare it to landfill, well landfill is exactly different. It's not the same. It may have some of the same initial waste that went into it, but what a landfill has accomplished or what occurred over time is that methane gas is being generated every day. In the case of a waste-to-energy you burn the trash one time, and that's it. More trash has to come into it. What is also happening throughout the cities and counties is that waste is in fact being reduced. I as a resident attended the City of LA Zero Waste Initiative, I attended the LA County Zero Waste Initiative in order to give my input. And also thinking in terms of the future for my children that we need to have a strategy. We had to have good policies. And the only way to do that is to adopt good policies, which we have done. Waste-to-energy generates the least amount of energy, as compared to any other source. If we're going to invest money, then I don't want to invest it in a 30-year-old facility that is already outdated. The concern was discussed regarding the destruction and burning of narcotics. Well, there already are new technologies that can do exactly that.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amina Maxi: good evening or afternoon? good evening. my name is amina ellie maxi, i'm with an organization called gia. and we're a network of grassroots and environmental justice groups that advocate for zero waste and to waste pollution. so when it comes to the question of this bill we strongly ask you to oppose the bill. according to the epa's own database burning municipal waste is the most carbon intensive form of energy generation. waste incinerators emit more carbon dioxide per unit of energy than a coal fired power plant. they are not a renewable form of energy. in addition waste burning also comes with really harmful co-pollutants which further burden the communities that are already overburdened with pollution. such as lead, particulate matter, dioxin. the two incinerators which would qualify as renewable, if this was passed or both located in low income communities of color. a cause for concern for these communities as was noted in a letter of opposition from the east yard communities for environmental justice. in addition, organizations across the state are opposed to ab 655. in addition, today as we speak, there is a goldman environmental prize ceremony happening in san francisco where the head of east yard communities for environmental justice. who's winning for the work he did to protect his community from the exide battery. this award is a prestigious honor and he mentioned that he'll be speaking on stage about this particular bill and stating that he's an opposition to it. in addition to mark lopez, who is the winner, nine other past goldman environmental prize winners have also come out in opposition to the support of incineration in the state of california. and i have letters to support that as well. i'll also like to speak one final point around the impact that it has, and actually does impact recycling. the city of modesto, which is very close to one of the three incinerators here is without a curbside recycling program. and they are the only incinerator that currently is qualified as a form of renewable energy. and so again we really urge you to oppose. and tom helm and john motaka from grayson neighborhood council, both were here, and they have to leave unfortunately.
[{'start': 52, 'end': 68, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1135, 'end': 1142, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1517, 'end': 1527, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1564, 'end': 1571, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2103, 'end': 2111, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2116, 'end': 2127, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nika Lapis: Good afternoon, Nika Lapis with Californians Against Waste. To call burning fossil derived trash renewable is on its face contrary to the goal of RPS. This is a bail out for two facilities that are not economically viable. And those facilities are competing with real recycling and with real renewable energy, thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Justin Malan: Justin Malan for the California Compost Coalition and Stop Waste. In opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: Kyle Jones with Sierra Club California and also on behalf of CLCV, in opposition. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Barbose: Jason Barbose with the Union of Concerned Scientists, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Victoria Rome: Victoria Rome with NRDC, in opposition.
[]
Michelle Hasson: hello, thank you, members of the committee. i am michelle from the center for environmental justice and community action. we are a 38-year-old environmental justice organization in jurupa valley based in the inland empire. and we're very pleased to support and sponsor this bill because in our region, we have seen warehouses spring up like fleas on a dog. and it seems to be that there is no mitigations involved, and what really brings to our attention is the world logistic center. and if you are not aware of such a project, it is a project that's 700 football fields worth of a warehouse. and unfortunately, the regional impacts of this project are drastic, but because of the citizen's initiative, this project was able to, in one sense, use a democratic process to the developer's benefit and to create a project that didn't have to answer any of the protections that we have under california law. right now, yes, there are lawsuits in place, but they didn't have to go through ceqa. i mean, it's preposterous. 700 football fields in a region where our roads don't even support it, where our county transportation commission, where air quality management district, everybody has said the impacts of this project are too drastic, yet they have no one to answer too, and who will pay for this? it is the community in the inland empire who suffers from the highest levels of ozone in this state. and those truck sources going 700 football fields, that is 800 trucks a day. that has a regional impact, and only one city council got to decide on that project.
[{'start': 49, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tanya Gulesserian: Good afternoon, Madam Chair, Members of the Committee. My name is Tanya Gulesserian, I'm here on behalf of the State Building & Construction Trades Council of California and the California Labor Federation. You've hard from Assemblymember Medina, Ms. Hasson about what AB 890 does and why it's so vitally important. I will be speaking what the bill does not do in response to the opposition. First, AB 890 does not outline all initiatives. In fact, most initiatives will not be affected by AB 890 since they do not constitute projects under CEQA. What constitutes a project is well defined, its impacts must be reasonably foreseeable. It's concerned with direct physical changes in the environment or indirect physical changes, not social and economic impacts. Finally, there are numerous exemptions from environmentally beneficial projects. It is certainly not the intent of the legislation to capture all initiatives and we, to the extent that there are more initiatives captured, then we intended, we are working with the environmental groups to determine a way to prevent this. Second, AB 890 would not lead to pre-election litigation, the CEQA Notice of Determination cannot be filed until after the initiative is directly adopted, or the election results are certified. Third, other environmental laws are not enough to protect public health and the environment. CEQA fills in the gaps where other environmental laws do not regulate, and not all initiatives will trigger Endangered Species Act or clean air act. Fourth, AB 890 does not violate the constitution. The Legislature has the constitutional authority to limit the initiative process because it has declared that environmental protection and public health is a matter of state wide concern. Finally, we understand the concern about not having some initiatives go to the voters. While the Legislature has the authority to restrict initiatives for projects with significant public health and environmental impacts, we are open to amendments to ensure that all initiatives go to the voters once the environment or review has occurred.
[{'start': 66, 'end': 83, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 239, 'end': 245, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 251, 'end': 257, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jena Price: madam chair and members, jena amina price on behalf of the california league of conservation voters, in support.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: kyle jena jones with sierra club california, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Juan Altamirano: juan with audubon california, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Magavern: Bill Magavern with the Coalition for Clean Air, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Vandawalker: vandawalker, california environmental justice alliance, in support.
[]
Janice Osted: osted, california-nevada conference of operating engineers, in support.
[]
Chris Snyder: chris, operating engineers local 3, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jesse Marquez: jesse coalition for safe environment, representing 15 ej organizations in support.
[]
Thomas Helm: thomas kyle helm, valley improvement projects, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Norton: Kevin Norton, IBEW Local 11 in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cara Martinson: good afternoon madam chair, members of the committee. my name is cara thomas martinson. and i'm here today on behalf of the california state association of counties, regrettably in opposition. we do understand and applaud the author for the intent of the bill, increasing transparency and additional environmental review, but we do have a fundamental issue with the process outlined in ab 890. we do feel like this bill puts our local elections officials and planning departments in the middle of a constitutional issue. we believe that the procedures adopted by the legislature for local initiatives never contemplated excluding certain types of initiatives from appearing on the ballot. and we feel that the bill, as drafted, would essentially preclude any project that's subject to ceqa from appearing on the ballot. and finally, in addition, this imposes a significant state mandate on our departments and we respectfully urge your no vote. thank you.
[{'start': 65, 'end': 86, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Louinda Lacey: Thank you Madam Chair. Louinda Lacey from the California Chamber of Commerce. Also respectfully in opposition. I won't reiterate the constitutional concerns already raised. We would like to say that the bill is a CEQA expansion. And simultaneously presents, as the analysis indicates, a significant departure from our existing local initiative procedures developed by this Legislature. In practice, almost all initiatives are considered controversial. Which means that virtually all initiatives will be subject to prolonged and expensive CEQA litigation. The bill would also delay all initiatives to the point of possibly rendering them futile. And placing an undue burden on the people's right to initiative. And for those reasons, we oppose.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary-Ann Warmerdam: madam chair, members. my name is warmerdam the rural county representatives of california. we respectfully oppose as well.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tom Scott: Tom Scott, the National Federation of Independent Business of California, opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Hernandez: Hi, my name is Jennifer Hernandez, I'm a board member of the California Forward Group, which is dedicated among other things to requiring a greater level of transparency and analysis of economic, environmental, and equity goals. So that it's very clear to all parties what it is that is being done and who is effected by it. I applaud and support this bill, and I hope you will as well. It introduces a very, very important legislative role in the more important policy details of what the Air Resources Board and other agencies are doing with climate. It could be that it required that climate policy and climate leadership does require higher expenditures on issues like housing, or transportation, or utility cost. That may be a consequence, but specialty agencies like the Air Resources Board don't have the authority over earned income tax credits. Or other financial levers that would allow the cost of this program to be more equitably born by lower and middle class families. We think it's very , very important that the impact of these programs on those families is well-understood. So that any ameliorating impacts that are within your authority as opposed to the Air Resources Board can be discussed, debated, and disclosed. We're very supportive of the workforce housing requirement here. The income inequality and poverty data in the state is shocking. And climate really provides an opportunity to turn that around, and we think this is a bill that will help inform, and guide that turn around. We think the green economy is here to stay, it can grow, and it can prosper for all of Californians. So we support the disclosure in oversight rule. We support the workforce training program. And importantly, we also support keeping as much of the revenue here as is possible, and sending less to other states and countries, thank you very much.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Constantino: Hi, good afternoon, John Constantino, on behalf of the Ad Hoc Offsets Group, 13 members, responsible for over 50 million tons of carbon reductions. These are reductions that are real, enforceable, verifiable, and permanent. And we applaud the author for her role in recognizing offsets in the cap and trade program. They do provide effective cost containment mechanism. Provide real environmental benefits, community benefits, economic, and job, and cost containment benefits. And briefly, the offset community is dedicated to mobilizing capital to improve GHG reductions. Their whole point is to make sure that their reductions are, can be verified against any standard, and in fact are verified at least three times before their used in California. So, with that as a backdrop, we would support to remain assets in the program, and are working with the author to make sure that it happens, thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Bogadora: Michael Bogadora on behalf of the Ag Energy Consumers Association. We work closely with the Dairy Digester Developers and others, who are developing offsets through methane reductions on California, there is, support the bills strongly in concept. Now, there's a long way to go on this bill and the Chairwoman's bill. But recognize we need to keep the program going to have benefits here in California, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Diana Vazquez: Yeah, good afternoon Chair and Committee Members, my name is Diana Vazquez. I'm here on behalf of the California Environmental Justice Alliance. And unfortunately, we're here in opposition of the bill. We have submitted a letter to the author addressing our concerns. Specifically, we appreciate the member's efforts in really trying to develop the workforce development piece, and we know we have recommended some suggestions for that. But we're here in opposition specifically because of the offset piece. We just don't feel that that's really what we want to actually see in this bill. We have issues and concerns, and we have addressed those concerns in our letter. And because of that, we are here in opposition of the bill.
[{'start': 61, 'end': 74, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Phoebe Seaton: Thank you, good afternoon Chair and members. Phoebe Seaton, Leadership Counsel for Justice and Accountability, we, too, unfortunately, can't support this bill. We align our comments with CEJA, we feel that offsets language will just continue to perpetuate some of the inequalities that we're seeing in the communities we serve.
[{'start': 45, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 187, 'end': 191, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brent Newell: Brent Newell of the Center on Race, Poverty and the Environment, we're also opposed to the bill for the reason stated.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pierson Stoecklein: Pierson Stoecklein, Client Legal Council for Atogen, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Erickson: Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I'm Chris Erickson, CEO of Climate Earth. My testimony focuses on one factor, that is the cost and complexity of environmental product declarations. You may be aware that EPDs as so called are environmental labels and now goes to a nutrition label and this bill would have suppliers produce EPDs on their products. EPDs don't make a recommendation they just state the environmental facts. We have developed a software tool that generates EPDs, essentially, instantly, and dramatically lowers the cost. How lower is the cost? It costs a concrete producer about $50 a month per plant for unlimited EPDs. That follows what we call a software setup fee that ranges between $9,500 and as high as $30,000 for a very large organization. We believe these costs are relatively nominal compared to a single state job. This software is in production across the country with major software producers and can be implemented for major concrete producer and can be implemented for all the materials in the bill rather quickly. So in summary we believe that those were objecting to the bill, because of the custom complexity of EPDs, have information and that's likely very out of date. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 46, 'end': 60, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Olson: Good afternoon Madam Chair and Committee Members. My name is Mark Olson, I'm the Vice-President and General Manager of Gerdau Steel. I manage the operation of Gerdau Steel mill in Rancho Cucamonga. Gerdau's Rancho Cucamonga Facility is the last mill in California that actually melt steel. We recycle steel sourced from the Los Angeles area, we melt it and make high quality seismic rebar that is used in large infrastructure and commercial projects throughout the state. Gerdau employees 1,100 people in California and we have an annual payroll of over $73 million. These are good middle class jobs that can actually support families. Our used of recycled steel in California's advanced energy and emission reduction requirements have made Gerdau's Rebar one of the greenest and cleanest steel products available. The addition of a new multi-million dollar environmental system that we are now building will make our Rancho Cucamonga mill one of the cleanest in the nation. So Gerdau supports AB 262 because it shows that California values efforts made by companies like mine to produce greener cleaner high quality products. It requires California State agencies to acknowledge the environmental and climate goals outlined by the Legislature and Governor, and develop a process to evaluate and precure product with better environmental profiles. If companies like mine are going to continue to invest significant amounts of money to improve the emissions profile of their production facilities, we would like to see the state place a value on procuring a greener, cleaner product. This effort will help California meet it's his greenhouse gas reduction goals and it will develop a market for greener products. Thank you for your time this afternoon and we respectfully ask for an aye vote.
[{'start': 61, 'end': 71, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathryn Phillips: Kathryn Phillips with Sierra Club, California and the interest of time. I'll just say that we support this bill and also speaking for voices for progress in organization of businesses, entrepreneurs, and philanthropists. And available for any questions.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Magavern: Bill Magavern with the Coalition for Clean Air in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Victoria Rome: victoria cara rome with natural resources defense council in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Barbose: Jason Barbose with Union of Concerned Scientist in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Artist: paul, president of local 864 inland empire in los angeles area in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bonnie Holmes-Gen: Good afternoon, Bonnie Holmes-Gen with the American Lung Association in California in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laurie Camerer: good afternoon madam chair and members, camerer, california coalition, or metals coalition. thank you, in support.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Fenstermaker: madam chair, mark for environmental defense fund in support.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Catherine Houston: catherine, united steelworkers district 12 and communication workers of america district 9 in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cathy Picelli: Cathy Picelli from 350 Bay Area in support. Also speaking for 350 San Diego, in support. And Fossil Fuels California, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Daniel Broad: Daniel Broad, Brief California, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jesse Marquez: Jesse Marquez, Coalition for Safe Environment also representing 15 other environmental justice organizations in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bret Barrow: Madam Chair and members, My name is Bret Barrow with the National Electrical Contractors Association. The California legislative council of plumbing, heating, and piping industry, United Contractors, the Wall and Ceiling Alliance in the Northern California Allied Trades. We're here in opposition today of the bill as it is in print. The main reason for that opposition was the bill would create a bid preference process. Were actually bids would be adjusted after the fact in way the environmental attributes. Now, we have been working with the authors office and the authors staff and we have seen amendments this morning that move away from a bit preference process to more of a bit specification. Where the departments would set a standard and then the bidders would have to comply over that standard. And we're still reviewing those amendments but we appreciate the work that the staff and the author have done on this bill and we look forward to continuing that work with him. Thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Adam Harper: Chair and members, Adam Harper with the California Construction Industrial Materials Association. We represent ready mix concrete industrial mineral producers and the construction aggregate producers in the state. We're opposed to the bill, unless amended to remove concrete. We appreciate the testimony on the ease of getting EPD's. However, we'd like to focus today on whether the state would be purchasing an environmental benefit when it comes to concrete. We would like to point out that what happens with the EPD to show a benefit in the production of concrete is the purchase of coal fly ash and it's substitution in the concrete process. There are already shortages of fly ash occurring in the market place, it's not an activity that needs to be in senevised, it is an activity that occurs regularly. In exchange already mixed concrete producers, of which there are several hundred in the state, are required to go through the EPD process and have these within the bidding process, and this is a complex process. That requires them to get into their manufacturing facility, and go through ,and quantify such emissions as they come from. So that's, and we kind of place this in our letter, so we're opposed unless amended. Thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Unger: i'd like to thank the committee for allowing me to speak in support of ab 36. and thank assembly member nazarian for introducing this bill. my name is jessica victoria unger and i'm with capstone turbine corporation. capstone turbine is the world leader in micro turbines and one of the few manufacturers of clean distributed energy in los angeles. our la facilities house headquarters, r&d, and manufacturing. much of our supply base is in california, and we are a frequent user of the port of los angeles. since capstone's inception, its core values have included producing advanced technology products with ultra low emissions. accordingly, our products are certified to the world's most stringent emission standards. distributed generation customers are looking for technologies like capstones to reduce their carbon foot print and improve sustainability. unfortunately california is one of the most difficult regions for customers to adopt these technologies. that is because of policies that favor one type of technology over another. ab 36 would remedy a disparity by enabling products that have the same fuel input and meet the same strict emission standards to compete on an equal playing field. furthermore, it would permit all california entities interested in on site generation to be environmental stewards. we respectfully request that you vote aye on ab 36.
[{'start': 104, 'end': 112, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 151, 'end': 173, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Shaw: Michael Shaw, California Manufacturers and Technology Association. And I will just respectfully request an aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jan Smutny-Jones: Thank you very much. Madam Chair, Jan Smutny-Jones with the Independent Energy Producers Association. We are here to support the bill as amended. As you may know, we represent pretty much one of everything, big happy dysfunctional family that includes biomass and geothermal as well as wind, solar, small hydro. A whole mix of resources including storage, so the intent of the bill is to keep the concept of portfolio in the renewable portfolio standard. We've had a standard of least cost, best fit for many years that's focused primarily on least cost rather than best fit. All these resources have different operating characteristics and bring with them different benefits and different challenges. Some of them have different incentives. As you're probably aware our wind guys get the production tax credit which is a good way in terms of having. It's a federal tax credit that helps them along and solar has investment tax credit again on a federal level, in addition to a solar property tax exemption here in California. So, these resources bring that into terms of their obviously their pricing mechanisms and that's very positive. The more foundational resources, the resources that have been here for a while with respect to biomass and geothermal don't really have access to those incentives, and that has an impact. So we basically believe that as the planning process in the integrated resource plan moves forward, taking into consideration some of the other attributes that these resources bring as very important. I will point out that some people suggest that we don't need base load resources somehow. But the reality is, is that by 2024, we will have lost all of our nuclear capacity. That's 4,400 megawatts of nuclear capacity, which is a base load resource, in addition to I think it's about 4,500 megawatts of coal resources that California was directly contracted for. So in addition to that there's a variety of other plans that operate that will also be the join office offline. So, we believe that there's probably plenty of room, and the need for some basal resources, and I certainly don't expect him to dwarf anything else that's going on in wind and solar. But it's important we believe to keep the, as I said earlier, these create good jobs, good taxes bases you're going to hear shortly, and it's designed to keep the portfolio and renewable performance standard. Thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Schneider: good afternoon. thank you for allowing me to address you. my name is chris jessica schneider. i'm with the operating engineers local three here in support of the bill. and i really want to kind of talk about jobs. and i think i bring a kind of unique perspective because we represent a lot of construction, work that goes on up the gaizers and, you know, it's green. it's such a wonderful resource that we need, but for their specialty, i was reading usa today ranked lake county the poorest county in, the entire state in 2015. and that was before the fires that have kind of burn through there. one of the unique things about local three is we represent kind of the construction side of the building trade. we have couple plas that could put hundreds of people to work, if this kind of. and this is going to help support that, but on our public sector side, if they're the operating engineers, we represent all of the lake county employees' associations up there. we represent the police, we represent most of the public safety. and the whole county was completely devastated two years ago by the fires. a third of the county burned to the ground. we had 2,000 houses that burned to the ground. the poverty up there is just very bad, and calpine and the geysers is the biggest tax payer up there. they're the biggest single employer up there, and the second biggest is the county. and these two are so entwined because if you don't have the taxpayers, we can't employ all those people up there. so from a person that represent, works in people and working families, and having been on the ground and seeing the devastation the fires caused. and having, we had with the billing trends we had over 250 operating engineers and laborers up there doing all the remediation, the hazmat. and i mean i would highly encourage if any of you if you have any questions about up there, go up there and do a tour. and you can still see the blackness up there. so please support this bill. do it for the working men and women of lake county and i thank you for your time.
[{'start': 69, 'end': 92, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Josh Pane: josh chris pane on behalf of the california refuse recycling council in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julee Malinowski-Ball: julee on behalf of the california biomass energy alliance in support.
[]
Kelly Boyd: Kelly Boyd on behalf of the California Low Carbon Fuel & Energy Coalition, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rhonda Mills: madam chairman, rhonda josh mills with the geothermal energy association, in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julia Kingsley: Julia Kingsley, representing the California Compost Coalition, Cirque Energy, and Alameda County Waste Management Authority, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cassandra Goth: goth with calpine. we own and operate the geysers in ms. aguiar-curry's district, and we thank you for your support.
[{'start': 57, 'end': 69, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Melissa Imbel: Melissa Imbel on behalf of SWANA and the current County Board of Supervisors in support. Additionally, the Sonoma County Board of Supervisors is supportive in concept. We're working with the author's office to ensure that community choice programs are not unintentionally disadvantaged.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Mills: karen rhonda mills for the california farm bureau federation in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barbara Lavay: Barbara Lavay on behalf of California Women for Agriculture and the Sacramento Valley Land Owner's Association in support. Kara Martinson on behalf of the California State Association of Counties in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 123, 'end': 137, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Stacey Heaton: stacey karen heaton, rural county representatives of california in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kirstin Kolpitcke: kirstin stacey kolpitcke with the california forestry association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Harmon: harmon on behalf of the county of imperial supporting concept, thanks.
[]
Alejandra Duran: Alejandra Duran with the Weideman Group on behalf of IHI Power in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 53, 'end': 62, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ryan Pruney: hi, thank you, members and chair. ryan kirstin pruney with southern california edison. we were opposed to the original measure. we were opposed to the proposed amendments coming from une. we want to thank, obviously, the committee and the author for trying to address some of our concerns that we outlined it in our opposition letter. we are still reviewing the amendment we think it moves in the right direction. and we look forward to following up with you as well as the author of this bill. to give you some of our thoughts and feedback. thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erin Nemull: Madam Chair and members, Erin Nemull representing the Large Scale Solar Association. We want to thank the Chair, and the author, and the respective staff for all of the hard work on this issue. We think it's definitely moving in the right direction. We have a process, unfortunately. We can't go to neutral yet. We may want to just deal with some of the details still with the author's office and staff, but definitely appreciate the work on this and hopefully moving toward neutral.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Cortez-Roth: melissa ryan cortez-roth on behalf of the california wind energy association opposed to the bill in print, currently reviewing the amendments. but again, right direction.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Israel Seles: Good afternoon Madam Chair, Israel Seles with San Diego Gas and Electric also reviewing the amendments. I think the basis of our opposition to the previous version and the current version of the bill was how could this prejudge the outcome of the IRP?
[{'start': 28, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Valerie Turella: turella vlahos, opposed to the bill in print, on behalf of pacific gas and electric. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kyle Jones: Kyle Jones with Sierra Club California, also opposed to the bill as written. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Passero: Okay, thank you. Michelle Passero with the Nature Conservancy, and we appreciate the opportunity to provide comment. We believe AB 1608, the vibrant landscapes bill, provides much needed legislative direction and support to ensure that our natural and working lands are forests, urban forest farms, range lands and wet lands are part of California's long term climate solutions. And for many of the reasons that Assemblymember Kalra already mentioned, so I won't reiterate those but we whole hardly endorse the rationale for this program. We would like also explain that this program as proposed actually builds on what the state has been doing. The state has made investments through the greenhouse gas reduction fund to land based activities and conservation activities, which is a great start. We also need to do more, and this program that's proposed is actually pretty unique and innovative as it's trying to build on what we've done. But also, looking at how we may be able to tackle climate change and help provide and enhance all the benefits that our natural resources provide, whether we're talking about urban forestry, ag lands, wetlands, forest lands. And it does this by looking at a regional scale, a jurisdictional scale across the county and that is different from what the state already does and it does this through the planning component of the program, but it is also then helps leverage how we actually do the accounting, how we actually do the implementation which is really critical. And the effective that is a broader scale impact, both in terms of how it might address climate change, but also how we can enhance all the other benefits across a landscape. It also helps to lower the the cost of implementation, when we get to implementation of these large scale plans often expenses can be significant for land owners and for communities. But when we design a system that looks at it as this larger scale we're able to reduce those costs. So, we respectfully urge your aye vote for this bill.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 427, 'end': 432, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alfredo Arredondo: Good afternoon Chair and Members of the Committee. Alfredo Arredondo on behalf of the Santa Clara Valley Open Space Authority. Just in the interest of time I'll cut down to just two examples that we have. The first is that Santa Clara counties climate action plan addresses facilities and employee actions like producing waste, purchasing more and efficient vehicles, lowering RGUs and county buildings, but it doesn't say anything about land use. And so AB 1608 would be a way to encourage counties to consider land use amendments with funding attached to help implement these activities. The second example, also in Santa Clara County, is within the Coyote Valley, which is a region within the county, that provides a really good example of the kinds of vibrant landscapes that we're talking about. Because the Coyote Valley itself provides the region with multiple benefits from ag land conservation and food production to wildlife and habitat connectivity between the Santa Cruz mountain range and the Diablo range. As well as ground water recharge and flood protection and better management. And then moving forward with 1608, providing for additional carbon benefits, as well. And so, this is one of the examples that we like to highlight as providing the multiple benefits and the intent behind the bill, so that by assisting local governments and other entities to develop these plans to integrate and account for natural and working lands as part of the overall strategies to reduce GHGs at the local level. And by allowing for funding for the implementation of these things, AB 1608 will help California more comprehensively, at the local level, address these issues and incentivize further action. We thank Assemblyman Kalra for his leadership on this issue. And we respectfully request an aye vote.
[{'start': 51, 'end': 68, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1730, 'end': 1735, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Doug Houston: yeah, real quick. doug. madam chair members doug melissa houston with the east bay regional park district urging to support please.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 22, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 44, 'end': 64, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Juan Altamirano: Juan Altamirano on behalf of Audobon California, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cara Martinson: Cara Martinson on behalf of California State Association of Counties in support
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Corey Bollis: Corey Bollis on behalf of the Carbon Cycle Institute, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Mason: Paul Mason with Pacific Forest Trust, also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Schremer: Sarah Schremer with the California Association of Resource Conservation Districts, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Johan Klehs: Johan Klehs representing LeadingAge California, an organization of over 600 senior not for profit housing owners, builders, and developers. We support this measure. It's similar to a proposal in Massachusetts in locating senior affordable housing near transit is a great way to help ease the housing crisis. We ask for an aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erin Niemela: madam chair and members, niemela representing bridge housing, also in support of the bill.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Magavern: thanks, madam chair and committee members. and thanks to assemblymember gomez, magavern with coalition for clean air, and speaking on behalf of the charge ahead california campaign, including dan jacobson, who i think is in another committee right now. we support the bill. we think the amendments make the bill better. and this is a way that we can expand access to electric vehicles for low income californians who previously had not had the opportunity to drive the cleanest vehicles. it's particularly important since we know that the worst air pollution in the state is in those low income communities of color, and we thank mr. gomez for championing that cause.
[{'start': 72, 'end': 77, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 79, 'end': 87, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 192, 'end': 204, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 634, 'end': 639, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bonnie Holmes-Gen: yes, chair garcia and members, bonnie doug holmes-gen with the american lung association of california. also wanted to add our support, our strong support for increasing zero emission vehicles, and increasing access for low income communities. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 17, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 31, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : thank bonnie you bonnie for bonnie this bonnie opportunity.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 12, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 17, 'end': 23, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 28, 'end': 34, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 40, 'end': 46, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jesse Marquez: my name is marquez. i'm executive director of the coalition for a safe environment. i live in wilmington. i've raised there all my life, and we are one of those low income, disadvantaged communities. and we appreciate going forward with this type of motion for this resolution and legislation that would benefit my community. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Brueggeman: thank you, mr. chairman and members of the committee. john jonah brueggeman with motor vehicle software corporation and we appreciate you bringing forward assembly bill 458. what this does is update the pfr program, the permanent fleet registration program's requirements to allow smaller businesses, smaller fleets to participate in the program. it's been a very successful way that fleets can actually reduce the amount of work required every year to register all their vehicles and it should be opened up to smaller businesses and a whole variety of new companies that can utilize the service. so with that, we respectfully request an aye vote.
[{'start': 54, 'end': 75, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matt Roman: matt john roman, california trucking association. expanding the permanent fleet registration program will allow independent fleets to enjoy the benefits and efficiencies of this established and successful program. we respectfully request an aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeremy Smith: Thank you Mr. Chair, Members of the Committee. Jeremy Smith here on behalf of the State Building and Construction Trades Council, again tonight on another high-speed rail bill. I would on one hand agree with Mr. Allen. There are thousands of shovel ready projects, water projects that need to be done. We need broader funding fix for that. We don't need to rob Peter to pay Paul. Especially a project that is providing jobs for workers. At the last Senate Transportation Committee oversight hearing on high-speed rail, a Fresno City Council member came and testified that just in Fresno, this project has led to a $500 million investment, indirect and direct funds. That's just one city and that's just the beginning. We are going to have according to the LAO, 50 million people in this state by 2050. High-speed rail needs to be part of the solutions about how to move those folks around. It can't just be planes, it can't just be cars and trucks to construct. The amount of highway miles needed, and airport runway capacity, would be double what we expect to spend on high-speed rail. They have a good business plan connecting the two valleys, Fresno and San Jose. And I'll just leave you with this, Senator Beall at that same hearing uncovered a very salient point corroborated by the High-Speed Rail Authority. If this bill were to pass today, and the voters were to overturn Prop 1A, the state would be on the hook for paying back the federal government all of the money the federal government has paid them for this project because there is no more matching funds. That's $4 or $5 billion hole right there. So we need to think about something like this and how much of an effect it would have on the general fund and the State of California's government. This is a project that's already creating jobs. It's going to create more jobs. I urge a no vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 212, 'end': 217, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 361, 'end': 366, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 374, 'end': 378, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1210, 'end': 1215, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brendan Tewing: Mr. Chairman and members, Brendan Tewing on behalf of the Sacramento Metropolitan Air Quality Management District and also the California Air Pollution Control Officers Association. We sincerely appreciate this bill. It's going to make a big difference in helping meet our air quality goals and we'll see significant reductions in particulate matters. So we really appreciate it and urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Pimentel: sure thing, mr. chair, members, pimentel with the san joaquin valley air pollution control district in support, urge your aye vote.
[]
Cory Bolsa: good evening, cory matt bolsa on behalf of calstart, in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tom Addison: Good evening. Tom Addison with the Bay Area Air Quality Management District in strong support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shane Gusman: mr. chairman, members of the committee, shane on behalf of the amalgamated transit union and the teamsters, both co-sponsors of the bill. the bill simply allows transit districts to utilize the expertise of its drivers when procuring buses for safety reasons. we urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Pimentel : Mr. Chair and members, Michael Pimentel with the California Transit Association. We don't yet have a support position on this bill, but we've been working diligently with the sponsors and the author's office and we're moving to a position of support. We expect to take that after one clarifying amendment that will happen after this Committee, so thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 39, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Joshua Golco: Good evening, Mr. Chair and members. Joshua Golco with the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees in support.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rich Desmond: thank you, mr. chair. my name is assistant chief rich. i'm the chp's legislative representative. i brought with me lieutenant reggie williams from our legislative office who was a prior commercial officer in the highway patrol and has first hand experience regarding commercial vehicle inspections and enforcement. we do not yet have an official position on the bill but we do have a series of concerns, and i'm happy to answer any technical questions you may have.
[{'start': 49, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 126, 'end': 141, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Kabateck: thank you. good evening, mr. chairman and committee members. my name is kabateck. i'm here today on behalf of the california delivery association, which represents the same day messenger courier and delivery industry in the golden state. cda is proud to support ab 1049 because it's simply good government and makes sense for california's small businesses but also for the motorist community in general. california small businesses and employees face many daily challenges, accommodating customers with quality service. complying with workplace requirements, and just keeping the trains, or in this case keeping the delivery trucks moving on time. for industries like ours, taking time off work means time away from serving the customer and the local community. this can be especially difficult for commercial and other motorist in rural areas, who may not have that same level of access compared to those in more urban parts of california. expanding this span of time for renewal from five years to eight years, seems reasonable and ensures both safe drivers and highways as well as the productive work force. moreover, ab 1049 makes good sense for good government, its customers, the tax paying motorists. although dmv has taken a number of positive steps in the direction of reform, the wait time in line is still an average of about 47, 48 minutes. this bill will help to reduce those long waits in lines. and ultimately state costs as the department will not have to send out as many renewal notices or process as much paper or create new physical licenses. the governor and legislature have made great strides in recent years to ensure california is treating its customers, the citizens of our state in a more efficient and user friendly manner. and all the while helping to cut unnecessary costs wherever possible. 19 other states have made this transition to an 8 year period. it's time for california which has been such a great leader on so many other levels to make this positive change. and for these reasons we ask for your support. thank you.
[{'start': 72, 'end': 80, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Devon Anderson: good evening mr. chair. devon cory anderson on behalf of donate life california. we're here today in opposition. dlc is the state authorized non profit organ and tissue donor registry for the state. our statutory relationship with the dmv allows our check offs to appear on the driver's license, id, and renewal forms. and the eight year renewal cycle proposed by this bill would inhibit the frequency by which we could present individuals the opportunity to sign up for the organ and tissue donor registry. 95% of our registrants come as a result of our partnership with the dmv. secondly, the driver's license form also includes an opportunity for folks to contribute $2. this funds our operating cost, as well as allows the dmv to cover some of their administrative cost as well. for these reasons, we don't see any reason to change the five year renewal cycle, and we respectfully request your no vote, thank you.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
June Lopez: thank you, there's a motion in the second. good afternoon mr. chair and members of the committee. my name's june and i'm with moulton niguel water district, and i thank you for this opportunity to spoke to speak in support of the long term efficiency framework. i'm not speaking in support or in opposition to any of the bills because i do realize that with all the discussion it might be helpful to have a little brief recap of how we got here and what the framework is trying to do. the last three years have been very challenging, but we did a lot and we learned a lot from from that. and some of the lessons that we learned, is that percentage reduction across the board is very challenging for water agencies. because it doesn't recognize the past and present investment in water efficiency programs. we also heard from our stakeholders, our customers, the public, who really didn't understand how the percentages apply to them in terms of individual action in achieving efficiency. so we talked about this and variety of other elements during the urban advisory group, which was a cross section of stakeholders, which i and several people in the room have had the privilege of being members of. and we knew that the framework wasn't perfect. i'm not speaking in strong support because it's perfect, but it's a movement in the right direction. and we need to move now before we lose the momentum, the valuable momentum that we created with the public in the last three years because they get it. they know that the emergency is lifted, but we're not out of the woods yet and there are more conditions ahead, historic dry conditions, so we need to prepare now. so, we don't want to lose that drumbeat that we've built over the last three years, and that's what this efficiency standard does. and it's not that new, our agencies, as well as several other agencies in the room, have applied this methodology in achieving efficiency and we've had great success. because it's not about using less, it's about wasting less. and the public understands that. and if you could identify in efficient use and you target those, and you recognize those who are efficient, then everyone benefits. and we also have gotten some very good data from this type of conjunctive level approach. the data that we could use not only to understand how water is being used, and how programs and projects to work, but also to balance. how much can you do with demand management strategy and how much infrastructure do you need to build to have supplies available when you need it? and having this data has allowed us in the last two years save $20 million because we're able to identify those opportunities where we didn't have to build expensive infrastructure. and we're able to leverage partnerships with agencies like facebook and netflix to really work together to have data drive decision for better and smart investment. and they're a lot of things that we need to work out and i'll look forward to being part of the dialog going forward and all the iteration talking to agencies across the state and learning and partnering together.
[{'start': 108, 'end': 112, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Genevieve Abaddon: Genevieve Abaddon on behalf of Series and Heal the Bay in supports.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Lynch: Danielle Lynch, on behalf of the Association of Professional Landscape Designers, California chapter in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: kyle, sierra california and on behalf of clean water action in support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bridget Larry: bridget jonah larry for the community water center in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Williams: Jennifer Williams, East Bay Med and also, appreciate the author replacing the trailer bill language into a policy bill and urge that bill to move forward so that all the approaches can be considered.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Beth Olhasso: Beth Olhasso on behalf of Inland Empire Utilities Agency, IUA and 13 other agencies in the west end of San Bernardino County do not have a formal position. But have sent a letter reaffirming our support to the governor's framework guidelines, and look forward to working with the author as the bill moves forward.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tracy Quinn: thank you mr. chair and members of the committee, my name's tracy bridget quinn with the natural resources defense council. the natural resources defence council supports the framework we remember of the uag. and we think that the solution that came up with, with respect to new water use standards is the right way to go. ab 1669, will give the authority to the state water board to set new water use standards. the state board has a well known public process and authority to set new regulations. the water board is a regulatory agency and is set up to vet, issue, inforce and modify regulations in a timely manner, in a transparent manner. the water board already has a statutory mandate to set the water law standards, which is one of the three elements that make up the new water use standard in this bill. data collection by the water board will directly support integrated water management. through informing work by other water board divisions, such as drinking water, water rights and water quality. and finally, the water board has adapted balancing competing interests. and in fact, have a statutory mandate to balance those interests and to protect public interest. one of the main differences from this and 968 is that we're putting forth one standard by which would apply to all water suppliers. as you recall from my testimony on 968, when 20 by 2020 or sbx 77 was developed. they had multiple methods the water suppliers could use to calculate a target. and that was intended to address the fairness and equity concerns of applying one percentage reduction target to all water suppliers. those fairness and equity concerns had to do with past investments in conservation, local climate and local land use. and the types of customers water suppliers were providing water to. this one approach setting an efficiency standard addresses all of those fairness and equity concerns. so there is no need for additional compliance methods. additionally it results in targets that are customized based on local conditions. and provides flexibility and local control in how the targets are met. i would also like to mention that cii indoor water use would be proposed to be addressed through best management practices. as is reflected in the framework report. and not volumetric water use targets, as is the residential indoor water use or outdoor irrigation. for those reasons, we ask you to vote aye today and nrdc strongly supports this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 60, 'end': 79, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Blass: danielle tracy blass with the california municipal utilities association, good afternoon chair, and members. we also oppose ab 1669, something i did want to bring up is the urban advisory group and the agricultural advisory group. both worked for many months on with the administration on developing the making conservation a way of life framework. and there are several elements in the trailer bills than don't exist in the framework, and i think that's where there is a lot of concern. one of those areas is the fact that in addition to this permanent authority to the state water resources control board. the authority to set these long term conservation standards would be the fact that they could set the standards for areas that include but are not limited to indoor, outdoor and cii. that is commercial industrial institutional and that's an area where in the framework everyone around the table thought that we should go toward the best management practices approach. so that is something then that we're concerned about. also giving the state water board this authority removes the legislature from the decision making process. and also the department of water resources as the lead agency. i know it mentions consulting with dwr. but not as the lead agency and dwr's had a successful track record with implementing the 20 by 2020 conservation targets. the lao mentioned that earlier, they were previously adopted by the legislature. and also ab 1669 fails to mention other pieces of the framework report. including the states proposal for stakeholder work groups. and the assistance from state agencies to help meet the new requirements. ab 1669 would append existing efforts, disincentivize future investments. and really erode the trust between the public and the water agencies that serve them. thank you for your time. we urge you to vote no on ab 1669. but we do appreciate the fact that these concepts are in policy bills. and we look forward to working with assemblymember friedman and assemblymember rubio on these concepts moving forward.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1990, 'end': 1998, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2018, 'end': 2023, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Syrus Devers: syrus with best, best & krieger the list of clients and on behalf of is identical to the previous bill. so rather than repeat them, let's just thank the author for bringing this to the policy committee, which was the right thing to do. thank you.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 31, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kyra Ross: Good afternoon, Kyra Ross on behalf of the City of Sacramento. I must respectfully oppose the bill.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sean Biggley: Sean Biggley City of Roseville we oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Adam Robin: Adam Robin Regional Water Authority in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pilar Onate-Quintana: Pilar Onate-Quintana for East Valley Water district. We don't have an official formal position at this point but we do see some concerns with elements of regulatory overreach and overkill. But God bless the Chair, the author, Ms. Rubio and others for the commitment to the policy process and discussions.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 230, 'end': 235, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John O'Malley: John O'Malley on behalf of Mesa Water District opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ross Branch: Ross Branch, Placer County Water Agency in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Audrey Durfor: Audrey Durfor on behalf of the California Building Industry Association in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Hilliker: paul danielle hilliker, san juan water district, opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bob Reed: bob on behalf of desert water agency, el dorado irrigation district, and roland water district in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tracy Quinn: mr. chair, members of the committee. my name is tracy paul quinn, i'm a policy analyst with the natural resources defense council, speaking in support of ab 1668. thank you for the opportunity to be here. california's recent drought was the most severe in modern history, and showed us that our previous drought planning efforts were not adequate for that drought or for the extreme weather we're likely to see in future droughts. the lack of consistency in current water shortage contingency plans made it difficult to understand what measures water suppliers were taking to meet water shortages, and how much water they intended to save with those measures. ab 1668 will require all water suppliers to prepare the same six levels of water shortage. this is the, i think primary difference between this bill and 1654. these shortage stages would represent the shortage or gap between the supplies available to a water supplier for the upcoming year or during a discrete emergency, and the projected demand for their service area. this could be determined during their annual water budget forecast which is an element of both this and 1654. stage one of the of these uniform consistent shortest stage one would be a 10% shortage. stage two is a 20% shortage up to stage five which would represent a 50% shortage. and finally, stage six would be a shortage of over 50%. well, the shortage stages would be the same for every water supplier. a water supplier could use any mix of measures, programs, projects to reduce water demand or augment supplies that reflected the different circumstances in each community. for instance, for stage one, a water supplier could ask residents to reduce outer irrigation to twice a week, or they could pump ground water from an aquifer where they have stored water for emergency situations, or any combination of those types of measures. the benefits of consistent stages are that they're easy to understand by the public, they allow water suppliers to work better together in times of emergency because they're working within similar structures. and they allow water suppliers to share resources such as communication and outreach materials, and collective experience in approving plans going forward. for these reasons, and i already see strongly supports ab 1668, and we ask for your aye vote today. thank you.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 64, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laurel Firestone: laurel with the community water center. again we work with many of the low income communities and communities of color that have been on the frontlines of the drought. and we've really seen the true human tragedy that has been occurring with communities without access to running water in their homes going on three years. the hundreds of millions of dollars that tax payers have had to spend, that our state has had to spend in emergency response and the growing affordability crisis that we are facing in urban areas, as well as we have to turn to more and more expensive water supplies. this bill would help us get ahead start to build resiliency and address, and prevent the kind of human tragedies that we've seen unfold in this latest drought. it's vital that we have drought preparedness plans and water supply contingency plans for both rural and urban communities. and this bill would allow us to do that. so thank you and urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Genevieve Abedon: abedon on behalf of ... and heal the bay, in support.
[]
Kyle Jones: Kyle Jones in Sierra Club California. And on behalf of Clean Water Action, in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Lynch: Danielle Lynch on behalf of the Association of Professional Landscape Designers, California Chapter, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Williams: Jennifer Williams, East Bay Med, still a tweener. want to thank the author very much for the approach of putting the proposed trailer bill language in the policy bill, and on all of these related bills, just really want to appreciate and thank the Legislature for maybe considering these and vetting them thoroughly and we would like to see the bill advance today.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Whitnie Wiley: Good afternoon Mr. Chair, members, Whitnie Wiley with The Association of California Water Agencies. The Association supports efforts to make water efficiency a way of life in California, and supports enhancements and drought planning that build upon the lessons that we Learned in this most recent drought. Unfortunately, however, the Association is opposed to AB 1668, and while Aqua agrees that urban water management and water shortage planning should be enhanced, we believe there is better way to obtain the needed enhancements in these areas. So AB 1668 expands urban water supplier reporting requirements without a commensurate enhancement at urban water management and drought planning. And we believe that drought planning can be enhanced while balancing the reporting burden on local water agencies. And I believe I just heard the Assembly Member mention that she'd be willing to work on the reporting requirements. AB 1668 would require agencies to undertake extensive planning to address six arbitrary levels of shortage at undefined stages that may have little connection to local hydrological patterns or the level of reliability inherent in local water supplies. The bill would require an urban water supplier to conduct an annual water budget for a CAS using hypothetical one, or more dry year periods instead of assessing current supplies and demands. And we would support an approach that takes annual reporting by urban water suppliers of whether their suppliers are sufficient to meet the demands over the this report period. 1668 also requires the Department of Water Resources to prepare an annual report to the State Water Board on water shortage response actions taken by water suppliers to allow the board to determine if noncompliance enforcement is necessary. And we think that it's unclear at best what would trigger a noncompliance enforcement, and that includes the authority under which that would be conducted. Again, Aqua agrees that California should enhance water shortage planning and learn from the lessons of this past route, which we have, and we're committed to working with the author and Assembly Member Rubio and others to enact the enhancements needed. Unfortunately, we're opposed to 1668, because of the heavier burdance on water suppliers at this time. We thank you and respectfully request your no vote.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2146, 'end': 2151, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Danielle Blacet: thank you, next. my name is danielle with the california municipal utilities association, cmua's members also support efforts to make water use efficiency a way of life and agree with enhancing the drought planning process. we respectfully oppose ab 1668 as amended on april 18th. california water suppliers provide a vital service in the communities and are directly accountable to the customers they serve. they see first hand the impacts of drought and climate change on their systems, and work in partnership with their customers to make operational changes and encourage permanent modifications that will increase long term water use efficiency in their communities. while the vast majority of urban water suppliers were well prepared for the latest drought, they recognize the importance of adaptation and learning lessons from every significant event affecting water supplies. in addition to the concerns raised by aqua, which we share, i wanted to highlight an additional area for your consideration. ab 1668 would change the law to require that water systems report the energy intensity of their water supplies and urban water management plans. we recognize the importance of the water energy nexus, as we represent energy utilities as well. but the intent of the existing statute is for the data submission to be voluntary and there's no stated purpose for the required collection of the data and it's actually not listed as a recommendation in the making conservation a way of life report. as i mentioned, we share aqua's concerns and we encourage this committee and the legislature to consider a path that both augments the current drought planning process and acknowledges the individuality in investments made by each community. we look forward to working with assembly member friedman and assembly member rubio on efforts moving forward.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 15, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 28, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1791, 'end': 1799, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1820, 'end': 1825, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sean Biggley: Sean Biggley, City of Roseville, we're in opposition to the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyra Ross: kyra tracy ross on behalf of the city of sacramento in opposition to the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Greg Morrison: Greg Morrison, Elsona Valley Municipal Water District in opposition to the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Syrus Devers: syrus kyra devers with best, best and krieger, my two clients are los virgenes and municipal water district of orange county, or mwdoc. and mwdoc has then reached out to orange county to also include water departments of buena parte, tustin, garden grove, and huntington beach, and the water districts of east orange, laguna beach, toronto, el toro, and yorba linda. however, we appreciate the invitation of the author to talk to us, so we are here opposed unless amended. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 38, 'end': 45, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Adam Robin: adam syrus robin, regional water authority, respectfully oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Hilliker: paul adam hilliker, san juan water district, opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John O'Malley: john paul o'malley on behalf of mesa water district, opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ben Chou: good afternoon chair gracia and members of the committee, my name is chou on the policy of the natural resources defence council. thank you for allowing me to testify today in support of this bill. california's most recent drought showed us that no one is immune from the impacts, urban and rural areas alike were affected by the drought. to preparing for future droughts requires a comprehensive approach that includes all of the ways that we use water, homes, businesses and farms taking steps to use water more efficiently. improving water efficiency is generally the most cost effective environmentally sound and the most immediate way to meet our water needs. this bill ensures that more agricultural water suppliers, which supply water to the many farms in california that in turn feed families across the world, are better prepared for inevitable next drought. the bill also supports the adoption of water saving practices that benefit producers and growers. enabling farmers to receive water delivery is nearly on demand, provides three key benefits. it eliminates water loss by leaking uncovered canals and ditches, it allows farmers to irrigate according to when their crops actually need water and it provide farmers the freedom to upgrade to more efficient drip irrigation systems. which have also been shown to improve crop yields. further, supporting on-farm practices like cover crops that build soil health will help farmers better prepare for future extreme weather. healthier soil benefits our farmers and the environment by holding more water, improving crop yields and reducing water pollution. the water challenges that we have faced these past few years underscore the need to pursue a proactive and comprehensive approach to ensure safe, secure and sustainable water supplies for the future. for those reasons we respectively ask for ab 1667.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 69, 'end': 73, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Firestone: my name is laura john firestone and i'm co-executive director with the community water center. we work with communities throughout the saline quay valley that lack access to safe, clean and affordable drinking water. our communities were on the frontlines of the drought, and many families continue to be without running water in their homes because of wells going dry and stress on over pumped aquifers. as a state in order to ensure the human right to water, we need to make sure that comprehensively everyone is playing a part in a making conservation a way of life. and using water efficiently and effectively, and ensuring that no community is left behind or without this basic human right. we are, our communities are part of the agricultural economy, part of the agricultural systems and whether were urban or ag we need to help make conservation a way of life. we respectfully ask for your aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: Kyle Jones, Soquel California and I'm behalf of Clean Water Actions, support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bob Reed: Good afternoon Mr. Chair and members. Bob Reed representing the Valley Ag Water Coalition, group of about 50 public farm water suppliers, mutual water companies and ditch companies located in the Saline Quay valley. I think it's important to establish the context for our comments this morning, with all due respect to the author, there was no outreach on this bill. It was a gut and amend, that came into print last Wednesday. Normally, we would have taken weeks to sit down with each of the Committee Members in order to discuss our concerns with the bill, but we're dealing with a bit of a compressed timeline here. We are not opposed to improving agricultural water management planning. And, in fact, we spent the entire weekend, Mr. Chairman, working on a comprehensive set of amendments to the bill that would bring it more into compatibility with the public review document that the five executive agencies issued last November. This bill is significantly inconsistent with recommendations in that public review draft. It's missing clear and concise provisions, for example, regarding the development of water budgets and management objectives. The bill provides undefined and therefore, unfettered enforcement authority to the State Water Board, even when farm water is being put to beneficial use and in full compliance with the terms and conditions of the water rights permit issues by the Water Board. This bill require an operational firm water delivery requirement that 24 hour requirement that was mentioned by prior the supporters. Such requirements provides no water conservation benefit and it likely would result in water wastage. It would cost hundreds of millions of dollars statewide for us to install telemetry, automated gate structures and interior water storage systems, in order to meet such a demand. Permit me, just for an illustration. If you're a farmer at the end of a 20-mile ditch system and you call for water to be delivered within 24 hoursY you can picture a train that's going down that canal, it's water. And the farmer maybe needs the engine and the coal car but not the other 30 cars behind it but you gotta water up that entire system. So when the grower stops taking that water that water just keeps going in these gravity fed systems. So it's not an appropriate broad based requirement to impose on Augwater suppliers. The bill also would impose urban type drought planning. That's inappropriate. We didn't suggest any amendments in that regard, because we're going to be engaging with both the Legislature and the administration in that. But frankly, when it comes to droughts and agricultural water production it's feast or famine. The Ag water supplier informs the farmers as what the supply is that year and it's up to the growers to determine how they're going to deal with that whether its fallowing or what have you? So, we need to engage on that as well. We are willing to work with the Legislator and the Governor to improve AG water management planning but we're going to impose this bill vehemently today. Without adoption of our set of amendments. Thank you.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gale Dalhant: hi, i'm gale laura dalhant with western growers association. our members grow the fresh produce that you find in your grocery stores today throughout california, arizona, and colorado. if you ate today, you can thank a farmer. the public policy institute report, the latest one said that on average state wide use in california. 50% of it goes to the environmental, 40% goes to agriculture, and 10% goes to urban. agriculture has spent $3 $1 billion, that's a capital b since 2003 on high efficiency irrigation technologies. we are under tremendous pressure financially from the increased fuel costs, labor costs, regulatory costs, which require monitoring and reporting and plan implementation. this measure we see as a significant cost to our water bills. this past week we have been working with the author's office and we really appreciate that. and we did develop a set of amendments over the weekend, and we would ask that they be adopted today to remove our opposition. thank you.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Trisha Garinger: mr chair and members trisha with the agricultural council of california in opposition.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Valerie Nero: Valerie Nero with the California Chamber of Commerce in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Bloss: danielle gale bloss with california municipal utilities association, we have several irrigation districts in our membership and we are in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dominic Demari: Mr Chairman, members,  Dominic Demari here on behalf of the Northern California Water Association, also opposed
[{'start': 22, 'end': 36, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jack Walker: mr chair and members, jack danielle walker on behalf of the california association of winegrape growers in pure irrigation district, current county water agency in the kings river interest in opposition.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: Good morning or noon, Kyle Jones the Sierra Club of California and on behalf of Clean Water Action today in strong support of AB 1000. Both of our organizations strongly supported SB 555 which required that urban water agencies start looking at water loss audits. To determine how many leaks are in the system and what can be done to reduce those lakes to save water. It's clearly one of the more inefficient uses of water is just let it leak within the existing systems. SB 555 also required that the board adopt rules requiring urban retail water suppliers to meet performance standards. We think that AB 1000, by codifying this action in the Governor's office will provide clarity and provide certification of these technologies through the CEC's public process. And allow to figure out what are the best technologies and management practices going forward. To really get to a better place on detecting and solving leaks in systems. And for those strong reasons, we're in support today, thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tracy Quinn: Good afternoon, chair Members of the Committee. My name is Tracy Quinn. I am speaking in support of the bill on behalf of the Natural Resources Defense Council. The requirement for the California Energy Commission to certify water loss technologies, was part of the long term water conservation framework. For that reason and the reasons that Mister Jones has provided Natural Resource Defense Council strongly supports this bill, and urges you to vote aye today. Thank you.
[{'start': 59, 'end': 70, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 350, 'end': 355, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Genevieve Abaddon: Genevieve Abaddon on behalf of Series in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Glenn Farrel: Good morning Mr. Chair and Members, Glenn Farrell San Diego County Water Authority. Even as we sit in this room this morning talking about the variety of bills related to making conservation a way of life. California's already had a long legacy in the area of water conservation. Many milestone water conservation measures have been signed into law over the last two and a half decades. Most of them have become second nature to us as we go about our day to day lives and our homes and businesses and farms, but they all demonstrate a strong and lasting water conservation ethic in our state. Beginning in 1991 with Senator Lucy Killea from San Diego authoring the first ultra low-flush toilet bill that ultimately became the water conservation standard in the world. To water efficient clothes washers and indoor plumbing fixtures, outdoor model water efficient landscaping. Water meters and submeters for conservation pricing signals, California has never shied away from being very aggressive on water conservation. Dr. Weber's measure, AB 1323, is intended to build upon that legacy of water conservation and water use efficiency. In 2004, the state was faced with a very similar situation, a variety of perspectives, multiple options relating to how to improve outdoor water use efficiency. Irrigation efficiencies a very highly complex issues, a variety of different perspectives and stakeholders. At the time a middle of the road compromise bill authored by then Assemblymember John Laird was introduced. That created a stakeholder workgroup with a process to develop a consensus base facilitated series of recommendations for addressing outdoor water efficient landscaping. And that report was ultimately submitted to the Legislature. Legislature had its oversight through the conventional legislative process and that process ultimately resulted in the successful model water efficient landscape ordinance that's in statute today. We think the time is ripe, the circumstances before the Legislature are ripe. And the issues and details relating to this policy area are exceedingly complex enough to give strong consideration to the common sense approach proposed by AB 1323. We strongly encourage you to take the time to allow a broad stakeholder group to collectively work through these issues, and we urge your aye vote on this measure.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 49, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 624, 'end': 635, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1023, 'end': 1028, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1485, 'end': 1495, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Moira Topp: Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Members, Moira Topp on behalf of the City of San Diego. We can't add anything more than our colleague from the Water Authority, strongly support the bill.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Whitnie Wiley: Good morning, again. Whitnie Wiley with the Association of California Water Agencies in support.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Moira Topp: Moira Topp on behalf of the City of San Diego in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Blacet: Danielle Blacet with the California Municipal Utilities Association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John O'Malley: john on behalf of mesa water district in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carolyn Jensen: jensen on behalf of western municipal water district in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Glenn Farrel: Good morning, Glenn Farrell, San Diego County Water Authority, in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Greg Morrison: good morning, greg jack morrison, elsinore valley municipal water district in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pilar Onate-Quintana: Pilar Onate-Quintana for East Valley Water District in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Emerson: Good morning, Mark Emerson on behalf of the Carmichael Water District in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kira Rosoff: Good morning, Kira Rosoff on behalf the cities of Sacramento and Santa Rosa in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jack Hawks: Jack Hawks on behalf of California Water Association in support. And CWA also wishes to commend the author on this bill and 968.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathy Cole: kathy greg cole with the metropolitan water district in support. and then we hope later in may, that our board will have policy direction. so we can engage on the plethora of bills before the legislature. i look forward to working with members on the committee, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Syrus Devers: syrus kathy devers from best, best and krieger, representing the municipal water district for orange county and los virgenes. and on behalf of buena park, tustin, garden grove, east orange county, el toro. yorba linda, south coast and laguna beach, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 39, 'end': 46, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ross Branch: ross syrus branch, placer county water agency, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Coach: Danielle Coach, Eastern Municipal Water District in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Beth Alaso: Beth Alaso on behalf of Cucamonga Valley Water District in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Hilliker: paul ross hilliker, san juan water district, supporting.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Allan Carlisle: allan paul carlisle, potter dam municipal water district in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jay Snyder: jay allan snyder on behalf of the orange county water district in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Williams: williams, east bay mud, same message, tweener, urge the bill. move forward to keep the conversation going on all these bills.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tracy Quinn: Mr. Chair, Members of the Committee, my name is Tracy Quinn with the Natural Resources Defense Council. Here to speak in opposition of this bill, we have two concerns. And they're related to the ways in which this bill differs from the framework report that the administration put out on April 7th. One, we believe that consistent water shortage stages for all water suppliers are an essential element of the more robust water shortage planning, that we need to prepare for future droughts. But perhaps most troubling, is that this bill would prohibit the state from requiring conservation during a state, local or other water shortage emergency. Beyond what a water supplier has elected to do in their water shortage contingency plan. While we are all hopeful that more robust drought planning and smart water use standards mean that we are better prepared for future droughts. And therefore significantly reduces the need for future mandatory conservation measures. The extremes of the last five years, from two of the hottest and driest on record, to the wettest year on record. Should show us that history is no longer a predictor of our future weather. And even the best plans may not be perfect. And even with the best planning, additional conservation efforts may be required during an emergency. Given the uncertainty of future water conditions, we can't tie the hands of the administration or other state agencies, that we have tasked with ensuring a safe and sufficient supply of water for all Californians. For this reason, we respectfully oppose this bill, and ask you to vote no today, thank you.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: Kyle Jones, La Cienega, California and also on behalf of Clean Water Action, opposed, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Genevieve Abedon: abedon on behalf of heal the bay in opposition.
[]
Paul Cook: Good morning, Mr Chair, I'm Paul Cook. I'm the General Manager of Irvine Ranch Water District. It's a pleasure to be here. AB 968 and its companion bill, AB 1654, which we'll hear about next. They combine to implement the vision of the Governor's framework for making water use efficiency a way of life in California. Both bills are products of a three month process by the water community to develop a comprehensive, practical, consensus based proposal. To ensure that urban water suppliers improve water use efficiency over the long term. While simultaneously being prepared to reduce demands through water conservation measures during times of drought or other shortages. AB 968 was developed with input from dozens of water agencies who are committed to water use efficiency and conservation. Water banking, water reuse and other innovative ways of managing water resources. The water community supports the Governor's goal that California become more efficient in its water use. And proactively developed AB 968 in response to the Governor's call for action. So first, AB 968 will establish, strengthen water efficiency targets, as mentioned by the LAO's office, for water suppliers for 2025. It'll do this by providing three options to suppliers for the 2025 targets. Each agency would be permitted to set up their own targets. Based on daily per capita water use, retail level water budget, or a hydrologic regional target. It's inclusion of these three methods, AB-968 allows a water supplier to select a target setting method that is locally appropriate. And takes into account it's level of sophistication. While building upon and strengthening the existing requirements of 20% by 2020. Additionally, the bill requires each urban water supplier to meet its 2025 target. While preserving discretion as to how suppliers achieve their targets. The bill also extensively details how a supplier's compliance with the target is determined. It also recognizes large investments that many local agencies have made in water recycling. And incentivizes to continued local development of water recycling programs. It does this by applying it an evapo-transporation factor of 1.0 to parcels irrigated with recycled water. When calculating water use efficiency with a budget-based method of water use. Consistent with the approach of existing law, that we mentioned earlier, SBX 77, recycled water is given consideration in the calculation of gross water use. The bill's provisions recognize that the application of recycled water in landscape irrigation is already extensively regulated. Thereby ensuring its efficient use and encouraging the expansion of water recycling throughout California. And finally, the bill does provide that it does not alter any existing water rights laws. It does not authorize or enhance the authority of the state board to alter any water rights beyond its existing powers. We think that's an important feature as well, John?
[{'start': 28, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2949, 'end': 2953, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Woodling: Thank you, Paul. Good morning, Mr Chair and members. I'm John Woodling, Executive Director of the Regional Water Authority. In that capacity, I represent 21 water suppliers, serving 2 million people in the greater Sacramento region. In addition to the robust framework for water efficiency target setting. AB 968 does two other important things. First, it establishes collaborative stakeholder processes. To continue the improvements in water efficiency beyond 2025, as set in the targets. The bill will require the Department of Water Resources to convene an Urban Stakeholder Committee to report to the Legislature and state agencies. With recommendations on new demand management measures. As well as recommendations for potential adjustments to the water efficiency targets for 2030 and beyond. The bill would also require a state agencies to convene a CCI, or Commercial Industrial Institutional water use task force. To recommend appropriate performance measure for CCI water use. To get water savings, but not negatively impact the economics of California's businesses. And then finally, AB 968 importantly will preserve the Legislature's authority and oversight over long term water setting. I think that's important with the potential great benefit of water efficiency. But also potential negative impacts to the economy and quality of life that the Legislature maintain this oversight. Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 15, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 57, 'end': 70, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John O'Malley: Mr Chairman and members, John O'Malley with California Advocates, representing Mesa Water District in strong support.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Syrus Devers: mr chair and members, syrus jay devers with best, best and krieger. representing the municipal water district of orange county and las virgenes water district. and also coalition letter which has the city water departments of buena park, tustin, garden grove. and the water districts of orange county, el toro, yorba linda, south coast, and laguna beach. all in support, thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 59, 'end': 66, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Moira Topp: moira syrus topp, on behalf of the city of san diego, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Genevieve Abedon: genevieve moira abedon, on behalf of alameda county waste management authority, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyra Ross: good morning, kyra on behalf of the cities of sacramento and santa rosa, in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Connor: chris genevieve connor, representing the coachella valley water district, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pilar Onate-Quintana: pilar chris onate-quintana for east valley water district, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Beth Olhasso: Beth Olhasso for Cucamonga Valley Water District, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sean Biggley: Sean Biggley, City of Roseville, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Emerson: mark pilar emerson with the carmichael water district, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jack Hawks: Jack Hawks, California Water Association, representing the water utilities regulated by the Public Utilities Commission, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anthony Gonsalves: Anthony Gonsalves on behalf of the City of Roseville and Fairfield, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jaime Minor: jaime mark minor on behalf of santa margarita water district, in support, thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Coach: danielle jaime coach with eastern municipal water district, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Greg Morrison: greg danielle morrison representing elsinore valley municipal water district, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ross Branch: Ross Branch with Placer County Water Agency, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Blass: blass with the california municipal utilities association, representing 40 water agencies throughout the state, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carolyn Jensen: carolyn on behalf of western municipal water district, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Allan Carlisle: Allan Carlisle with Potterdam Municipal Water District, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Ikerd: How can I follow that? Jason Ikerd, Edelstein Gilbert Robson and Smith, on behalf of the Orange County Water District, also in support, thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 36, 'end': 60, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 65, 'end': 70, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Paul Hilliker: Paul Hilliker with San Juan Water District, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Whitnie Wiley: good morning, wiley with the association of california water agencies, support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Williams: jennifer greg williams with east bay municipal utility district. we're a tweener, don't have an official position on the vote. we appreciate the author working on the issue. we know there's various approaches before you today that significant policy shifts. we encourage the legislature thoroughly vetting those. and would like to see the bill move forward today.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tracy Quinn: Mr. Chair, Members of the Committee, my name is Tracy Quinn with NRDC. The goal of a new water use standard is to maintain and build upon the incredible water reductions that we've seen over the last five years. This bill, which extends 20 by 2020, is essentially written to result in 25% savings by 2025. Our concern with that is that as was explained earlier in the presentation, in 2015, using the same base line used to calculate SPX 77 savings, our statewide savings were already 33%. So this bill and this approach wouldn't even hold the line at where we are now. Instead, it would allow significantly more water use by water suppliers throughout our state. Multiple compliance paths, as is recommended in this plan, were also included in 20 by 2020 to address the fairness and equity of asking every water supplier in this state to reduce water use by 20% regardless of their past investments in conservation, their local climate, and the type of customers that they were serving. The multiple methods of target setting had the ultimate impact of weakening the goal. If every water supplier met their 2020 target that they established in 2010, the statewide savings would have only been 16%, falling short of the 20% goal. Because this bill will set back the state's conservation achievement, we respectively oppose AB 968 and ask that you vote no today. Thank you.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: Kyle Jones Sierra Club California and also on behalf of Clean Water Action Today in opposition, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Genevieve Abedon: Genevieve Abedon on behalf of Heal the Bay in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kim Thorner: good morning, my name is kim jennifer thorner, i'm the general manager of olivenhain water, i'm also the chair of the north san diego reuse coalition, we are here in support of ab 869 on recycled water. recycled water is the ultimate form of conservation, it starts as potable water subject to all water use efficiency regulations. once it's salvaged as from waste water and turned into recycled water at great cost, it is all ready subject to the most restrictive regulations of any water source in the state. no other water supply in california is subject to the level of restrictions that mandate not only its efficient use, but also require annual inspections to verify that the water use is protective of public health, and that the water is used efficiently, such as note requirements for no over spray, no saturation of soils, and no leaks. recycled water is more expensive to build as a supply source and it's more expensive to administer annually because of these inspections. if recycled water is restricted, two very negative consequences will result, water agencies will not build and finance these higher cost recycled water projects that we ultimately will be restricted from using, restrictions will be a disincentive to future development of this supply. recycled water is salvaged waste water that is otherwise unusable, it is the ultimate form of conservation, and if it's not salvaged it goes out into the ocean and does not exist as a water source in california. every drop of recycled water replaces a drop of potable water, reducing energy demands associated transporting water from the delta and the colorado. excluding recycled water from reduction goals, by no means prohibits efficiency standards on potable water. our motivation to develop recycled water is not guided to allow wasteful use of potable water. recycled water is developed to increase local sustainable supply, and less independence on imported water. recycled water was not restricted under sb x7, it was not restricted under the drought emergency, and that promulgated its very development as a reliable supply. california cannot conserve its way out of the next drought, nor can we recycle our way out of the next drought. it is only through a combination of water use efficiency, water management, reuse, and new supply development combined, that we will address our future challenges. therefore, we request your support of ab 869.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Harris: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I just want to take a moment, Richard Harris on behalf of Padre Dam Municipal Water District. I want to thank the author, these are very complicated issues with a lot of moving parts and a lot of different ways that we're all looking at it. I just want to personally thank her for understanding the value of recycling, and allowing us with this bill to have this discussion, laser focused on this unique resource, so I really appreciate that. Just three points somewhat reiterating what the general manager said, but first off, it's been characterized as a loophole, what we're asking for, we're not asking for any sort of a loophole. The water starts as potable water, that water is subject to all the conservation regulations, then that water is salvaged, and then that product is again used, another conservation effort. So it's not a loophole in any means, what it is, is a recognition of the value of recycling, the fact that we can take a waste and make it be beneficial. And the second point, just have three points Mr. Chairman. The second point is, Title 22 as pointed out in your analysis, all ready regulates the efficient use of this water. No other water is regulated to that point. I think that's something that's lost. You can't over spray, you can't pawn, you have to monitor. Her agency has people whose job it is, is to make sure that happens, and if they don't, they're fined. They have cease and desist, their permits are at risk. So you want to talk about people that manage water efficiently, that's what the recycler's do. The third and final point is the financial one, which is, to me, the most pressing. Padre Dam Municipal Water District is about to embark on a $170 million potable reuse project, that will provide 30% of the drinking water for Eastern San Diego, County, this is a huge big, big deal. The people that have to vote on that, for that project to move forward, are people that are going to have to raise the rates of their rate payers by telling them you are going to have water that you can use in your water supply in times of drought, and in times of just daily living, because we need new water supply. And in fact, that's what we're supposed to do, is create new water supply to reduce reliance on the Delta, and to also meet the Governor's plan, the California Water Action Plan, which is develop new recycled water supplies. So that $170 million, if they can't use that water, those local boards of directors are not going to vote to proceed with that project and create that water supply. So we gotta make sure when we're just in this little lens of looking at the conservation, that we don't negatively impact the larger water supply questions, and that's just why I think it's so important that we were able to have this discussion. When we look at conservation as a way of life, let's make sure it doesn't get into the way of recycling as a way of life for millions of people. Mr. Chairman, thank you for your time.
[{'start': 55, 'end': 69, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Moira Topp: thank you mr. chairman and members, topp on behalf of the city of san diego. we are in support of this measure, we too are embarking upon a project, a $3.5 billion project that will serve 1.3 million californians. we also think that this is a balanced bill to ensure that the residents of san diego aren't going to have to pay twice for that same water, so we strongly support the bill and ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anthony Gonsalves: mr. chair, members of the committee, anthony representing the saint gabriel valley water association, we are also in strong support and want to thank the author for her work, thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bob Reed: good morning mr. chair, members, bob kim reed with reed government relations on behalf of desert water agency, and el dorado irrigation district, in support.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melanie Cuevas: Good morning, Melanie Cuevas on behalf of the Viejas Band of Kumeyaay Indians, located in San Diego, also in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Greg Morrison: good morning mr. chairman, members of the committee, morrison again, from elsinore valley municipal water district, in support, thank you.
[{'start': 53, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tracy Quinn: good morning, mr. chair, members of the committee. my name is tracy bob quinn, i'm with the natural resources defense council. nrdc definitely supports investments in recycled water. we see it as crucial element in a sustainable california water supply portfolio. but that doesn't mean that we should be able to use it wastefully. we'd like to see more wastewater being discharged to the ocean recycled. but i'd like to remind you that not all wastewater is discharged to the ocean. recycled water wasn't included in spx 77 because it was a standard based on reducing water demand. and the state wanted to recognize past investments in recycled water. the proposed standard is different. it moves us away from percentage reductions and towards the efficient use of water. it's not simply about using less water, it's about using the water we need more, or better, sorry. there's a huge appetite for investments in recycled water. we've heard some incredibly big projects that are in the works in san diego. according to the state board, 70% of recent state revolving fund loans were provided for recycled water projects. recently, in the prop 1, there was $725 million set aside for recycled water projects. under the proposed standards, recycled water is already incentivized. the water use target would be 20 to 55% higher in areas where recycled water is used for outdoor irrigation. including recycled water in the water use standard provides added certainty about future demand for recycled water. which can be incorporated into rates and ensuring fiscal stability. i'm happy to work with assemblymember rubio and her staff to find ways to provide additional certainty. recycled water projects can be expensive, and those capital costs are passed on to customers in the form of rate increases. we need to make sure that we maximize the value of these investments. we are also concerned that these type of exemptions opens a pandora's box for other types of supplies to be exempted. for these reasons, nrdc opposes this bill and would ask you to vote no today.
[{'start': 62, 'end': 77, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1609, 'end': 1614, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kyle Jones: good morning, jones with sierra club california, and also on behalf of clean water action today. we also must oppose the bill for many of the reasons tracy provided. we just think it's smarter for folks to get to a more efficient level of water use. and focus on conservation and efficiency, first. rather than just jumping straight to recycling. we think once that that overall water demand is lowered, you could then recycle more efficiently. so we must oppose the bill and ask for a no vote today, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 150, 'end': 155, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Genevieve Abedon: Genevieve Abedon, on behalf of Heal the Bay, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gabriella Enriques: gabriella, on behalf of the community water center, to express opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Lange: yeah, thank you very much. lange on behalf of the yuba county board of supervisors, very specifically, their da had a lot of trouble in court. there are not any kinds of criminal penalties for sticking a pump in a river and the yuba river is actually subject to an accord, which i think the vice chair would understand, there's a lot of environmental concerns related to taking any kind of water out of there that's not permitted or agreed to. and actually as a statistic that we thought you would be interested in hearing about, the california valley in san luis obispo county, the growers out there will pay $8500 for a truckload of water and so the penalties that the water board can assess are probably just built into the cost of doing business and that is why we need criminal penalties. and for all these reasons, the yuba county board of supervisors and their da  strongly encourage you to vote aye today. thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Staci Heaton: yes, heaton, rural county representatives of california, in strong support.
[]
Natasha Minsker: Natasha Minsker on behalf of the ACLU of California. Regretfully, we are opposed to the portion of the bill that would create a new criminal penalty for theft of water. We believe that the civil penalties are the appropriate remedy for this behavior and that adding criminal sanctions will not lead to the deterrence that is sought. In fact, research on criminal justice issues shows that increasing criminal penalties, adding new criminal penalties on top of civil penalties, does not increase the deterrent effect. To deter behavior such as this, the critical issue is increasing the enforcement of the prohibition against taking water in these situations and so we would urge you to amend the bill to remove the criminal penalties, focus on increasing the civil penalties and increasing the enforcement measures, which is really what's needed here. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Lang: Okay, I'll talk slow. Just kidding. Karen Lang on behalf of the San Joaquin County Board of Supervisors. Very thankful to the Assembly woman for taking this issue on again. The last time we were before a Committee on this topic we were in the middle of a gut wrenching drought and our hope was that we would get the legislation passed in time for the next year when we had a lot of water, which is very unfortunate that we're here when we do have a lot of water. But the county believes that with the legislation that the Assembly Member is proposing, it would authorize them to be able to store water for more than five years. Hopefully that will get us through the next drought they believe about a million acre feet of storage that they could immediately put to use in the county, and that will help hopefully sustain them through what might be another drought. And we've sort of, last time around, we got into a place where it was either a really big change in law or if it's just a little change because folks can already do it. San Joaquin County is telling this body that they need the legislation to be able to do this with assurance that they won't have to remove it within five years. It has huge benefits for salinity intrusion and other things of that nature. And for all of these reasons we ask for your aye vote today. And look forward to working with the author and stakeholders.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathy Cole: thank you, mr. chair, members of the committee. cole of the metropolitan water district of southern california. ms. eggman's bill in its current form could, as my colleague noted, harm legal uses of water downstream. impacting available water to communities, agriculture, and the environment during certain hydrologic conditions. so we've gotta have some due process and opportunity for those that may be harmed to weigh in. we have met with the author's staff to share our concerns, we were very engaged in her last session effort. so as a sign of good faith, we will not object today to moving the bill forward out of committee. but if we cannot find middle ground with the author on amendments that are critical to our interest in fairly short order, we are going to have to oppose the bill. thank you.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 116, 'end': 122, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Beth Alaso: Beth Alaso on behalf of Cucumonga Valley Water District, echo the comments of Ms. Cole.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 82, 'end': 86, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Chris Connor: chris tracy connor representing the coachella valley water district also in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Greg Morrison: Greg Morrison, Elsinore Center Valley Municipal Water District, also opposing and supporting Ms. Cole's comments.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 97, 'end': 101, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kristy Falame: Kristy Falame, here on behalf of the Three Valleys Municipal Water District, also in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jack Walko: Mr. Chair and members, Jack Walko on behalf of the Alameda County Zone 7 Water Agency in opposition.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Steven Choi: did you call me, choi?
[{'start': 17, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joseph Edmiston: Mr. Chairman and Members, Joseph Edmiston, Executive Director of the Santa Monica Mountains Conservancy, we support the concept of the bill. Obviously, we can't speak for the administration, but it's good to get everybody together and we have some experience with River Rangering. I'd like to introduce to you Fernando Gomez, the Chief Ranger of the Mountains Recreation Conservation Authority, our joint powers partner and if the sergeant can pass these out, we do have an active River Recreation Program in the Upper Los Angeles River. So, Fernando?
[{'start': 26, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 310, 'end': 324, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 542, 'end': 550, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Fernando Gomez: Good morning, my name is Fernando Gomez, Chief Ranger for the Mountains Recreation and Conversation Authority. We've been working on the river. We've been working with the multiple jurisdictions from both city, state, and federal. We have shown that the possibilities and the mission that has been brought before you, that we can accomplish this. Going around are photos from programs that we provide for both ADA groups, for vets, we bring them out to the river and let them see the possibilities that this river actually has. With this, as rangers, we have also included that all of our rangers go through the State Fire Marshal in order to be able to respond to all sorts of emergencies, from swift water rescues to just assisting people who are utilizing the river as a recreation within the recreation zone and out of it as well. So that's one of the photos you are seeing there as well.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Stanley: hi, my name is stanley, i'm the executive officer of the san gabriel and lower los angeles rivers and mountains conservancy. we are very grateful to be here today and we look forward to ab 1558 moving forward. the rmc was created to serve the needs of, truly, the urbanized area. we represent 68 cities and 20 unincorporated areas in southern california, including the san gabriel valley, the gateway cities and southeast la county, a portion of antelope valley, and unincorporated areas, so our territory is quite expansive. part of the mission of the rmc is to preserve the open space and habitat for low-impact recreation, educational uses, as well as restoration opportunities for wildlife and protection of our watershed. for the past year, the rmc has been collaborating with the county of los angeles, particularly the county's department of public works, the office of the speaker, supervisor solis, ridley-thomas and hahn's office, so we've got three supervisorial districts that we've been working with on a working group, 12 cities and various ngos to coordinate the implementation of the lower los angeles river working group, created by the legislation, put forth by speaker rendon and ab 530. the goal for the group is to develop development of a master plan for the lower portion of the la river that seeks to identify and prioritize revitalization efforts and encourage communities to engage with the river, making the river a welcoming place for all. during the year, long process of the working group meetings, several barriers of river enjoyment have been discussed. beside from basic awareness of the la river and educating the public about the hydraulic functions of the river, the issues of safety and access come up very often. it is probably one of the things that we discuss the most. this bill would serve towards creating an environment that enhances public safety, stewardship, educational programs, and job creation through partnership with the california conservation corps or the local conservation corps including la and long beach corps. the legislation rightly encourages collaboration between jurisdictions that govern various aspects of monitoring, oversight, public safety along the river. moreover, by giving this responsibility to the two local conservancies, the legislature recognizes the critical importance of conservancies to the future. restoration of the river is specifically for engaging the community and the stakeholders in this process. another issue that must be addressed is the complexity of the jurisdictions by a variety of public safety organizations. los angeles police department, l.a. county sheriff's department, 12 cities along the lower los angeles river, army corps, l.a. county public works, lots of different entities. if someone has an accident or needs medical attention while on the river, the logistics of getting to them can be somewhat challenging. just this weekend, a bike rider shared a story of how his friend had a bad bicycle accident on the rio hondo that required medical attention. even when they called 911, the police took an hour to get to them due to the lack of access points on the river, inadequate signage and the-
[{'start': 15, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 901, 'end': 906, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1188, 'end': 1194, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rico Mastrodonato: good morning, mr. chair and members. rico chris mastrodonato with the trust for public land in support.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 60, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tyler Blackney: I would, thank you. I'll keep my comments brief. Chair and members, my name is Tyler Blackney, I am with the Wine Institute and we are the proud sponsors of AB 1420. At its core AB 1420 is intended to conserve water and protect the environment by streamlining the small irrigation pond permitting process. We believe this will decrease the impact that agricultural water diversions will have on the water shed. This is very similar to a bill that we sponsored last AB 1704 by then Assemblymember Bill Dodd. That bill was held in the Senate Appropriations Committee. We are currently working with Department of Fish and Wildlife and the State Water Board to hopefully, reduce some of those costs. With that, we respectfully ask for your aye vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 79, 'end': 93, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 496, 'end': 505, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Genevieve Abaddon: Genevieve Abaddon on behalf of Community Alliance of Family Farmers in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matt Clifford: mr. chairman and members, matt rico clifford, trout unlimited, we support.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Reggie Collins: Reggie Collins from California Trout and we support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Reid Addis: reid matt addis with the ocean conservancy, in support. here in strong support today. ocean conservancy, though we look at the ocean side of the equation when it comes to climate change. we've been very interested in what ocean acidification means from climate change. what the impacts are to our coastal communities and also sea level rise. several years ago we worked with senator wieckowski on a statewide plan to make sure that the sate is looking at and preparing and adapting to climate change. and there's a safeguarding plan that the natural resources agency has put together and implemented and is currently updating. we think it makes sense that when you look at all the state facilities that are out there, that the state park system is one of those important facilities that should be preparing for and adapting to climate change, should be looking at the safeguarding plan and making sure it's implementing the safeguarding plan. and we think this measure, this bill today, rather, goes a long way in helping state parks system do that. so in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 383, 'end': 393, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kyle Jones: Kyle Jones, Sierra Club California, in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: Kyle Jones with Sierra Club of California, in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Lange: lange on behalf of the city of santa monica, in support.
[]
Ryan Pierini: ryan reid pierini with southern california edison, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: good morning mr. chair and members, ignacio ryan hernandez on behalf of the utility reform network, a consumer protection entity here in california. we do have an oppose unless amended position let me just state our position briefly. first of all, i want to thank the author and the author's staff for having an open dialogue with us, an ongoing conversation on this. our primary areas of concern have to do with the funding mechanism as opposed to the policy issue of trying to expand and increase access. as the way it's drafted now, there are certain ratepayers that would shoulder 100% of the funding to build the infrastructure, and that is concerning to us. especially in the light of the fact that there are other as worthy projects that are also being funded 100% by these particular ratepayers.  not all ratepayers in california are going to fund this, only certain ratepayers, and so we do have a concern of ratepayers having additional funding these things 100% over and over and over. in addition, there are funds available now that could be used for this projects. the utilities that are going to be building this infrastructure are not being asked to pay out of their own money, it's only their customers that will have to pay. municipal ratepayers will not have to pay and what our consumers will see will be in their monthly bill that they get. so, we're just trying to find a way to either spread out the cost, reduce the risk, especially of stranded assets for consumers, or possibly public private partnerships to help with building the infrastructure. we've actually been involved in pushing a project like that here in california. so we're going to continue our conversation with the author as the bill moves forward and i believe we have a handful of suggested amendments that will be ready by the end of the week. thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cory Bullis: good afternoon, cory ignacio bullis, on behalf of the electric vehicle charging association, we are not in opposition of the bill, we are neutral for the time being, we do have some concerns about language in the bill regarding the utility owner operator model. we are working through that with the assembly members office. really appreciate the open dialog we're having there, and hope to continue it. thanks.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Lang: Thank you.>>Good morning Mr. Chair and members. Karen Lang on behalf of the Delta Counties Coalition. It's the five counties that ring the delta, San Joaquin, Contra Costa, Solano, Sacramento and Yolo. They've been working together for almost a decade on everything related to the delta, when it was the BDCP and now it's the California Water Fix. Setting aside the actual merits of building the tunnels, which the counties have remained very skeptical of, there's a deep concern about how they're going to be paid for. Particularly, given the failure of the Oroville Dam, the same people that would be benefiting from the tunnels also benefit from the Oroville Dam and now, they're going to have to pay for that. So, there seems to be a diminishing amount of revenue available unless you increase rate payer costs in order to cover the construction of both the tunnels and also the Oroville Dam repairs. We would like to see increased transparency from the delta counties, giving the fact that these tunnels are going to go through at least two of them, that can have major impacts on the counties themselves. We want to make sure that they're not going to be bearing any costs associated with the impacts of that. We're also a little bit concerned about the beneficiary pay's principles, it's very good to hear metropolitan water district talking about that on a previous bill. We'd love to see it for the tunnels, considering some estimates I think done by Dr. Michael showed it was 20 cents on the dollar in terms of how much they're going to pay versus how much you're going to get. And finally, I just wanted to point out to the Committee that there's an ongoing audit related to the expenditures that DWR has made so far in constructing the tunnels or being a proponent for the tunnels. I think it would be wise to take that into account when the Legislature and the administration consider the tunnels going forward. And finally, I wanted to observe also that as far as the funding that's being committed, at least one of the proponents has been fined for the SEC for some of their accounting. So, we're also deeply concerned about when they say they can afford it, how are they really going to pay for it? Is the money really there? And if it's not, what's going to happen to the delta county? So, for all these reasons, we're in support of the Assemblymen's bill today and ask for your aye vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1464, 'end': 1471, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kyle Josephs: Good morning, Kyle Josephs here of California and also, on behalf of Clean Water Action, in support, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathy Cole: i'm back. please proceed. good morning mr. chair and members of the committee, kathy cory cole from the metropolitan water district of southern california. and metropolitans won a 57 public agencies and organizations that are opposed to ab 791, and i'm not picking on the author here by any means. she has for five years. it's the law we share, right? so, we view ab 791 as yet another attempt to delay decisions on water fix finally referred to as twin tunnels project with no added benefit to the public process or environment. so, after over a decade of study, public dialogues, scientific analysis, the final environmental documents for california water fix and cal eco restore were released in late 2016. this was a major milestone. in my opinion, this is probably one of the must scrutinized public works projects in the land. and as the assembly committee analysis points out, there's been extensive analysis, there's also some ongoing processes going on with respect to this program. but this year, federal state and local water agencies are expected to make several major decisions on california water fix, and a full and transparent public process. so here is the deal, first we're anticipating issuance of a section 2081 permit by the state of california that complies with the environmental laws of california. second, us department of fish and wildlife service and the national marine fisheries service are in the process right now drafting biological opinions on the project's impacts on the delta to ensure that the best updated science is applied to protect species. when those environmental approvals are complete, california water fix can receive a notice of determination from dwr and a record of decision from the bureau of reclamation, and these are very important approvals that will allow this project to move forward. and then lastly, but certainly not least, the state board must issue a change of point of use for the new diversion point of entry from the state project on the sacramento river. so, once those biological opinions are finalized, and again we expect that to happen in fairly short order. and that's gotta be done by the federal and state fishery agencies. we're going to know the rules of the road. it's at that time that the beneficiaries of california water fix, the customers of the federal and state water projects, who represent drinking water. who provide drinking water for over two-thirds of the states population and irrigation water for 3 million acres here in california. it's at that point that they can identify their potential cost share and financing method to best address their respective agencies, financial risk, and benefits, not the department of water resources. the contractor agencies, all public agencies, santa clara valley water district, metropolitan, zone 7 from alameda county, coachella desert, central coast, westlands, kern county water agency, a host of others. must all then follow a public notice process, transparency requirements that are required under the brown act. and they're going to have to hold public meetings with their boards to decide their cost sharing and financing for their respective share of the project cost which will lead to the final vote by their policy makers on the project. these are the local venues where the discussion of cost and benefits are appropriate, given the unique local circumstances of those contractors. local water supply, financial condition, etcetera. so, if this bill were to become law it wouldn't be effective until january of 2018, which means further delays to the project. so it's time to call for the question. are we thumbs up or thumbs down on california water fix? and this is the year when those decisions have to be made, thank you very much.
[{'start': 79, 'end': 94, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jack Walker: Okay thank you, bring your next witness. Mr Chairman members, Jack Walker with the Walker Group on behalf of the Alameda County Zone Seven Water Agency, Curran County Water Agency and San Bernardino Valley Municipal Water District. Ms.Cole, was exhausted in her, I think her response to the author. I just simply like to add two things one, is that this is going to be a very public process as she indicated. And in the case of Mr. Solis his district for example, a current county water agency given the smaller the denominator, the contractors represent, the actual cost per acre foot, per acre is going to be a very important consideration for them. So, that's going to be scrutinized to the end degree and the Committee ought to be fully cognizant of that fact. The second point is this Legislature will change it's oversight role, as was displayed and pointed out by the supporters today there is a very vibrant audit function the Legislature can utilize and in fact has. So ,there is plenty of opportunities for oversight in addition to the public agency process that Mrs. Colt described in detail, so thank you very much.
[{'start': 62, 'end': 73, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 235, 'end': 239, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 432, 'end': 437, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1078, 'end': 1082, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Valerie Nera: valerie kathy nera for the california chamber of commerce, in opposition. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Greg Morrison: Greg Morrison representing Elsinore Valley Municipal Water District in western Riverside County in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Kahn: Chris Kahn, representing Coachella Valley Water District in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christie Foy: Christie Foy, on behalf of Tree Valley's Municipal Water District and Long Beach Water Department, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Beth Oloso: beth valerie oloso on behalf of inland empire utilities agency, west basin municipal water district and cucamonga valley water district, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John O'Malley: John O'Malley, with California Advocates opposed, on behalf of West Basin Municipal Water District, the San Gabriel Valley Municipal Water District, and Mesa Water District.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Fred Main: Fred Maine, on behalf of the Chamber of Commerce Alliance of Ventura, in Santa Barbara County, in opposition. Mr. Chairman and members.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cindy Tuck: good morning, tuck with the association of california water agencies in support for the reasons mr. reeb stated. thank you.
[{'start': 100, 'end': 104, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kathy Cole: good morning, thank you, mr. chair, members of the committee. i'm kathy beth cole with the metropolitan water district of southern california and we are a part of a coalition letter that is opposed to ab 732 unless amended. there's 21 public agencies and business organizations that are part of that letter and although, let me say upfront, we definitely support vital levee improvements in the delta, it is critical to protect a variety of purposes, but we unfortunately view the bill as an inappropriate attempt to permanently encumber state general fund dollars for levee maintenance and responsibilities on private lands in the delta without any demonstration now or in the future for this higher level of public subsidy. as the author mentioned, the governor did veto an identical bill last year, sb 554, by senator lois wolk and in his veto message noted a number of efforts were underway to determine the levee protection need in the delta and that sb 554 was premature. to catch us up from 554 days, as you all know, existing law does require the delta stewardship council to identify priorities for state investments and levee operation, maintenance, and improvements known as the delta levee investment strategy. that strategy was recently adopted by the council, recommending an up to 75% state cost share be extended indefinitely. plus the council went on to say that the deductible amount should be re-evaluated periodically to reflect current inflation and the needs of programs and participants. and lastly, it also recommended that there be a simplified methodology to determine a local levee maintenance agency's ability to pay for levee maintenance and improvements. so the coalition recommended a simplified ability to pay methodology be explored and that the criteria regarding economic production and land values be factored in into any eligibility for state funds, as opposed to the political willingness of reclamation districts to raise the necessary local funds. so it does remain important for the state to identify the appropriate methodology to arrive at the state's level of cost share so that the use of taxpayer dollars can achieve the most levied maintenance investment for the buck. so ab 732, as written, could lead to actually less levee maintenance if subsidy levels are set too high and there remain limited state funds for those purposes. so for these reasons, we have recommended that prior to any future legislative action to extend the state cost share that the author amend this bill to direct the department of water resources to enlist an outside entity of sufficient independence and financial expertise to conduct an affordability and benefits assessment for the delta levees subventions program. we believe that further justification is necessary for that long term financial commitment for the level of state support as required on the bill. and i thank you mr. chair.
[{'start': 66, 'end': 81, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 821, 'end': 830, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jack Walk: Mr. Chair and members, Jack Walk on behalf of the Kern County Water Agency and the San Bernardino Valley Municipal Water District also in opposition.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark Hennelly: Hi there, Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee. Mark Hennelly with California Waterfowl Association. We represent a lot of duck clubs and other private landowners that have managed wetlands on their property. Mosquito abatement fees are a significant cost for many of these private landowners. Many landowners even delay their flooding of their wetlands to reduce these fees. That negatively impacts water fowl and other wetland dependent wildlife. The landowners would like to implement best management practices to help control the mosquitoes but there's additional cost to doing that. For example, if you're going to re-contour your wetland, that can cost tens of thousands of dollars for just a single wetland and many of the properties have many different wetlands located there, so the cost can be very high. As proposed to be amended, AB 718 would allow the landowners to voluntarily enter into an MOU with the local abatement district, with some assurance of cost relief if they implement the BMPs. In doing so, we believe the bill would reduce a financial disincentive to wetland conservation and also protect public health and reduce the amount of spraying, which is important, and for these reasons we urge you to support the bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 53, 'end': 66, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Gaines: mr. chairman, members of the committee, my name is bill kathy gaines and i'm here today representing the california hawking club with tulare basin wetlands association, the suisun resource conservation district, and the cal-ore wetlands and waterfowl council. california's lost roughly 50% of its wetland, or 90% of its wetland habitat. today the remaining wetlands are artificially irrigated, intently managed to recreate marsh vegetation. many of those lands are in private ownership and managed under management plans written by the department of fish and game and the us fish and wildlife service. these mosquito fees are a serious disincentive to continuing these private landowners managing these lands in public trust and we urge your support of assembly bill 718. thank you.
[{'start': 51, 'end': 68, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roy Griffith: Mr. Chairman, Roy Griffith on behalf of the California Rifle and Pistol Association. For the reasons already stated by my colleagues and for the fact that we support anybody who's going to take the time to enhance habitat for wildlife and for access, we support this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rick Gilmore: Yes, good morning, Chair Garcia, Members of the Committee. My name is Rick Gilmore, General Manager for the Byron Bethany Irrigation District. I want to thank Assemblymember Gray for his effort working on this bill. Byron Bethany was the technical sponsor working with Assembly member Gray, on crafting the initial legislation. And we're here today to support the bill as amended. And if there's any questions, we're here to answer those. Thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 31, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 70, 'end': 82, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 174, 'end': 178, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 216, 'end': 229, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 285, 'end': 289, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jack Walko: good morning, mr. chairman, members, walko, in behalf of the california association of wine grape growers, in support.
[]
Bob Reed: Good morning, Mr. Chair and Members. Bob Reed, in behalf of the Valley Ag Water Coalition, in support.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Valerie Nera: Good morning, Valerie Nera of the California Chamber, in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Justin Oldfield: Morning, Justin Oldfield of the California Cattlemen's Association, in support.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dennis Cardoza: Morning, Mr. Chair. Dennis Cardoza, on behalf of Byron-Bethany Irrigation District, and San Luis Delta Mendota Water Authority, in support.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: Good morning, chair Members of the Committee. Kyle Jones with Sierra Club of California and also on behalf of Clean Water action. We'd like to thank the author in the Committee for reducing the scope of the bill to something smaller, but we unfortunately still oppose to the measure today. We think that the Water Board does a fine job of handling enforcement actions and proceedings, and we feel that there's sufficient procedural protections in place at the Water Board to protect their judicial process. And worry that if it's moved to a separate body that there will be inefficiencies that will be created and a lack of expertise in water rights areas. So we must oppose today and urge a no vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 46, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rachelle Ehlers: good morning. ehlers with the lao. the sergeant has passed out a handout from which i'll be speaking called overview of state's water conservation efforts because you have so many bills on this topic today and the governor has some proposals, as well. staff has asked me to give a brief overview for you just to provide some context for the discussion that's coming up. so i will give a very brief overview of some of the significant water conservation efforts in recent years. a very quick overview of the governor's initiative and proposals and bills before you today and then provide some key policy questions to hopefully help provide some context for the discussion you're going to have today. so turning to page one there was very significant legislation in this area in 2009. that set a goal and requirement that the state reduce its urban per capita water use by 20% by the year 2020. so it's referred to as 20 by 2020 legislation. the legislation also set an interim goal of a 10% reduction. by a 2015 all compared to a 2009 baseline. so state agencies were under way implementing this plan. local water agencies were underway working toward this goal as well. even though it set a statewide reduction target, the legislation allowed for some flexibility at the local level for how to achieve that target. four different methodologies that local water agencies could use and then the drought hit and that expedited things. so through his emergency powers declaring a state of emergency and executive orders. the governor and his administration instituted some temporary requirements for water conservation. it began with a 20% voluntary reduction and then as the drought continued in 2015 moved to a statewide requirement of a 25% reduction across the state. the water board implemented that through emergency regulations. there were different targets set at different areas across the state. depending on their previous water use that ranged from a 4% reduction to a 36% reduction with this goal of 25% across the state and we got pretty close through those emergency reductions. in 2016 as the hydrology improved somewhat the water board modified those requirements and allowed local agencies that could self certify that they had enough water supplies. to withstand three additional years of drought could then set their own requirements and targets for how much they wanted to reduce. so some moved away from the governor's requirements and some chose to keep them in place. you can see on the last bullet, there were also some emergency regulations beyond these reductions. that temporarily prohibited certain wasteful water use, things like running sprinklers in rainstorms and hosing down sidewalks. so turning to page two gives you a picture of what urban water use has been across the state in recent years. you can see compared to 2013 which was the pre-drought base line used for this reduction targets. subsequent years has been less, typically more in the summer, which is understandable. 2014 higher than 2015, 2016 came back up a little bit, but still well below the pre-drought levels. you can see 2017 starting out very low, which is understandable given the amount of precipitation we've had, probably not too much outdoor watering happening in january and february across the state. so these numbers are all ready below what the targets that were set in the 20 by 20 legislation for 2020. so you can see the bottom bullet there in 2015 the state wide usage rates averaged 133 gallons per capita per day across the state. the goal set in the legislation was 159. so drought usage less than those goals set in legislation. turning to page three, moving beyond the emergency drought regulations the governor has recently introduced a framework and plan moving towards more permanent water conservation. the draft plan was released in december, the final in april titled, making conservation a california way of life. drafted by five state agencies in reasons to his executive order, to do so. certain components of his plan would in act changes through existing regulatory authority. you can see some of those are making those prohibitions on which wasteful water used permanent. reducing water supplier leaks and water losses and certifying innovative technologies for water conservation and energy efficiency and a lot of these efforts are already underway through previous legislation and they're just proposing to kind of expand them and take them a bit further, but then the governor has also introduced budget trailer bill language to institute new pieces of legislation itemized here in the bottom three bullets. probably among the most significant is instituting new water use standards that would go beyond the 20 by 2020 legislation. the proposed trailer bill language would authorize and require this state water board to adopt regulations. establishing new long term targets by may 2021 and adopt additional emergency regulations with interim targets in the meantime. in contrast to the previous legislation, rather than setting the intent expressed in this language rather than setting a state wide reduction goal is instead to define some standards kind of in building up, what we would expect standards to be. and then allow local agencies again the flexibility for setting their own targets, particularly for the outdoor use ability to set targets based on the hydrology and climate in those areas. it would also institute additional requirements for urban water management plan that local agencies have to put together right now, including water shortage contingency plan and submitting annual budget to the state for how much water their area expected to use, and then, finally, as you have heard, most of these proposals focus around urban water use, but the governor does have some proposals for agricultural water use, as well, adding some new components to agriculture water plans. but the most significant part would be expanding who needs to submit these plans and conduct these plans that used to be just for agencies that supplied water to 25,000 irrigated acres or more and this would drop that threshold to 10,000 irrigated acres or more. turning to page four, this is just a summary prepared by your committee staff of the related bill that you're going to be hearing today. you will have robust discussions on these, so i won't go into them, but i will just highlight that some of the would implement some components that are also included in the governor's trailer bill proposal. some would take a slightly different approach than what the governor is proposing. and then some cover areas that aren't touched on in the governor's trailer bill. so you've got a big variety of options before you, in terms of how you want to proceed in this policy area. so given that variety of options before you, turning to page five, we've just provided some really high-level big picture questions for you to think about and consider, both throughout your discussion today on the different bills, but also in the months to come as you're thinking about what overall approach the legislature wants to take in this policy area, and the first is really the key, what is the goal that we're trying to accomplish with these proposed changes and policies? is it just using less water overall? is it using the same amount of water but using it more efficiently? is it saving water in some areas and moving it to other areas that may need it? we have a very diverse state, as we all know, some areas are more wet, and some areas are more dry, do the same types of goals and objectives that apply in different areas of the state? so thinking about what it is we want to accomplish and how we craft policies that apply to meet those goals and objectives and then how should if we're moving in a target direction, how should those targets be structured to accomplish those goals? again, given the diversity of our state, how should we take in to account the diversity of the state in structuring those goals. how should we measure progress towards meeting those goals? some of the approaches focus on a per capita, per day measure. some focus on an overall statewide target, and however we get there putting the pieces together. works some focus on the individual pieces, and what's happening in each region. so thinking about that, and then also thinking about just beyond targets. are there other tools or approaches you might want to use to get towards these goals? some talk about market forces, pricing incentives beyond just setting limits that you might want to consider including in your portfolio of approaches. what role do you all want to play in crafting policy and overseeing the implementation of those policies? what policies do you want to implement through legislation and what do you want to defer to be done through the regulatory process? what do you want to set here at the state level and what do you want to allow more flexibility to be determined the local level? the fourth one, how can the state ensure that these efficiencies in water are users sustainable, we've seen dramatic reductions during the drought. and some of those are likely permanent because of some of the changes in policies that bit had been in place, incentives to remove lawns and put in more drought tolerant landscapes and appliances, but some of the changes probably aren't sustainable. expecting all californians to shower with buckets to collect water and take out to their gardens or expecting residents and golf courses to leave grass brown permanently. you know, maybe some of those aren't. so making sure that we're setting objectives that are reasonable and sustainable for the long term. fifth, how can we think about uncertainties in planning, both here at the statewide level as we're setting our plans but also the requirements at the local level? what we can predict with certainty is that the future is uncertain and climate change obviously introduces even more uncertainty, so how are we comfortable with that? how many different contingencies are we expecting local agencies to incorporate into their plans? and then finally, turning to page six, how should alternative sources of water such as recycled water or desalination fit into the state's overall water conservation approach? we want to make sure that we're encouraging and incentivizing development of new sources, at the same time we're encouraging and incentivizing efficiencies, and so we're needing to make sure that our policies are in alignment and in coordination so that we can achieve both of those goals and not end up working in counter to others. so with that i'm happy to answer any questions or get out of the way and let you dive into the meat of your discussions.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tony Thurmond: Thank you Mr. Chair, and Members of the Committee. It's my pleasure to be before you to present AB 224, a bill that we often refer to as Caleb's Law. First, let me start by thanking the Chair, who has been very diligent in trying to find amendments that will allow us to find a favorable outcome for this bill. I want to thank you for that Mr. Chair. While I think we've been close in the conversation about amendments, there are some aspects of the amendments that we feel is not consistent with the recommendations, that the California Dental Board has made. The chair has allowed me to offer a number of alternative amendments. I'd like to talk about some of those today, but I wanted to acknowledge the graciousness of the chair in his commitment to working to try and find a positive solution here today, thank you. Sadly, last year tragedy struck in my district when a six-year-old named Caleb Sears, who was an otherwise healthy boy, passed away in a dental chair. Ordinarily, healthy children do not die when they go to the dentist's office. And concern over his death led to legislative energy to look into the matter. We Learned that in all of medicine, oral surgeons are the only physicians who are able to both operate on a patient and administer anesthesia at the same time. Last year, this Legislature required the dental board to propose recommendations to improve the safety of pediatric dental anesthesia. Our bill today, codifies those recommendations. These are not recommendations that Tony Thurmond created, but the highest authority for dentistry in the State of California, has proposed the recommendations that are embodied in this bill. The dental board convened an initial Subcommittee of one attorney, and one oral surgeon. This Subcommittee proposed an initial recommendation. Later, the full board which is comprised of dentists, other oral surgeons and public members, amended the initial recommendations to include the recommendation, that we ban the operator anesthetist model in the interest of safety. My bill today proposes to implement the board's full recommendations. We've tried to be thoughtful, in working with stakeholders to carefully address cost and access issues. I want to also thank the California Dental Associations and the Oral Surgeons. Why they don't share all the views that we've had and held here today, they've taken many meetings with me and my stuff. And when I first decided to do this bill, the first person I called was CDA to say let us work together to figure out a way to keep children safe, and they committed to that. Obviously, we still have some work to do to find full agreement, but I want to acknowledge that we've met with countless stakeholders on this matter. We have removed one of the recommendations that there be an anesthesia assistant, in order to make the recommendations more in line with current practice. We have included nurse anesthetists, also in line with current practice. It's our belief that this inclusion addresses both cost and access concerns. Specifically, we believe that there are now 9,300 eligible providers in the state. We understand that the nurse anesthetists offer potential cost savings, compared to an oral surgeon. A nurse anesthetist can currently practice and act as the second provider with an oral surgeon, and a nurse anesthetist does not need a general anesthesia permit, to do so under current law. This will not change with AB 224. Nurse anesthetist, provide these services in all counties in California, and are widely available in rural communities. Further, in order to truly understand implications of this bill as it relates to cost and access, I'm willing to include a concurrent study of cost access concerns. I'll also commit today, to including a study on the safety of dental sedation assistance and a potential dental board training program, to further expand the group of eligible second providers. Since the Dental Board recommendations did not address these additional groups, I think it's important that we move the bill as is and Commission the concurrent studies to be finalized within a year. If after the study, the data that is produced and it's determined that dental sedation assistants and/or the new proposed training program is determined to be safe, in line with the Board's recommendations, I will happily champion their inclusion. I'm committed to addressing concerns, because this bill is about promoting patient safety and taking care of the most vulnerable. And I respectfully ask for your aye vote. With me today to testify is Dr. Jaques Corovo, a pediatrician, Dr. Karen Seibert, an anesthesiologist, Dr. Larry Trappe, a dental anesthesiologist. And to my right Tim Seers, who is the father of Caleb Seers, who requests to have a few words today.
[{'start': 894, 'end': 905, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1506, 'end': 1519, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 4580, 'end': 4593, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4615, 'end': 4628, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4655, 'end': 4667, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4712, 'end': 4721, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4744, 'end': 4755, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jaques Corovo: hi, i'm dr. corovo, thank you for having us here. i'm a pediatrician and hospital based specialist in antioch in walnut creek. and i'm here on the governing board of the american academy of pediatrics in california. and speaking on their behalf, we represent over 5,000 certified pediatricians statewide, and our mission is to promote the health and well being of children in california across all settings. pediatricians are the sponsors of this bill ab 224, to implement the recommendations of the dental board, and to better safeguard young children undergoing sedation anesthesia in dental office. in central to this, is the elimination of the use of the single operator anesthetist model. in this single operator anesthetist model, the oral surgeon is simultaneously performing the dental procedure and the anesthesia. they're texting and driving in our opinion, and we do not feel that is safe. a child undergoing deep sedation and general anesthesia, in any other setting in medicine, has a dedicated provider to perform that anesthesia or sedation. this doesn't occur anywhere else that i'm aware of. pediatricians importantly, we are here because we care for children and we don't care where they are when bad things happen, we don't want that to happen. and we have no financial stake in this and who provides the anesthesia, and our only interest in sponsoring this bill is in keeping children safe, and stopping any preventable death or poor outcome. we respectful urge your aye vote on ab 224.
[{'start': 12, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Larry Trapp: thank you mr. chair and the committee, for you attention to this important matter. my name is dr. larry jonah trappe. i'm a dentist anesthesiologist, i teach residency and a program director for residency in dental anesthesia. i practice for a private practice for 24 years, and i'm an expert for the board in reviewing poor outcomes. i want to echo much of what the previous speakers have said. i'm here to promote safety. and what i regret, is the two to five year old that are so commonly presenting with dental disease, are not here to testify. because they are very motivating. their parents are very motivating. i've seen poor outcomes, i've read poor outcomes. it's not a place we want to be. pardon?
[{'start': 98, 'end': 116, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tim Sears: my name is tim, and my son caleb was six and half years old when he died. caleb had a powerfully creative and curious mind. he loved numbers and was fascinated with time, collecting clocks, and sand timers, and calendars. caleb's body was strong, and healthy, and constantly in motion. he was climbing trees, or rocks, or the kitchen doorway. caleb was quiet at school, but nevertheless, he formed intimate friendships with his classmates and close relationships with his teachers. when he came home, he was anything but quiet. reciting elaborate stories about llamas, and trains, and skunks, and ballerinas. he was his little sister jenna's best friend. they spent hours constructing entire worlds out of blocks, and pillows, and blankets. and then two years ago, we took caleb for a routine oral surgery. we knew there was some risk to general anesthesia. but after talking it over with friends and family, we made what we thought was an informed decision. but we had no idea that the standard of care for anesthesia in an oral surgery clinic, was lower than in other medical field. we'd promised caleb a special weekend after the procedure, eating ice cream and watching "the lion, the witch and the wardrobe". instead, we spent that weekend in the icu holding his hand as his brave little body struggled to hang on. after two days, the doctors were able to do a scan of his brain, and we realized that he was already gone. we lost caleb in that dentist office, because it took minutes for anyone to notice when his breathing stopped. and the oral surgeon, despite having completed all of the required continuing education and being in good standing with the dental board, was unable to rescue him. and his only backup was his dental assistants. since caleb's death, we've learned that his was not an isolated case, that are there children who've died under similar circumstances, and there's been previous attempts to change the practice of dental anesthesiology. but for some reason, the practice has been allowed to continue, and it needs to stop. it's up to this committee to do the right thing and to protect kids, it's too late to save caleb but there's other children with dreams and hopes like him. and you need to protect them from dying needlessly, i urge you to vote yes for ab 224. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 27, 'end': 32, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 74, 'end': 79, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 222, 'end': 227, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 343, 'end': 348, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 634, 'end': 639, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 773, 'end': 778, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1099, 'end': 1104, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1435, 'end': 1440, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1755, 'end': 1760, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2145, 'end': 2150, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kavita Trivedi: hello, my name is dr. kavita larry trivedi. i'm in a clinical adjunct assistant professor of medicine, at stanford university. i'm also an emergency room physician and hospitalist in san francisco. i urge you to vote yes on ab 224, to help make sure dental procedures are up at the same standard of care to protect children all across california. thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Josephine Roen: hello, my name is dr. josephine kavita roen. i'm a board certified pediatrician practicing for 10 years in the bay area, with the permanente medical group. i support this bill strongly for the safety of our patients, our children, your children. thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Harris: my name's jennifer, i'm an assistant professor of emergency medicine at ucsf. i definitely urge you to support this bill. i regularly perform procedures under sedation. we always have somebody closely monitoring the airway and the breathing, to ensure the safety of our patients. we do not do the procedure and the sedation at the same time, to maintain patient safety. this should be the standard for oral surgeons as well. thank you.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shannon Hoffmaker: my name is shannon josephine hoffmaker. i'm a nurse practitioner in oakland. i just listened to a very long discussion about patient safety and standards of care, under the midwifery bill. this is very clearly an issue about standards of care in patient safety. i urge you to vote yes in favor of this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rita Agarwal: I'm Dr. Rita Agarwal I'm a clinical Professor of anesthesiology at Stanford. I'm also the Chair of the American Academy of Pediatric Section on Anesthesiology. I strongly support this bill. The departments of anesthesiology has tried to make anesthesia safer everywhere. The Society for Pediatric Anesthesia has initiative called "Wake Up Safe," that has. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christine Johnson: hello, my name is dr christine shannon johnson. i'm a pediatric anesthesiologist and a pediatrician. i have practiced for 38 years, most of it at oakland children's hospital. and more recently at pediatric dental initiative surgery center in windsor, california. i strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeff Poage: Jeff Poage with the California Society of Anesthesiologist, I'm a pediatrician and a physician pediatric anesthesiologist, I work in East Bay. Strongly urging a yes vote. This is a patient safety issue. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeremy Pearson: pearson, i'm owner of happy bear surgery center, where we see 2,700 pediatric patients a year with a two person model, one anesthesiologist and one dentist. if you wouldn't sit in the passenger seat and let the driver text and drive, then you shouldn't vote no on this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ana Caplan: Hi my name is Dr. Ana Caplan I'm Caleb's aunt. We came to you last year with this issue, and you sent us to the California Dental Board. They came back with recommendations, and I urge you to support this bill which implements those recommendations.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 33, 'end': 38, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Justin Sears: my name is sears. caleb sears is my nephew. my daughter lucille was born a month after caleb, and they enjoyed six years together. i had to drive home and tell her and her older brother that they weren't going to see caleb again. i urge you to support ab 224 to prevent that from happening to other families. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 18, 'end': 29, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 56, 'end': 63, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 87, 'end': 92, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 217, 'end': 222, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ann Bentley: my name is ann christine bentley, i'm tim's mother and caleb's grandmother. i'd ask each of you to look inside and ask yourself if your children were going to have oral surgery, would you want the same person operating on them and performing anesthesia, when they have those little bitty tubes in their throats? think about it and if the answer is you would want that, please vote yes.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 38, 'end': 41, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 55, 'end': 60, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Gary Cooper: Thank you Mr. Chair, Gary Cooper representing the California Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons. First, very briefly, I'd like to thank Mr. Thurman for his continued work on his issue. We've worked many, many hours on it. And I'd like to thank, Mr. Low's staff because she's worked very many hours on this. Since this bill is basically focused on oral and maxillofacial surgeons, I will defer to Dr. George Marinon who practices in Southern California and let him discuss the day to day practice of oral and maxillofacial surgeons as it regards to children seven and under.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 152, 'end': 159, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 261, 'end': 264, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 412, 'end': 426, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
George Marinon: good afternoon, members, thank you for the opportunity to be here today. my name is dr. marinon and a i'm a board certified oral and maxillofacial surgeon and have been practicing in the san fernando valley for more than 24 years. as part of my practice, i see children of all ages who are frequently seen urgently as a result of either infection or trauma. the california association of oral and maxillofacial surgeons supports portions of ab 224 that have been shown to increase anesthesia safety. but we have significant concerns over some of its other elements. we must take and oppose a less amended position for the following four reasons. first, the promise of ab 224 to fully eliminate risks in pediatric dental procedures under anesthesia by mandating an additional anesthesia provider or a permit. there is no data to support that this mandate would improve safety, in reality the truth may be different. in the dental board 2016 five year study there were three deaths of pediatric patients undergoing outpatient dental procedures under anesthesia, of these two occurred where there was a second anesthesia provider and only one occurred in an oral surgeons office. nationally the last three deaths of pediatric dental patients under anesthesia occur while it's.
[{'start': 88, 'end': 95, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Monica Miller: is it on? mr. chair and members, monica ann miller on behalf of the california association of nurse anesthetists. first and foremost, we want to thank both your staff as well as the assemblymember's staff. we've had a lot of meetings on this particular bill. we remain opposed unless amended at this point. but we'll continue our conversations into the future, so thank you.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Leonard Tyco: Hi, my name is Leonard Tyco, I'm a dentist and a physician. And I just would like to remind the Assembly members that the dental board's findings, the model that AB 224 is looking to change to had five deaths in that study period versus one.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jy Rampersad: chairman low, committee, my name is captain rampersad. i'm a captain with american airlines. i happen to be married to a pediatric anesthesiologist. we enjoy a tremendous safety record in aviation because we do not respond to emotion of the situation. we look at the facts, we look at the data. and we-
[{'start': 9, 'end': 12, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 44, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alan Kaye: thank you. my name is alan monica kaye, i'm the past president of the california dental society of anaesthesiology. also, i am presently the president of the california association for oral surgeons. and the past president of the california dental board. i'm here to say that i appreciate the hard work that is going into this, but at this point in time i agree that we must not support this bill unless amended.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sean Blake: hi, dr. sean alan blake, executive director, dental director, children's dental health clinic in long beach. we work with residents and dentist anesthesiologists, oral surgeons, and medical anesthesiologists. and at this point, i have to oppose unless amended, thank you.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tony Thurmond: you're right. people always say things, like i ask them if that's a no and they say well we're not quite there yet. and my answer is a yes. let me be clear there. i just want to be clear that the dental board is the leading authority here in the state. these are not tony's recommendations.
[{'start': 267, 'end': 271, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tony Thurmond: thank you for the questions, assemblymember baker. and it allows us to address something that we heard from our colleague that we were saying that these procedures could fully eliminate the risk. and i would never be so bold as to make such a statement. and i don't think that anyone has ever made that statement. we cannot say that we can fully eliminate the risk, we cannot. but what we're asking for today is supported by the dental board. and it's instinctual to all of us. why would we withhold from any family something that we think increases the chances of safety? and it's been said today that there have been incidents where a child has died when there was an anesthesiologist present. that's true, we don't refute that. but it's also been said that there have been those same situations where there were other factors that could have contributed to those tragedies, meaning that there could have been health issues that contributed to those tragedies. and so what i'd like to ask, mr. chair, i understand that the california dental board is here, to give them an opportunity to say that these are their recommendations, that they are saying that this is safest way. to your question, assemblymember baker, it's not tony sean thurmond saying this is the safest way and that it falls short. it's the california dental board that's saying these are the safest ways to keep children safe. the board made these recommendations. i think it's the responsibility of the legislature to codify that.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 49, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1210, 'end': 1215, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1226, 'end': 1244, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Fred Main: Mr Chairman, Members of the Committee, Fred Maine with Clear Advocacy on behalf of the California Nurse-Midwives Association. We're the sponsor of AB 1612 and support it strongly. I'd like to introduce Linda Walsh, who's the immediate past President of the CNMA to provide testimony on behalf of the bill, thank you.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 49, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 202, 'end': 213, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Connie Delgado: Good morning, Mr. Chair and members, Connie Delgado with the California Hospital Association in support.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Monica Miller: Mr. Chair and members, Monica Miller on behalf of the California Association of Nurse Anesthetists in support, thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roxanne Gould: Mr Chair, members, Roxanne Gould with the American Nurses Association in California in strong support.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tosy Marseline: tosy, licensed midwife, i have been involved in legislation around licensed midwifery since our bill was passed in 1993 and are legislator at that time-
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Leslie Nelson: leslie tony nelson, licensed midwife, i stand in support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chelsea Fedlan: Chelsea Fedlan, I'm a licensed midwife and consumer of midwifery services and I support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Caleem Joy: Caleem Joy, I'm a Medical Board of California licensed midwife. I'm here representing the California Association of Licensed Midwives and we would hope for an unanimous vote of aye, and we're in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kiley Hackbarth: kiley leslie hackbarth, consumer of midwife free services in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christy Weiss: Christy Weiss on behalf of the California Association of Nurse Practitioners in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amber King: Amber King with the Association of California Healthcare Districts in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Farley: Laura Farley, student midwife in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Juan Thomas: Good afternoon Mr. Chair and members of Committee. Juan Thomas representing the California Medical Association. Look, we believe that certified nurses midwives play an important role in the delivery of healthcare in the State of California. Currently the model that we operate under in the State of California is a team-based physician-led model. And this leads to and has led to high quality care that's delivered efficiently and cost effectively. I think one of the practical effects of this bill will be to tear that team apart, to bifurcate that, and remove an important element from that team-based model. So let me just talk about the bill in particular. We believe that the bar in the corporate practice of medicine is an important consumer protection and we've seen this here in Sacramento, here recently, with stories of individuals who were seeking sensitive reproductive services, who were denied those services. And the reason why the individual ended up getting those services was because their physician who's not employed, and this person was seeking a sensitive reproductive service, who was not employed by the hospital, had the leeway and the room to fight on behalf of this individual and to go to the press. So we think that the corporate bar's an important consumer protection. Second the bill does, it allows nurse practitioners to practice independently in all settings. I mean, I'm sorry certified nurse midwives in all different settings. This includes the hospital, it includes the out of hospital settings. I've lost my train of thought here because I said nurse practitioners. Anyway, I'm sorry, so I guess there should be a requirement if you are practicing independently. At the very least, there should be a requirement for notification, especially in out of hospital situations of whether or not you have have a relationship with the physician or you don't have a relationship physician. The bill lacks that. There's no requirement that the CNM who has a woman who's seeking to have an out of hospital pregnancy at least notify that person if they have a relationship with the hospital in case there are complications. The bill doesn't require any of that, doesn't require them to notify, much less have some process in place. I think, one of the things that's most concerning about the bill is that it sets up a situation in the workplace that is unworkable. They are seeking to remove physician supervision when it comes to diagnosing. They want no supervision when it comes to developing a treatment plan. But, they're willing to be under protocol when it comes to prescribing medications. In statute and in regulations, protocols and standard procedures are supervision. So a physician, in setting up these types of agreements with a certified nurse midwife, by law, and it'll be in violation of their license. They have to understand, to have an intimate knowledge of the person's education, clinical training, capabilities, and abilities. And by law, they are required to be the first person that makes that patient assessment under the protocol. Thank you sir. So you're going to set up a situation because the CNMs in this bill say we don't want any supervision except when it comes to prescribing drugs and the law requires the physician to do the initial assessment. I think it's going to be very difficult to find a physician that will enter into that type of agreement because it's going to expose them to liability when they're not actually assessing and seeing this patient on a regular basis. What they're anticipating is a physician will develop this protocol or standard procedures and then walk away and not ever have any interaction with the patient. This is a situation that will not work in the marketplace. So there are other issues with the bill and I'll let people from ACOG and others have a talk.
[{'start': 51, 'end': 62, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shannon Smith-Crowley: shannon representing the american congress of obstetricians and gynecologists and we were the ones who kind of all started this with ab 1308 in 2013 because licensed midwives were practicing illegally because they couldn't get physician supervision. and it was basically forcing them underground and putting the patients into delicate situations. especially when somebody would be dropped off at the emergency department door. no information about the patient. no idea how long she'd been in labor. you literally could have the baby stuck in the birth canal.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jody Hicks: Jody Hicks representing the California Academy of Family Physicians and for all the reasons stated we are opposed as well.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: Thank you, Mr. Chair and members. Ignacio Hernandez on behalf of the California Court Reporters' Association. We do have an oppose position on this bill, actually, an oppose unless amended position. Let me clarify a couple of points. The underlying issue and problem that we have seen here in California, is that there are Business entities who are organized in other states. In other words, they're out-of-state companies who have been operating here in California. We were the sponsors of the bill last year that passed out of this Committee in a particular form. The problem that we've had is that these out-of-state entities are claiming that they do not have to comply with California's robust ethical laws. They do not believe they have to comply at all with any of them and that is a major, major concern. What this bill addresses is one very, very narrow piece of one of the many ethical rules. This would prohibit the giving of cash and gift cards, it does not even cover the trips and other things we have seen as a problem. The proponents of this bill are also the opponent of the Cower bill that you heard earlier. The proponents of this bill would like, and we've had this discussion many times over the last year or two, only a gift card or cash prohibition ethical rule in California and thats it. They do not want to comply with all the other ethical rules in California. We believe that any business operating in California, whether they're based in California originally, organized in another state, needs to follow every single ethical rule in California. That is how it should work, that is what the Calvert bill does. This bill does not do that. This is a very narrow, alternative and we believe it is inconsistent and in conflict. With the Calvert bill because it says that these out of state companies only need to follow a very narrow subset of one ethical rule. It's all ethical rules or don't do business in California. For those reasons we are opposed unless amended.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jim Gross: Jim Gross on behalf of the deposition reporters Association. I want to associate my comments with Mr. Hernandez comments, we do have issues with this bill. We do appreciate that Mr. Salas has tried to tackle the problem because he became aware of it last year when 270 came before him. I think in good faith he's tried to move forward with this. Unfortunately we don't think it hits the mark and of course it is Sponsored by those who oppose the Calvert bill that was earlier. So unfortunately, we must remain opposed. If this bill does move forward, we will continue to work with Mr. Salas to try to resolve this issue. Again, I think there's a real momentum for dealing with the overall problems and with respect to court report or services, we have three bills in play on that. And that's very a good thing generally, but at this point we must remain opposed to the bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 102, 'end': 111, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 182, 'end': 187, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 585, 'end': 590, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Coby Pizzotti: Mr. Chair, members. Coby Pizzotti with the California Association of Psychiatric Technicians. We're not in opposition, we actually just have concerns. We've had conversations with Mr. Salas and the committee staff about this bill. But the way the bill is currently written, it eliminates the Board of Vocational Nursing and Psychiatric Technicians. It also eliminates their ability to hire an executive officer. Well, if there is no board, you don't need to hire an executive officer, so that's obvious, but what it currently does in its current form, it does not provide any mechanism for a licensee, a licensed vocational nurse or a licensed psychiatric technician, to renew their license. So if it goes forward in this form then it will certainly cause great problems. However, I am quite certain that this bill will not look this way when it gets back from the Senate or when it goes much further than this. But our concern is that we do not want the board to be eliminated, we do not want this board to turn into a bureau of The Department of Consumer Affairs. We have very grave concerns because, as the board is currently constituted, there are two psychiatric technicians on the board, licensees on the board. We only have 12,000 licensees in the entire state. If we are turned into a bureau of the Department of Consumer Affairs, we're quite afraid that we're going to be lost in the bureaucracy of a massive department. We'll have no expertise in that department. There will be no one to represent what it actually takes to do the job, what education really needs to be there in order to adequately provide accreditation services. So we do have some concerns about how this bill moves forward and we would love to be a part of the conversation as it moves forward through this process. So with that, we only have concerns, thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 184, 'end': 189, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark Johnston: Chairman Low and Members of the Committee, my name is Mark Johnston and I've been a California licensed pharmacist for 26 years. I'm also currently serving my second term on the National Association of Boards of Pharmacies Executive Committee. I stand in favor of AB 1589 and I will stand for any questions.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 12, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 54, 'end': 67, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Stein: hi, jennifer kiley stein on behalf of the national association to chain drug stores. this bill, we think, is a great push towards the board of pharmacy looking at the pharmacy tech ratio in california. we have not looked at our ratio of pharmacists to pharmacy techs for 17 years. we're the most restrictive in the nation with a ratio of one to one, where many other states it's almost 20 or unlimited ratio. so this bill really asks the board of pharmacy to examine this and let the legislature know what the best approach is going forward. and so, we would really encourage the committee to support the bill, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Trent Smith: Mr. Chairman and Members, Trent Smith on behalf of Rite-Aid Pharmacies in support.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Peter Kellison: Peter Kellison on behalf of Walgreens, also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Redman: good morning mr. chairman, members of the committee, my name is dr. david jennifer redman. and i'm the legislative chairman for the california optometric association. the legislation we are discussing today is not new to this committee as mr. salas said. in several states across america the scope of practice for optometrists takes into consideration the expanse of education and training of our doctors. these states are making it possible for vulnerable patients to take greater advantage of the health care expertise of optometrists. the end result is greater access to care, safe and expedient treatment. and savings to the consumer and social programs that serve our vulnerable populations. in fact the optometrics schools in california are unique. in the unique position of training young people who work in all other states in the country. to provide care that they are presently not allowed to provide in california. that makes no sense and we need to address that. we have had several dozens of hours of meetings with the stakeholders over years. to craft the legislation that safely and responsibly places our scope in the statute. this year we have been meeting with the stake holders in sessions that have been amicable and constructive. and the stand alone legislation today is the result of those meetings. we look forward to the meetings continuing and is our hope that we ultimately a bill that represents meaningful expansion of scope. and a greater ability for consumers to find much needed care. thank you.
[{'start': 68, 'end': 89, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 243, 'end': 248, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Juan Thomas: Thank you, Mr. Chair. Juan Thomas from the California Medical Association. We too have been a part of these discussions over the years. I want to concur with the remarks that have been made. This has been a good process and the meetings have been cordial. I think I look forward to having more conversations as to move on and we ask for a yes vote.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jodi Hicks: Jodi Hicks with the California Academy of Eye Physicians and Surgeons aligned with CMA and working with the author in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ken De Vore: thank you, chair and members. ken david de vore with the national federation of independent business. and, since it's been moved, i won't be long. we love this bill. it's permissive. it's going to go a long way toward promoting a pro-business environment in california. for years we've had a gotcha mentality, where agencies are, it seems like they're out looking for things. and we had some witnesses testify, i know their bills, they were both sick today, some small business owners. a $1500 fine because she did not have a little electrical outlet cover. a plug thing that covers it on the ceiling where they plug in their christmas lights. that was a $1500 fine that cost her 25 cents to buy a plug. things like these where an agency would have the ability to, because a lot of agencies say hey look we have to give you a fine we don't have the authority to give you a fix it ticket. so, that being said, let a business owner here talk.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Manuel Cosmay: my name is manuel ken cosmay. i'm an accountant for small businesses and i also have a payroll company. the witnesses that were going to attend today are actually my clients. and this bill is such a welcoming relief even for individuals like myself. because, having a small businesses, you have an enormous amount of regulatory issues you have to face. you have some payroll issues you have to face. both at the federal and state level and at the local level. and this provides at least some form of relief for them. it allows them to stay in business a little bit longer and that's essentially why i'm here, to support this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Trent Smith: thank you mr. chairman and members. again, smith here representing homeguard. homeguard is a bay area and sacramento based company. they are a home inspection company, a pest inspection company, and a roof inspection company. and their business model is is they offer all three reports. so it is easier in a real estate transaction for a consumer or real estate agent to call one company and arrange for all three reports which are common in a real estate transaction. that provides easier scheduling and often an attractive price to, again, provide all three reports. as the author has stated, the home inspectors are not licenced entities. and as a result, they are not allowed to provide a report and then offer to make repairs from that report and that is an important consumer protection. pest inspectors and roof contractors are licensed entities. the pest inspectors by the structural pest board and the roofing contractors by the state contractors licensing board. and as a result, both of those professions are allowed to assess, in this case a roof inspector is allowed to assess a roof, on whether it's weather proof or free of leaks. and then offer to make repairs. however, in the case of my client, because the home inspection law is drafted broadly to prevent a home inspector, home inspection company, or an employee of a home inspection company from making any repairs to a property that they've done a home inspection on. that prohibition bleeds over into the second part of the inspection which is the roof inspection done by a separate employee who otherwise would be able to make those repairs. if not for the fact that they had another employee make a home inspection. it's important to note what this bill does not do. it does not allow a home inspector to make repairs under the home inspection report. it is only dealing with the roof inspection. we have accepted the committee amendments, and we appreciate the work of the committee. and i think it's important to note what those committee amendments are. first, it clarifies that two different employees have to make two different inspections. one does the home inspection, one does the roof inspection. in addition, it clarifies that the repairs are being done in connection with a roof certification. and what that is, is you are looking for a warranty or a guarantee that, that roof will not leak under a specified amount of time. so again, that narrows it. the reason why you want that, of course, is peace of mind when you're buying a house. and sometimes it requires certain repairs before a company can give you that guarantee. the other thing it does, is it provides consumer disclosures. that tells you that the company has done both a home inspection and a roof inspection. it also notifies the consumer that the repairs being offered are only for the roof and no repairs identified in the home inspection are allowed or authorized. and then finally, it tells you that the consumer as always has the right to seek a second opinion. the last amendment is probably very- 45 seconds. yep, the last one is really, it is to prevent a concern we learned about, about up selling. where the home inspector would do a report and then offer to have their company do a roof report. this says that the roof report has to be done prior to the home inspection report to prevent that. so again, we are committed to continue working with any opposition. we think these amendments go a long ways, but i'm happy to take any questions and we ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 43, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Pace: My name is David Pace, I am Legislative Chair for the California Real Estate Inspection Association. We initially had opposition to the bill as it was written. And we had been working with the proponents of the bill. And we believe that the amendments that have been offered satisfy our concerns. So we are moving from an opposition to neutral.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randall Hager: Good afternoon, or good morning, I'm ahead of myself here. I'm Randall Hager, I represent the California Psychiatric Association. I'm actually here testifying on behalf of Doctor Robert McCaran who is our President Elect, and who is also the Training Director at UC Davis of a combined training program around in internal medicine in psychiatry. This is a really important bill that provides help with access to psychiatry and psychiatry services. It's a critical strategy that does help us deliver services where the services can be most effective which is in primary care which is where people very early present. And so this kind of experience using training methods, training curriculums to get at the, well the psychiatric IQ of primary care physicians is really, really critical in that effort. And we imply the author and the Steinberg Institute for bringing this bill forward and we urge your support for it.
[{'start': 63, 'end': 76, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 179, 'end': 193, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Carmen Delgado: great, good morning. my name is carmen and i am the vice president for the board of guide dogs. we'd like to thank the assemblymembers and the members of the committee. we appreciate your effort in the oversight process and we are working diligently to address those issues that were identified in the sunset review. as you know, four of our board members are guide dog users. one raises guide dogs, and i am a mother of a blind child and involved in outdoor sports activities for the blind. these are dedicated members who are committed to ensure the quality of the guide dog industry and the protection of the consumers in california. as a mother, i am concerned when individuals demand for less oversight and accountability. i want to ensure that there is oversight to ensure that my daughter is safe in sometimes an unsafe world. the board is in the process of working with our stakeholders to draft amendments to existing ownership and arbitration laws that enhance consumer protection and we look forward to sharing that information as soon as possible. we have heard the voices of our stakeholders at the last meeting. many say that the board may no longer be needed. either the board may no longer be needed because there is no longer issues or they haven't been successful in fulfilling their mission in accordance with the statutory mission. because the board is about consumer protections and identifying issues, we have several arbitration cases that we have seen in the past year. 1331 just passed and this bill was created by individuals and organizations that represent it here today. if the board is not needed, then why was that not included in the previous bill? if the board is sunset, there would be no venue for a guide dog user to seek arbitration hearings and there are several arbitrations that occur, that come to the boards. we are the sole authority that has that responsibility. we would like to ensure that we are able to see what the impact of 1331 is this year and then report back to the committee. they're asking me to close now. but even so we are asking for your support of this important board. it may be small, but it is powerful and we want to ensure that those that may not have all the advantages in life, have the protection under the state of california. thank you as a parent and also as a board member.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Theresa Stern: is tracy going to speak? good morning, thank you for allowing us a chance to talk about ab1705. my name is theresa manuel stern, and i'm the vice president of outreach admissions and alumni services at guide dogs for the blind. i'm also a blind person who has the great opportunity to work with a guide dog. we are here to support the consumers in this attempt to oppose 1705. we feel like it is no longer necessary. guide dogs for the blind has always had an amicable relationship with the state board and we appreciate all the work that they've done over the years. however, guide dogs for the blind, along with the two other guide dog schools here in california are regulated under the international federation of guide dog schools, igdf and their regulations and criteria are much steeper and much more difficult to meet than those of the state board. also, as carmen talked about sb 1331 that became law last year. that actually allowed instructors from outside of california who work at guide dog schools outside of california to come in and do follow up instruction without being licensed. so we feel like that creates an undue burden on schools residing here in california who are also igdf certified and have to pay licensing and some pretty substantial fees as well. i believe we paid over $130,000 in fees last year and because we're the largest guide dog school, we pay the most. the other thing to bring up as well is that the state board really only covers a very small group of people nowadays. so those people that are under protection are only california residents who have graduated from a school based in california that are under that protection. that only accounts for about a quarter of the people that we serve at guide dogs for the blind. we also feel like this limits the choice of people who are deciding to get a guide dog thinking that they may not have these protections from the state board, so that's of great concern. and finally, i just like to say that in all the other 50 states of the us and all the provinces of canada there is no precedent for this. there is no other board that licenses guide dog instructors, and we really feel like it's irrelevant and redundant. so i would urge you to vote no.
[{'start': 3, 'end': 8, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 107, 'end': 127, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 865, 'end': 871, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Gina Harper: Me, my name is Gina Harper. I'm a Senior Vice President of investments at Morgan Stanley. I'm a blind woman. This is my fourth guide dog. I am very independent and active. I would like you to vote no because this board, it is obsolete. So, Theresa speaked about the International Guide Dog Federation. They have strong, stringent criteria for the schools, as well as the trainers under the schools, so the work that the board is doing, it is obsolete. Also, when this board started in 1940, there was a need for this board. We are now many years later. There are strong advocacy groups for blind people. The National Federation for the Blind, the American Council for the Blind, these organizations allow blind people to speak out if they have an issue with guide dog schools. So, as a blind guide dog user in California, I have a guide dog from a school on the east coast and I was tremendously hindered. I was hit with my husband, who also is a guide dog user in California. In Davis, we were hit by a car and because of the rules and regulation of the board, we were not able to have our guide dog school come and work with us and follow up with us for our dogs. This is just obsolete, there is no need. The other thing is I'm a donor to Guide Dogs for Blind in California as well as other guide dogs schools. And as a donor, I don't want my money going to administrative costs that are obsolete, which is what the responsibility is put on the guide dog schools in California to pay these fees, and it's also a conflict of interest. So the board is funded by these guide dog schools, so the guide dogs schools are supposed to be overseen by this board, who is funded by the people they're overseeing. That's seems a little backwards.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 240, 'end': 247, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Margie Donovan: Good morning Mr.Chair and Committee Members, my name is Margie Donovan, I'm a California resident. In 1981, I got my first guide dog out of state, recommended by a person who works with blind people and teaches us how to travel. This is now my sixth dog. His name is Grotten. He's a beautiful German Shepard, and I ask the Committee on behalf of me and my dog as a team to please vote no on 1705. Thank you.
[{'start': 56, 'end': 70, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shannon Dillon: mr. chair and committee members, my name is shannon theresa dillon, i'm a guide dog user. i'm asking you to vote no, on ab1705 for all the reasons previously stated. i'm also here on behalf of national federation of the blind of california and california association of guide dog users to ask that you oppose ab 1705. thank you.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 66, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Frank Welty: i'm welty from san leandro, california. i'm a guide dog user and a former member of the california state guide dog board. i am also here in behalf of the california council of the blind, of which i am first vice president, and also a member of golden state guide dog handlers and we are in opposition to ab 1705.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeff Thom: Chair Low and Committee Members, Jeff Thom of Governmental Affairs Chair California Council of the Blind. We associate ourselves with the other opposition comments and urge that you do not support AB 1705.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 9, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 33, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Judy Wilkinson: My name is Judy Wilkinson, I'm President of the California Council of the Blind and as you see I have a guide dog with me. We definitely oppose this bill. The board is not protecting us, last year they would not vote for ABA 1824 which would of given protection to our service animals from other attacks. They came out against that bill thats certainly not protection.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Margie Donovan: Thank you, I'm sorry, I missed part of the question. If I understood it correct, by the way I'm Margie Donovan, we're talking the two year, correct?
[{'start': 96, 'end': 110, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Samantha Corbin: Thank you to our author and thank you Mr Chair and Committee Members. I'll keep it brief as well. I'll just add, again, Samantha Corbin on behalf of CICO a San Diego based company that produces water cremation device. This is a process all ready in use in California, something that universities use across the state, University of California and Los Angeles in particular supportive of this measure, has been working closely with our water sanitation plants for years to ensure the safest most environmentally process available. And we look forward to your aye vote. I'm here for any technical questions that you might have.
[{'start': 120, 'end': 135, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Gauger: good morning mr. chairman and members. my name is jessica, on behalf of california association of sanitation agencies, we are an association that represents all waste water treatment agencies in california. we've been working with the author and sponsor on the amendments that were included in the bill last week. we think they go a long way to clarify the appropriate disposal of hydrolysate. and we appreciate that they allow individual agencies to accept this material on a voluntary basis. so with the acceptance of the amendments we've moved to an approved position on the bill. and want to just thank the author and his staff and his sponsor for working with us to address our concerns.
[{'start': 50, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brooke Riden: mr chair and committee members, my is brooke shannon riden. i'm the president of the california court orders association, and we're cosponsors to this bill, and we urge an aye vote. thank you.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Gross: mr chair and members, tim brooke gross on behalf of the deposition reporter's association. we're also a cosponsor of the bill. and we appreciate the work of the staff and ask for your support.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kara Cross: good morning, my name. good morning, my name is kara tim cross, i'm with the personal insurance federation of california. together, our six member companies represent or write the majority of home owner's auto insurance in california. i want to start by saying we appreciate assemblymember kalra's commitment to work with us on protecting volume discounts, but we also have concerns regarding ancillary services, as mr. bellot just mentioned. currently as drafted though, ab 1660 threatens the ability for insurers to obtain volume discounts, as well as ancillary services. such discounts in services, keep rising litigation costs down for insurers and their consumers. unfortunately as you know in the insurance world, we deal with a lot of litigation. insurers are always looking for inefficiencies to keep litigation costs down. jeopardizing ensures ability to contract for volume discounts or ancillary services, to remove inefficiencies from the marketplace and result in placing cost pressures on insurance for premium for consumers. for these reasons, we urge your no vote on ab 1660, thank you.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 62, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 290, 'end': 295, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 420, 'end': 426, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Eric Robles: robles with the united nurses associations of california ,union of healthcare professionals. thank you, mr. hill, for your bill and proposing a four year extension. unfortunately, we have to oppose unless we amend the bill. we're really concerned about the ce piece. ces are one of the things that unions are actually would have provide to their members. it's a very important service we provide to nurses all over southern california. your proposal would change that and we look forward to continuing the dialog. we've had a short conversations, but we would appreciate a longer, detailed conversation, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 108, 'end': 112, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michelle Cabrera: mr. chair, members, cabrera with the seiu california, also on behalf of our 35,000 nurses state wide, we must respectfully oppose unless the bill is amended around the continuing in educational requirements. our nurses have also been providing these courses for 15 years or more. and we believe that we are able to provide a diversity of perspectives around issues related to direct nursing care as well as a california grounded perspective. so we want to continue to have this conversation, we're very appreciative of the extension of the brn for the next four years. we also have some concerns around the mandated reporter provisions which were amended in last week. and look forward to engaging more around those, thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Mitchell: rebecca jonah mitchell, naturopathic medicine committee's executive officer. and we are in support of this.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Field: Dr. David Field, I am the chair of Naturopathic Medical Committee, in strong support. And I'm available for questions from the members, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Tannehill: yes, tannehill with aaron reid and associates on behalf of the california society for respiratory care, also in support.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 20, 'end': 30, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Bahr: Dr Jennifer Bahr, President of the California Naturopathic Doctors Association in support.
[{'start': 3, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matthew Siverling: madam chair and members, matthew rebecca siverling on behalf of the california agricultural commissioners and sealers association in strong support.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Fearing: yes. good afternoon, madam chair and members of the committee. jennifer matthew fearing on behalf of the humane society veterinary medical association. the hsvma's principle mandate is to protect and advocate for animals. and the consensus of our california veterinary leadership is that sb 546, as amended, seems reasonable, is in accord with our existing professional data to provide informed consent to clients, and would generally impact companion animal welfare in the state positively. thank you. thank you mr. hill.
[{'start': 63, 'end': 79, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 517, 'end': 521, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Susan Riggs: good afternoon, susan jennifer riggs for the aspca and we too are here in support. and we appreciate senator hill's leadership on this. we believe that, well, the aspca is not just an animal welfare organization. we actually run our own medical facilities and have lots of experience in this area and believe that the consumer needs to be part of this. and disclosure and everything is very very important so that people can make consenting choices for their animals.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 109, 'end': 113, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Christina De Caro: Thank you Madam Chair and members. Christina De Caro representing the California Veterinary Medical Association. We are in an opposed, work with the author position. We appreciate the Senator's comments about, of course, wanting to work with us. We definitely want to work with him. We have great respect for the author. Great respect for staff, most certainly. And in fact we have been engaged in conversations. They have been productive. The April 17th amendments I would mention, go a long way to helping us out. And we're grateful to the author for that most certainly. But we still need to lock down kind of that who, what, when, where piece and just drill down on those. We feel that if we don't make it abundantly clear, when some of these triggers will kick in, that could leave us subject to some enforcement problems and maybe even some litigation, so we want to be careful. Right now, we feel like the bill goes a little bit further than even MDs and pharmacists. And so we just really want to be careful. This weekend, our CVMA Board of Governors met and they discussed the bill in great detail, and they still have some concerns. I've trimmed this down, I'm going to hit on just a couple. There is concern still from CVMA regarding in-patient, out-patient care. When does this disclosure, this duty to consult kick in, are we talking about post surgical while the animal is recovering? Are we talking about over night care, etcetera? The CVMA would be very concerned it the duty to consult is required on refills. We feel that that directive could end up taking a lot of time away a veterinary practice and it lead to increased veterinary cost. Another new requirement on the veterinary profession is that, the client could decline the council but we still need to make a record keeping notice there. And so we've got to keep up on the record keeping provisions. I should note that's all by hand in most cases usually. And the CVMA would also like to know how this will work with the large animal community. Our veterinarians out in the large animal world will get up at 3:30 in the morning, go out to the barn, and often the client isn't there. And so, there would be no ability to do the consult there. So lastly, I know that the proponent brought up the issue of CVMA comments relative to the Information that is available to send home with a client. Our letter does discuss the current void of the information that is available online for our veterinarians to print out and send home with customers. It just isn't available as a one-stop shop online repository. We even have a member of the Veterinary Medical Board, who asked to speak with the publisher of this Veterinary Dictionary to see if he or she would be willing to move this to an online format, so we can address some of these concerns. So again, we want to indicate that we were working on all of this. Last week, Mr. Gauge and I had I think some very productive discussions. Again we said, would you just mind pulling together a stakeholder group. We really feel that we're at that part where we just need to drill down on some specifics. And so we asked Miss Williams, Mr. Gage, CVMA, the Veterinary Medical Board and then the two universities that have the veterinary colleges in California, because they have concerns on some other pieces. And the Senator and Mr. Gage said, of course, let's do that, let's get everybody in the room. And prior to the bill going to the Appropriations Committee, let's get it all hammered out. We do want to consult, I have to leave you with that stress that point emphatically. We do want to consult. We just want to get this all right. Get it into a more workable format perhaps that resembles more the Pharmacy Act. And if you have any questions with me as Dr. Ken Polowski, he's the President of the CVMA, and just here for technical questions.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2897, 'end': 2902, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3140, 'end': 3148, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3154, 'end': 3158, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3347, 'end': 3351, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3779, 'end': 3791, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Vicky Ferraresi: Good afternoon, my name is Vicky Ferraresi and I'm the current President of the California Society of Health System Pharmacists. And I in my work life I'm a Director of Pharmacies Services for Pathways Home and Hospitals which are the largest hospitals in San Francisco Bay Area. At CSHP we believe this bill is logical the extension of SB 493 that Senator Hernandez carried several years ago. Establishing pharmacists as health care providers and creating an advanced practice license for pharmacists. Pharmacists today spend a larger percentage of our time delivering direct patient care to consumers and qualified pharmacy technicians are picking up some of the extra work load that's associated with this paradigm shift. There're approximately 73,000 pharmacy technicians practicing in California and they're performing increasingly diverse duties across the state. We believe patient safety would be greatly improved by ensuring that the Board of Pharmacy had a representative that clearly understands the practice demands on this particular profession. 10 other states including Oregon, Washington, Arizona and Texas are recognizing the need to include pharmacy technicians in regulatory oversight proceedings, and have already passed bills that include pharmacy technicians on the respective governing boards and its time for California to do the same. We are joined today by two pharmacy technicians who will tell you a little bit about the contributions they're making to our healthcare system. And why having representation on the Board of Pharmacy will strengthen its ability to regulate the profession.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 357, 'end': 366, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tom Harper: Yes, my name's Tom Harper. I'm a Pharmacy Technician in UC Davis Medical Center in Sacramento. I've worked in several various roles as a pharmacy technician for the past nine years. I first started in a retail setting, then I moved into the hospital setting, and then most recently a clinical setting. Over the last nine years, I've seen what we do as pharmacy technicians, evolve. In a retail setting typically you would think of a technician as filling prescriptions, counting pills, putting them in a bottle for a pharmacist to check. When I moved into the clinical role over at one of the HIV clinics in Sacramento, I had more of an indirect or direct patient interaction were, the patients would call me to get their refills or we would help them obtain them grants and money to pay for their medications. In 2014 when the hepatitis C medications were approved, the cost of the medications were greatly greatly, I mean some of them were $30,000 a month. Patients who are on Medicare can't afford a 3 to $4,000 co-pay, so the technicians work diligently to get these barriers broken down for patients so they can get treatment. When I first came back from Texas working in a correctional facility there I did a clinical study with six HIV patients. And myself working with a nurse, we did direct education on why adherence to the medications would increase and improve their outcomes. In that sequence period, the patients, the six patients that we followed had an undetectable viral load just having that interaction with pharmacy technicians. And then coming back and working, starting at the pharmacist led hepatitis C clinic at UC Davis where the pharmacist met with patients with the physicians to get a regimen built. And then the technicians ultimately reduced all of the barriers to obtain the medications significantly improved. So for the last three years, we have over 500 patients now treated virtually free of cost by eliminating the money to get these treatment medications.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rachel Ortiz: Good evening my name is Rachel Ortiz. I, too, am a pharmacy technician, and have been for many years. I am number 74, registered with the California State Board of Pharmacy out of 73,542. And I still have no voice. I have been registered for over 20 years, and there is no governing body for pharmacy technicians at this time or a seat at the Board of Pharmacy. And I feel that that is very important, that we have a pharmacy technician on the Board of Pharmacy so that we can help partner and work together as one voice moving the profession forward. It is very important that patient care, it's, for a patient to come into a pharmacy, any pharmacy, the first point of contact is with a pharmacy technician. I believe holding higher standard for pharmacy technicians is very important. I currently hold the MBA higher education was and is still very important to the profession and to any pharmacist that you speak to would love to see that. Currently the requirements for pharmacy technician right now are high school education. I am in favor of increasing the education requirements. That involves setting up the qualifications and levels of competency for pharmacy technicians to work in a pharmacy hospital and retail. It's really, very important. I believe at this point engaging the stakeholders early in the process is key for our success in getting this bill passed. While the scope of pharmacists keep emerging and changing and innovative ideas keep happening every year, every single day. I feel the pharmacy technicians rules and responsibilities have remained generally unchanged for the last 20 years. Again, there's no voice on the board of pharmacy. If a pharmacist's time is spent on tasks that can be safely delegated to the pharmacy technicians. Patients are being deprived of the clinical expertise that pharmacists bring to the health care team. It is critical to optimize the role of appropriately trained pharmacy technicians to protect the safety and health of the patients. Thank you.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marcy Repcasky: thank you so much. good afternoon, i'm marcy susan repcasky, i am a pharmacist at the university of california san diego, so a little south of here. and i have been a pharmacist for about 30 years or so. i very much value technicians that we have and i would like to share with you one of the roles of technicians in santiago. we have technicians working in our emergency department doing medication history and allowing the pharmacist to do a more thorough evaluations of those medication histories ensuring patient safety. so i am very much in support of this bill.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gang Dong: my name's gang marcy dong i'm a pharmacist and a private citizen, as well as president-elect for chsp. i'm in support of this bill, in terms of having a technician on the board of pharmacy. i've work with many technicians over the years as many of the people have mentioned, they have done many other types of duties besides the routine filling our prescriptions. and it's very important that they have a voice on the board of pharmacy, they understand it, i think that they can help other pharmacists as well as the public members on the board.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maria Zerpa: hi, real quickly. maria gang zerpa, i'm a pharmacist for sutter health speaking on behalf of myself. and in support of-
[{'start': 18, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jamie Lee: Hi, Jamie Lee, I'm with the Department of Corrections and I'm a pharmacy technician. I'm in support of the bill as well.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gary Cooper: thank you, senator glazer. mr. chair and members, cooper representing california association of oral & maxillofacial surgeons. as senator glazer stated correctly, the dental board took a long, lengthy period of time to take a look at the standards and the statutes and the regulations governing pediatric dental anesthesia in california. as senator glazer said, and we've all heard several times, they came away with for the most part there needed to be some tweaks to the statutes. some safety requirements enhanced. some safety education requirements enhanced. but for most part, there wasn't a significant gap. and there wasn't a significant problem in the current statutes. when the dental board heard this, they basically agreed with 90% of that. unfortunately they added, as senator glazer said, one extra component to add a second anesthesia provider in the room for seven and under.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 25, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 50, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 138, 'end': 144, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 349, 'end': 355, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 789, 'end': 795, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brianna Pittman: good afternoon, chair and committee. brianna maria pittman with the california dental association. we're here in support of sb 501. we really do appreciate the approach that this bill has taken in looking at this complex and emotional issue of pediatric anesthesia. and by following the dental board's full recommendation, that there be an analysis on the effects of the costs and access before we do anything to change the dental care delivery system. and we know that from the reports that we've seen from the dental boards report and their data, that while there are very few deaths, the six that have occurred, or the nine that have occurred over six years happened in a variety of settings. we know that there are a number of recommendations that are being put forward as solutions to the risks that are sort of inherent in pediatric dental anesthesia. and we just want to highlight again that it is important to recognize that anesthesia and sedation always carry some risk. and that there was no pattern in the provider, the setting, any of those. and so we really encourage an effort to increase safety in all dental anesthesia settings. and we think that this bill does that by following the board's full recommendations. i'd also like to introduce doctor john blake to speak on some of the access issues, especially around denti-cal.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1265, 'end': 1275, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Paula Whiteman: thank you again for allowing me to speak before you. i'm paula brianna whiteman. i'm a pediatrician and member of the governing board of the statewide american academy of pediatrics. i'm here today representing over 5,000 board certified pediatricians. our mission is to promote the health and well being of california's children across all settings. pediatricians strongly oppose sb 501, as this bill disregards and omits the most important recommendation of the dental board of california relative to pediatric anesthesia use. the dental board has recognized the need to better safeguard young children undergoing sedation and anesthesia in dental offices by recommending elimination of the use of the single operator anesthetist model. the single operator anesthetist model has not been accepted anywhere in medicine for decades, now existing only in dentistry. sb 501 is a half measure that falls far short of what the california dental board recommends and what pediatricians know is needed. pediatricians have no financial stake in who provides anesthesia services in a dental office. it is only in the interest of keeping children safe that we have made it our top advocacy priority to see it implemented in their entirety. the dental board of california's recommendations on pediatric dental anesthesia. thank you, we oppose sb 501.
[{'start': 57, 'end': 79, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anna Kaplan: My name is Dr. Anna Kaplan. A couple years ago, I was watching my healthy six year old nephew ride his bike in circles around my daughter and his sister. His smile was wider than almost anyone's I'd ever seen. Caleb was one of the kindest souls, always full of ideas and energy, he loved climbing trees and building elaborate structures in his living room. He was halfway through his kindergarten year and looking forward to all of the upcoming summer adventures when he went in for his routine oral surgery procedure. Caleb's parents, Eliza and Tim, were worried about putting Caleb under general anesthesia. But the surgeon had warned that it could be a traumatic experience, since he would have had to drill into bone. And given Caleb's young age, they had the option for him to be asleep and not remember the procedure. Our family talked about the risks, never once imagining that there was not a dedicated anesthesia provider administering the drugs and monitoring Caleb. We had never heard that oral surgeons did double duty. We assumed that there was one standard of care. There's nothing different about dental surgery and other dental surgeries. The same way we never imagined someone would operate without washing their hands or sterilizing their instruments. But when Caleb stopped breathing, neither the oral surgeon nor the dental assistants noticed right away. It took minutes. And when the oral surgeon finally did notice, he was not ready to save him. When the paramedics arrived, Caleb's teeth were broken from the oral surgeon's attempts to get the intubation tube down his throat. We later Learned that he hadn't intubated a child in a long time. Despite completing the required continuing education, and being in good standing with the Dental Board and with the Oral Surgery Association, he wasn't prepared to handle the emergent situation that unfolded. And his only back up was dental assistants. Caleb had already been without oxygen for 30 to 45 minutes by the time they arrived, far too long to survive. Instead of birthday parties and ice cream, we spent the weekend at the intensive care unit at children's hospital, where Caleb went to cardiac arrest over and over again. He died in the dental office, but it took days for his body to accept it. Caleb's sister Jenna was only three. She screamed for hours when she heard her big brother was not coming home. For a while, Tim and Eliza's life stopped and I think any parents would, no piece of legislation would let Tim and Eliza have Caleb back in their arms ever again. Or bring back the other children that have been lost. But Assemblymember Thurman's bill AB 224 does the right thing, includes the board's recommendations, the full board's recommendations. Including the most important one, that a separate anesthesia provider is required for very young children. SB 501 does not include this critical component. Had a separate anesthesia provider been present for Caleb's surgery, he likely would be here today. Not only would they have noticed sooner, but they would have been more practiced in responding to a pediatric emergency. That is their job. Every organization that means anything in academic world in anesthesia has released policy statements to this, supporting this. The Dental Board of California all voted to include this in the recommendations. Listen to them, not the oral surgeons who seem to be blinded by their financial interests. SB 501 is the wrong bill. And our family strongly opposes SB 501 and is urging you to vote no.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 210, 'end': 215, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 519, 'end': 524, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 536, 'end': 541, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 546, 'end': 549, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 578, 'end': 583, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 732, 'end': 737, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 970, 'end': 975, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1279, 'end': 1284, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1497, 'end': 1502, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1919, 'end': 1924, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2150, 'end': 2155, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2274, 'end': 2279, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2289, 'end': 2294, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2399, 'end': 2402, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2407, 'end': 2412, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2493, 'end': 2496, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2501, 'end': 2506, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2512, 'end': 2517, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2622, 'end': 2629, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2946, 'end': 2951, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jeremy Pearson: Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Dockerty. Good afternoon again. Hello, Jeremy Pearson with Happy Bear Dental Surgery Center in Tulare and also representing the Coalition of Dental Surgery Centers in California. Our dental surgery center sees 2,700 patients a year, 95% of them are DentiCal and MediCal. And we do a two operator, one with an anesthesiologist or an anesthetist, and the other with the dentist doing the actual surgery treatment. And over the last year in 2016 there were over 30,000 patients seen in the same using the same model in dental surgery centers across California. This would be as I stated before. If we don't allow people to drive and text at the same time, then why would we allow a surgeon to be able to do two vital, life-threatening potentially parts of a job, and split their attention that way? I would very strongly request a no vote.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 34, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 65, 'end': 79, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Norwood: Mr. Chairman and members, John Norwood on behalf of the California Pool and Spa Association. I'll be real brief, because I know you have a long agenda. First of all, I want to say that the statistics you heard on drownings are obviously very serious. Part of those reflect situations with pools and spas but otherwise, there's drownings beyond those as well. And I wanted to point out that. But our members who build primarily in ground pools and spas are very serious about child safety and safety around pools and spas. So we think this bill makes some needed updates in the law. Aand I think it's a right balance. It also helps create kind of one statewide standard. We had some jurisdictions that had two, some had one. There was a provision that allows local entities to do even more, and we really wanted to create a statewide standard. This, I think, goes a long ways to essentially De facto putting in a statewide standard. For those reasons, we're proud to be here in support of the bill.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lydia Bourne: Lydia Bourne representing American Academy of Pediatrics, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brandon Epp: Brandon Epp on behalf of the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dev Gnanadev: thank you senator hill, thank you for actually taking this early, so that i can make my flight. good afternoon madam chair and the committee members, my name is dr. dev paula gnanadev, i am the president of the medical board of california. i also have with me, board's executive director, kimberly kushmyer. board would like to thank senator hill and the county staff sara mason for diligent work on sb 798. the board included new issues in its 2016 sunset tribune report to the legislature. sb 798 includes many of the new issues requested by the board, including language to make changes to accommodate the continuing evolution of medical training, to improve the efficiencies of the board's licensing, and enforcement programs, and most importantly to enhance consumer protections. the board supports all the language in this bill that was requested by the board in it's sunset review report, and on behalf on the board, i would like to thank senator hill, and the committee staff for their hard work on this, and for including the board's requested language. this bill also includes language that was not requested by the board, the language will be taken to the board at our board meeting later this week, we have boarding meeting thursday and friday, we'll take that language. we'll be happy to answer any questions for you, you have regarding the languages suggested by the board, the board respectfully requests you to vote aye on this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 22, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 165, 'end': 183, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 289, 'end': 306, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 342, 'end': 346, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 368, 'end': 378, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 954, 'end': 958, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rosanna Davis: rosanna dev davis, california association of licensed midwives, we are in support of this bill. peer review is a fundamental value of quality and improvement, and so we can certainly get behind all that, thank you. thank you, next.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ed Howard: Are we going to oppose now? I think we oppose. You're standing there, at least you were opposed. Chair and members, Ed Howard on behalf of the Center for Public Interest Law, and on behalf of Consumer Watchdog this afternoon, respectfully opposing SB 798. This bill, in part, if enacted as written, would once again permit medical board investigators and attorney generals to return to the time when they did the most important job of enforcement of any patient protection job in the medical board, it would turn to the time when they could work in complete isolation from one another. A model that this Legislature has rightly, in an unbroken fashion, rejected since at least 2005. Chair and members, vertical enforcement is just a fancy term for requiring the lawyers in the Attorney General's Office, and the investigators who work up the evidence for the cases, to work together from the beginning, exactly the way it works in complex civil cases, both in the private sector and in the public sector. Vertical enforcement is ailing. But what appears to divide the author from the Attorney General and consumer groups, is not dedication to protecting patients, the author of this bill is matchless in this Legislature, in his passion for making sure the medical board protects patients. Rather, what appears to divide us, is why vertical enforcement is currently ailing, but the data show why. Between the time that vertical enforcement was enacted in 2005 and 2006, and the pivotal year of 2014, case cycle times, the time where you open a case and close it, went down, government got more efficient between starting at 277 days and ending at the end of 2013 at 245. VE had a rocky beginning, but it was starting to work. And then there was a massive reversal in these data beginning in 2014. Since 2014, the case cycle time of 245 days has ballooned to 473 days. And the investigation vacancy rate, the number of vacancies in the investigation unit since 2014, has doubled. It was a too high and stubborn 15 to 20% before that time, it's now at an astonishing 41%, it's doubled since 2014, why? The bill appears to presume that the reason why is because of the simple requirement of lawyers and investigators working together. And therefore, the bill before you repeals the entirety of that simple requirement. But this can't be so. If this were so, if it was just a requirement, winding up. If this were the requirement we would have seen it in the nine years before 2014, but what happened in 2014? What happened in 2014, is that we transferred physically transfer the medical board investigators who used to be housed in the office of the medical board to the Department of Consumer Affairs, the Department of Investigations. And at that point forward, the medical board investigators that handled the most complex cases in DCA land were working side by side making the same pay as the investigators who do small cases, who do landscape architect cases, who do the much more simple cases. It was terribly demoralizing and they are leaving in droves. That is what is ailing the VE in some, could be VE improved? Yes, yes it could. We look forward to working with the author and this Committee to make sure it fulfills its promise. But make no mistake about it, we cannot go back to the time when two teammates, doing the most important job in the Department of Consumer Affairs to protect patients, are permitted to work in complete isolation rather than as a team and for that reason we respectfully request your no vote. Thank you, Madam Chair.
[{'start': 116, 'end': 125, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alicia Sanchez: okay, i'll do my best. alicia rosanna sanchez of the california medical association. we have established over the weekend an opposed unless amended position on sb 798. first, i want to start with noting that we actually support the elimination of vertical enforcement. it has contributed to increased enforcement timelines which we think does not support public protection. but there are a lot of other things that we have concerns about, as we noted at the informational hearing on the medical board we're opposed to probation notification, cost recovery without a decrease in the licensures fee, reducing patient confidentiality which in this bill is lowering the privilege related to psychotherapy. we have been previously opposed to changes in the expert witness process, and the cease practice process that's being established for a 20 reports and we've worked in previous years on the reporting for ambulatory surgery center. i expect that there will be some, a lot of work that needs to continue to be done in this regard. finally, we would note that the bill increases the requirements for licensure for physicians without supervision by two years. it increases the necessary training for no expansion of practice. we have a plenary license, so that makes sense. but we believe this provision, while it requires refinement, we're generally okay with the concept. we're not opposed. but we hope that the committee will be consistent, as it considers other questions related to independent practice for other providers and, with that, we will submit our written testimony, or our written comments, in our letter in the very near future. thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : Madam Chair, Members of the Committee, Randall Hagar for the California Psychiatric Association. We object and have a concern about the amendment to business and professions code 2225, which sets forth the privacy of the psychotherapy patients' privilege.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 52, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Valencia: madam chair and members, john alicia valencia, representing the american board of cosmetic surgery, and the california academy of cosmetic surgery. we have a position of oppose unless amended, specifically with regard to the provision, as we testified at the sunset review hearing relating to the proposed eliminations of medical boards' determination of equivalency of a specialty as a pathway alternative to the american board of medical specialties, and the american graduate medical education process. the board for 27 years, has had this process in place, has approved four boards, rejected two including the board that i represent which currently has an application pending before the board. so the way the bill is constructed presently would be particularly detrimental to that effort. i've spoken with senator hill, i believe that we can make progress to a reasonable accommodation to allow for the process that is now a year and one-half old. it's a fairly substantial process to be completed in due course, and then explore with the senator and the members of the committee alternatives for the future as specialties continue to emerge in medicine. thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 818, 'end': 822, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Robert Sumner: Yes, Robert Sumner with the California Department of Justice, we certainly don't have an opposed position and are neutral on the bill but we do recognize that the bill contemplates changes to the vertical enforcement program that's been in operation for some time and is certainly viewed as a work in progress and we are committed to working with both our clients and the medical board, and also with the chair to make sure that we address the feature of vertical enforcement in a way that preserves its benefits while streamlining its application.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gary Cooper: thank you senator bates. gary john cooper representing the california association of oral and maxillofacial surgeons. as most of you know and most of you are involved in, we had a hearing about two and a half months ago dealing with pediatric dental anesthesia. and that hearing basically covered the recommendations of the dental board regarding that subject. but if you look at the actual final report that was sent to senator hill, one of the key questions and one of the key comments that was made in the recommendation was that legislature before you do and take any major actions to deal with this issue and to deal with other issues regarding access to care. please analyze how it does affect access to care with regard to economics and personnel. that particular study really needs to be accomplished before anything really is moved forward. i know in a few minutes you'll hear another bill that has basically the same language in it regarding the study. basically, it was our position that that really needs to be done before anything is moved forward. senator bates agreed that that's something that she thought was appropriate, particularly in light of the concerns about access to care. particularly in light of the subject that was discussed considerably at the hearing two months ago. with regard to the course in pediatric life support, that is another one of the subjects has been constantly discussed, pediatric life support, and whether the assistance, and the assistance to the surgeons and to the dentists are qualified to help and administer pediatric life support. so we believe it's the dental boards responsibility to develop a course to allow them to learn how to do that effectively without having to go through a very larger course that only doctors would be able to pass. which would be pals, this is one that would be appropriate for the assistants in the office. so hopefully that answers the question why you'll see two bills dealing with that one particular study, but that's something we really believed was necessary before anything really moved forward. and with that, i'll turn it over to dr. larry moore.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 23, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 25, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 429, 'end': 433, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1070, 'end': 1075, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2129, 'end': 2140, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Larry Moore: good afternoon, i'm dr. moore. and i'm representing the california association of oral and maxillofacial surgeons. excuse me, who are the sponsors of this bill. i currently practice oral and maxillofacial surgery in chino hills, california. i've been there for 20 years. i'm the vice president of calamos and i want to thank dr. hill for initiating this dialogue with his letter in february of 2016. i would point out that the letter and response to the dental board pediatric study ends with this most important point. and that point is that the board, meaning the dental board, recognizes that the manpower and economic considerations for pediatric dental sedation are beyond the scope of the present report. these considerations will be critical to the successful implementation of any changes to dental sedation laws. the board therefore recommends that there be an analysis of the effects of any proposed new legislation or regulation, on access to care of for pediatric dental patients prior to the implementation of any changes. calaoms supports this position of the dental board. and in fact we support all the enhancements that the dental board subcommittee recommended with the exception of the requirement for the additional anesthesia provider. which we believe is unnecessary and will adversely affect access to pediatric sedation and dental care. the second component of sb 392 is aimed at creating a course of study that does not currently exist. i've devoted most of my professional career to advocating for creating programs and training non-professional assistants, dental assistants, registered dental assistants, and other unlicensed personnel. i also is involved in creating the dental sedation assistant which is a licensed position. these are career-track positions for people who do not have the benefit of 14 years of post-high school education, like most of us have. and it's important to provide a training mechanism so that these people can have a career path that provides them good income and a stable environment to raise their children in. thank you very much for you time.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 329, 'end': 333, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brianna Pittman: good morning, chair members. pittman with the california dental association here in support. we appreciate that this bill was forwarded with the board's recommendation to do an analysis of a cost in access to care before doing anything that would upend the dental care system. and regarding the pediatric advanced life support and airway management course. we've had a lot of conversations with our members about whether or not the one course that currently exists, which is known as pals, is really the right course. i think, as was said before, it's really more appropriate for the physician or the dentist, the doctor, rather than staff. and so we are looking forward to and expect that there will need to be courses done. and the board would be the appropriate place for the criteria for those courses to be done, thank you.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paula Whiteman: thank you for allowing me to speak here today. my name is paula. i'm here representing the governing board of the american academy of pediatrics of california, an organization over 5,000 pediatricians. we have no financial stake in this cause. our sole interest is in the health, welfare, and safety of the children of california. this is an unnecessary act to require a study be conducted to determine the affects on access to dental care, based on the california dental board recommendations, to end the single operator anesthesiologist model for children under seven years of age in dental settings undergoing sedation and anesthesia. waiting until next year to act is an unnecessary delay that will place more children at risk of injury or death as well as more families at risk of losing a loved one. we respectfully ask and strongly urge you to oppose sb 392.
[{'start': 58, 'end': 63, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeremy Pearson: Good afternoon, my name is Jeremy Pearson. I'm co-owner of Happy Bear Dental Surgery Center in Tulare, California. I would like to just take a couple minutes to untangle two issues that I believe are inappropriately tangled in this bill. First of all is the access to care issue, and second is the issue of needing two anesthesia permit holders to treat one patient. First of all, access to care. Access to care is a reimbursement issue, it always has been and it always will be. If you have private insurance, or if you are able to afford to pay cash, you can go to any dentist, any oral surgeon, and your good insurance and your cash will be accepted. The people who have a current access to care issue, a severe crisis right now, are the poor or the low income who have Denti-Cal. And there is no secret that Denti-Cal has a crisis access to care problem. There are many, many dentists who are registered with Denti-Cal, but do not take Denti-Cal because it's almost charity work. There are, and as far as oral surgeons, less than 10% of all oral surgeons in California are even registered with Denti-Cal, let alone taking new patients. Many dentists who are registered with Denti-Cal will not take new patients or maybe see one or two new patients per month. The fact of the matter is that Denti-Cal has not raised its rates in 20 years. Denti-Cal California rates 49th out of 50 states in the reimbursement, the lowest reimbursement for our Denti-Cal program. So access to care is a reimbursement issue. If you increase reimbursements, all dentists and oral surgeons would take the patients. Separate to that is the issue of having two people to treat one patient. This is a safety issue. It's not a reimbursement issue, it's a safety issue. The fact of the matter is, is that if you have a surgeon doing treatment on a patient, they should be concentrated on the surgery. Another professional should be concentrated on the airway and the anesthesia being provided to that patient under general anesthesia. It's the same thing as going, well, we need two people with a driver's license when you're driving a car. Well that doesn't make any sense until you add the extra information, that the person driving wants to text and drive. The moment you add that information, then it makes completely clear that one person should drive and concentrate on driving and the other person, even if they do have a driver's license, can sit in the passenger seat and text while they're driving, right? So the fact of the matter is that this is a safety issue and if we are not going to allow a person to text and drive, we shouldn't allow a surgeon to be responsible for the surgery and the anesthesia on the same patient.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bernadette Murray: Good afternoon. My name is Bernadette Murray. I am a California Massage Therapy Council Certified Massage Therapist #222 from Woodland California. As I previously testified last week, I stand in support of the bill and I think this testimony is very powerful and moving about many of the issues that students are facing in attempting to gain their certification. Thank you so much, Senator Nguyen, for sponsoring this important bill and thank you, Committee Members and Committee staff, for taking this issue with serious consideration.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 390, 'end': 396, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Carolyn Veal-Hunter: I'll be brief. I'm Carolyn Veal-Hunter on behalf of the American Massage Therapy Association. First we want to thank the Committee for putting the bill over last week to give us time to continue to work with the author. And we appreciate that the author has taken our concerns into consideration. And with the amendments that she's taken today, we remove our opposition and look forward to continuing to work with the author on the bill.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anastasia Boden: good afternoon mr chair, members of the committee. i'm anastasia, and i'm an attorney at the pacific legal foundation. it's a nonprofit legal foundation and also the sponsor of sb 247. i represent entrepreneurs and other individuals in constitutional lawsuits against irrational, anti-competitive license laws. so as you all know, sb 247 seeks to ease the burden of occupational licensing on various occupations that are attenuated to health or safety concerns. and for many occupations, sure, licensing can be intuitive, doctors and lawyers often come to mind for people. but for scores of others, licensing simply puts up an onerous and arbitrair barrier that deprives people of a way out of poverty. that deprives people of their right to earn a living for themselves and their families. worse, while proponents claim that licensing laws are necessary to protect the public health and safety. in reality, there are plenty of studies that show that the these laws are often created and perpetuated by the people who are regulated themselves, as a means to protect themselves from competition. as the senator noted, this is a bipartisan issue, largely because people recognize the disproportionate effect that licensing laws have on poor and minority groups. and also a very hot topic right now is how occupational licensing laws disproportionally affect people who have been convicted of crimes. who turn to repeat offenses, rather then lifting themselves out of poverty and finding a job because they can't, because of these laws. so, when you try to do occupational licensing reform, which many states have, might i add. there are plenty of states, wisconsin, arizona, florida, minnesota, that are doing the same types of things, and picking off occupations that are attenuated to public safety. like dietitians, arborists, funeral directors, talent agents, interior designers, photographers used to be licensed in wisconsin in fact. any how, when you try to do this stuff, you do have people come out and tell you, these people who are already licensed, why you need to perpetuate the licensing regime. but you don't hear from people who maybe operating illegally on the underground economy, and don't want to come out and say so, and talk about how these laws have harmed them. you don't hear from people who have been deprived of their ability to earn a living, and so they don't have the means to come out and represent themselves and to travel from afar. but i encounter these people everyday in my work, i represent them in lawsuits for free. and so i wanted to share with you a few perspectives on that. so with regard to one of the things the bill would do, and that is eliminate the requirement that private investigators have to have an office in the state. there's actually, when you look at the law, it doesn't say that there's any authority for the bureau to impose that requirement. but i know that it exists, because i was contacted by a private investigator from out of state who wanted to get a license here. he's licensed in several other states, he had a client who was willing to pay him to do some business here. he tried to get a license and he was denied, simply because he could not afford an office in california. he could only afford actually to work from his home in his home state. and this is one of those scenarios where i don't think anybody can rationally say that having an office in california makes you a better private investigator. where you have your office has nothing to do with your ability to perform. it's simply a way to keep out of state people from competing with california licensees. with regard to makeup artists, you have to have 140 days of educational experience, and pass two exams to do something that people do every day. and yet we know that in the past 4 years, they've only been 18 cases of allergic reactions. so there's not a whole lot of complaints about any harm, despite that we know that there's quite a big underground economy operating on that front. similarly with barbers, that's an excellent vehicle for economic mobility for people. that's a real way that people can have an entry level occupation and pick themselves up out of poverty. and yet, this is a fun fact, in california it takes more educational experience and time to become a barber than it does to become an emt. so there are all sorts of these irrational things going on because they've been lobbied for that way. custom upholsters are something that the bill touches on, only seven states regulate custom upholsters. so it's difficult to argue that there's some nationwide crisis that requires licensing, when certainly in the majority of states see fit to do it without. and so, in sum, i just wanted to bring some facts to your attention, and tell you about things that are often not heard, and that is the way that these laws deprive californians of economic opportunity.
[{'start': 55, 'end': 64, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Judy Casp: thank you very much for letting me come. my name is judy gary casp and i am a person with a whole bunch of licenses and a whole bunch of training, and i'm really proud of it. i'm going to tell you why, i am a california licensed cosmetologist, i am a california licensed aesthetician. i am a california licensed barber and i was looking around this room today, i can help some of you gentlemen, if you like, see me at out in the hall. you don't have a really good fade on a number two there and your taper is a little bit off but i also am a certified cpr instructor for the american cpr training association. i am a certified massage therapist and i'm registered with camtc. i am an approved blood borne pathogen trainer for the department of environmental health. that's the one and a half hour course you are required to become a tattoo artist or a permanent makeup and stick needles in pigment in somebody's face before you can become a tattoo artist or a permanent makeup artist. i also am an owner of an accredited and california-approved, beauty school where i am an instructor and i also teach barbering, aesthetician, permanent makeup, massage therapy and manicuring. so i have a lot invested in this and i have seen young gentlemen for barbering, so i'm here to oppose barbering and makeup. i don't know why in this bill, you would include barbers. you would devalue the profession, and you would say that they have too much training. first of all, if you would look and i know that we have a doctor on staff right here, not a doctor on staff, but as a member. i think you would agree with me that there's a lot of pathogens, bad ones and there's a lot of microbes and a lot of bacteria and there's scabies which are called itch mites. if you ever think that you got bit by a mosquito and all of a sudden you got these little bumps, it's because your barber, did not disinfect their clippers or their trimmers. or because the barber works underground and the barber shop is the same person, who was the barber person, one time in his life and nobody is training anybody in disinfection and sanitation. if you got up this morning and you took a shower, you sanitized yourself but you did not dip yourself in a bottle of properly made barbicide and stay there for 10 minutes for contact time to kill the bacteria. there is a ton of super bugs and i think the doctor would agree with me coming in from foreign countries that there's no antibiotics for. i really think that there is huge training that is needed. they have to pass a test, that is a 60 question multiple choice test, by 75%. i think my students that arrive that are on the verge of becoming illiterate, barely passing high school, have no clue about what disinfection, sanitation, proper consultation is or anything else. they come out with a lot of training and they are good for society.
[{'start': 52, 'end': 66, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vanessa Kehenon: Vanessa Kehenon on behalf of the Health Care Providers of California, here in respectful opposition to the bill. Our members are the state's licensed hearing aid dispensers. This bill contemplates complete elimination of our licenses in the State of California. We believe that it is under the purview of this Committee through the Sunset Review process to do that examination. You've seen fit to maintain our license for years upon years now. Additionally, just as matter of safety and background, we do have to demonstrate proficiency in being able to take ear molds. We spend all day inside our patients' ears. We do believe that because of that, the state needs some recollection of who is operating under that shingle in California. So with that, we must oppose.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : Chair and Members, Jerry Desmond on behalf of the Cemetery and Mortuary Association of California regretfully in opposition unless the provisions are amended out of the bill that would eliminate the cremated remains disposer registration requirement. We believe the balance of consumer protection with the increasing rates of cremation throughout the state if you engage the services of a cremator remains disposer, you want to know where they served, if they have a boat license or a pilot's license and where they would be inspected by the bureau.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 32, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Stephanie Roberson: Mr Chairman, Stephanie Roberson on behalf of the California Nurses Association, more of a general principle, we believe that licensing provides protections, so we therefore oppose, thank you.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : wendy judy jacobs, judy california judy aesthetician. judy sir, judy 82,000 judy of judy us, judy as judy we judy speak, judy and judy we judy are judy in judy opposition judy of judy this judy bill, judy mostly judy because judy of judy the judy blood-borne judy pathogen judy and judy the judy barber judy and judy makeup judy artists. judy there judy are judy no judy requirements judy for judy a judy makeup judy artist judy outside judy of judy a judy licensed judy establishment.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 19, 'end': 23, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 35, 'end': 39, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 54, 'end': 58, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 64, 'end': 68, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 93, 'end': 97, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 121, 'end': 125, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 130, 'end': 134, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 147, 'end': 151, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 155, 'end': 159, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 171, 'end': 175, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 184, 'end': 198, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 200, 'end': 204, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 212, 'end': 216, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 225, 'end': 229, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 233, 'end': 237, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 273, 'end': 277, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 282, 'end': 286, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 303, 'end': 307, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 312, 'end': 316, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 338, 'end': 342, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 349, 'end': 353, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 358, 'end': 362, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 366, 'end': 370, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 384, 'end': 388, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 393, 'end': 397, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 400, 'end': 404, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 424, 'end': 428, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 437, 'end': 441, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 445, 'end': 451, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 452, 'end': 456, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 466, 'end': 470, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Merno: Hello, my name is John Merno, I am a licensed barber, so I will talking on behalf of barbering. I have been licensed since 2011, since then it's been a great career path for me, there are many barbers who have gone through the school that I attended that have felons, different records against them. They've come out of the program making money that one, doesn't require them returning to selling dope. I oppose this bill knowing that it is a career than needs education, especially in the sanitation field, and also in the fact that you come out knowing a whole lot more than you go in. You need education in all these licensing fields, contracting and above, so I oppose this strongly.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Fred Jones: Senators, Fred Jones on behalf of the Professional Beauty Federation of California. I did not submit a letter but I have been in contact, several correspondences, with the author's office, so we do have some concerns on the barbering and makeup. There are some regulations, there's plenty of red tape that we would like to work with the author on in trying to streamline, but we are a licensed industry, and to pull that out could have all sorts of unintended consequences, so we have some concerns. Thank you.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maria Garcia: mr. chair, members, garcia with greenburg taruig on behalf of the california landscape contractors association in staunch opposition, respectfully, to sb 247. specifically, the provisions related to rc 27 license and the impact of raising that threshold would have both to consumers and licensed contractors throughout the state.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : Good afternoon Mr. Chairman and members. My name is Deborah Carlton with the California Apartment Association. We do truly appreciate this out of the box look at providing housing. As you all know, we're not getting it done today. And I appreciate the fact that we're anticipating what's ahead.
[{'start': 52, 'end': 67, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cathy Sailor: Good afternoon. Good afternoon, it is my pleasure to share my observations with you today. Thank you, Senator Jackson for your leadership on this important issue. My name is Cathy Sailor, I oversee the affordable housing program for Eskaton, a local non-profit that has been in existence for almost 50 years. Eskaton provides every level of care for seniors, including skilled nursing, assisted living, adult day healthcare centers, health and non-medical home care, and apartments for low income seniors. We serve older adults in every income level and we have locations throughout Northern California. Older adults are the fastest growing demographic in the country. Increases in housing and healthcare costs, combined with stagnant Social Security and SSI disbursements, are creating tremendous poverty among our older adult population. Starting in the late 1970s, Eskaton successfully developed 850 units of affordable apartments using primarily federal 202 funding. But as the years went by, cuts to federal and state housing programs have left few funding options for non-profits like Eskaton to develop more low income apartments, just as the need reaches its peak. Amongst our 13 locations we have 1,600 names on waiting list with waits up to 3 years for an apartment to become available. For older adults, housing is healthcare. Affordable housing properties linked with health and supportive services have proven to significantly help meet the varied needs of lower income seniors, while helping address a multitude of public policy priorities. Non-profit affordable senior housing providers, such as Eskaton, have been providing service-enriched housing for decades. However, it is very difficult to create more such housing in California for a number of reasons. The biggest is that there is little funding to build affordable senior housing. There simply aren't enough affordable units being built to keep up with demand. If a project does receive funding and is built, it is extremely difficult to layer on coordinated social and health services because of strict regulatory and funding mechanisms. This incredibly important bill will bring together public and private stakeholders to help identify and solve barriers, as it seeks to encourage and grow the supply of service-enriched affordable housing in California. I respectfully ask for your aye vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 110, 'end': 117, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 174, 'end': 186, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Megan Rose: Good morning, my name is Megan Rose, I'm here on behalf of LeadingAge California. LeadingAge California is an Association of non-profit providers of senior care and services. Like Eskaton, we represent over 400 of these members providing the same type of care across the state and I have to echo Cathy's comments that we do see housing is healthcare and the only way that we are going to be able to successfully address the issue of the silver tsunami is through building more housing and more service-enriched housing to allow our seniors to age in place. So I respectfully ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 296, 'end': 301, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bernadette Murray: Good afternoon, ma'am. Good afternoon, my name is Bernadette Murray. I'm from Woodland, California and as the facilitator of the Parkinson's Support Group in Woodland, California, I am not speaking on behalf of Parkinson's Support Group or the Parkinson's Association of Northern California, but simply as an individual, I stand in support of this bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 50, 'end': 67, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Juan Thomas: Thank you Mr. Chair and members, Juan Thomas representing the California Medical Association. We share the Senator's concern about opioid addiction, and look for ways to decrease opioid addiction. I think we've shown this at all of our specialties, throughout our specialities are re-evaluating best practices, guidelines updating our guidelines on how to prescribe to minors. We have a number of issues with the bill. I think we share the same concern with the same provision of the bill as a emergency docs. We're unsure how all this would work. First of all it's standard of care, standard of treatment for physicians who are prescribing to minors to educate them on all of the different treatments that are available. We're unsure about some of the legal things in here like what level of physician, what level of conversation is a physician supposed to have when they're counseling the guardian or the minor on the illegality of misusing or sharing opioids. We are also concerned that when it comes to writing this information down on a prescription pad, we don't really know what that means. We think that it was going to put physicians in a position of potentially violating HIPAA. Are we supposed to list all of these different treatments? Is this a check off box? How is this all supposed to work because the bill's very unclear on how that would work and we think it could potentially put physicians in a position where they are violating patient privacy rules. Also, again like the emergency physicians, when the patient comes in for a reassessment, our physicians, especially pediatricians and family physicians and others are pretty capable of determining and assessing that patient. We think having to refer that patient out to another specialist could result in a delay of care for that patient, of someone who's in pain. So for these reasons and many others, we're opposed to the bill and ask for your no vote.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randall Hagar: Good morning, Randall Hagar for the California Psychiatric Association. We too are opposed to this measure. It's an unappreciated fact that psychiatrists actually write prescriptions for many of the pain medications out there. And as a matter of fact, the UC Davis Pain Medicine and Behavioral Medicine Pain prevention and behavioral medicine program is actually a psychiatrist. And it is the opinion of that person, who is actually Dr Robert McKerran who is also our President elect, that this is really the wrong approach because it's got the wrong problem. He says that of the 2 million people that we know of since about 2014 who have abused and/or are dependent on opioid medications. A good portion of them are aged 12 and older and that is a really, I think it's a very striking fact. The problem really is not that they get these prescriptions directly. The problem is that there is unintentional drug overdose, deaths, and use and abuse and dependence on these drugs because they get them by other means. So they're not the primary recipient of being prescribed. Our option that we would prefer to see would be a training and education approach. It should focus on preventative work in the primary care setting where many of these prescriptions emanate. It would include things like coping strategies for pain, support systems for pain, physical activity, links between depression and pain. Many antidepressants are used very effectively to treat pain, and they don't have the side effects that opioids do. Again, I think for these reasons as well as a number of those that have been already cited in previous testimony, we are unfortunately in the position to ask for a no vote today.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 436, 'end': 451, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Phyllis Marshall: Good afternoon, Madame Chairwoman and Members of the Committee. My name is Phyllis Marshall, on behalf of the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors. The Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors took a support position on the previous version of the bill. The Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors supports efforts to restore the $620 million to counties, which will have a substantial impact on county services. For Los Angeles County alone, the impact would be $220 million this year. That number would grow to $500 million, by budget year 2021. Unfortunately, we have not had an opportunity to fully review the most current amendments to AB 675. We are in the process of doing that. So we are not able to take a position on the current version of the bill. However, we do commend the author for his leadership on this most important issue. We also commend the Chair of this Committee, for your leadership and support on this issue. And also the Chairperson of the Budget Subcommittee. This issue will have a substantial impact on county resources. We'd also like to acknowledge that Los Angeles County, as well as other counties. Are continuing in conversations with the Governor and his staff regarding this issue. And we thank the Governor and his staff for the ongoing negotiations. And certainly hope that we can resolve this matter in the budget, thank you.
[{'start': 75, 'end': 91, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Angie Garlin: thank you, my name is angie jonah garlin. i'm with alameda county, and we have a pilot. and i'm happy to talk offline with folks about what that's been like for us. but we have clean up language in the bill that would do something very important, which is include all of our alternative payment providers who are currently banned from our pilot, due to some language that needs to be removed. so we have a bifurcated system. but since the pilot, since six month, we've had dozens and dozens of families. like sule and her family, who've been able to participate in the pilot. we also think that statewide reform is a really great idea. some other bills that are doing that, would not do exactly the same as what the pilots are doing. so we also believe that these pilot bills provide a really great way to increase affordability and accessibility, thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 509, 'end': 513, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Karen Lange: good afternoon, madame chair. karen angie lange, on behalf of the sonoma county board of supervisors. and also, kathy christian has asked me to express her support on behalf of contra costa and marin as well, she couldn't be here. for sonoma county, they've actually returned $2.5 million in funds that they could have actually used to provide care to children, just because of the inflexible nature of the existing program. and this bill is just critical to serve folks and neighbors in neighborhoods, that are just a little bit more expensive. this flexibility is key for tailoring these programs to economic commissions, in these individual communities. so we ask for your aye vote today. thank you.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 112, 'end': 127, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brenda Brown: i'm sorry. i'm brenda. so i'm representing the state funded administrators, or state funded programs in contra costa county as part of this bill. and i'm going to keep this close because we've all heard this. it's the flexibility is what we really need for each of our counties. it's becoming harder and harder for us to serve all of the families that need families. i actually have families walking in daily requesting care. and for one reason or another, i can't serve them. i either can't serve them because i can't make my contract, because i have to send monies back, because i can't serve them without teachers. i can't serve them because they make $5 too much, because they make minimum wage and they got a commission, and thing's like that. and we just need that flexibility to fit our county and what it's.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Angie Dillon-Shore: i'm dillon-shore, representing first 5 sonoma county and i strongly support this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Crowe: Sarah Crowe, First 5 Contra Costa in full support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Suzie Marrone: Suzie Marrone on behalf of the Child Planning Council of Sonoma County, and the County Office of Education. I support this bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ruth Hernandez: ruth karen hernandez, in support of this bill. on behalf of the contra costa county office of education, and the contra costa local child care planning council.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kai Jackson: Kai Jackson with San Diego Unified School District, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rosanna Carvacho: carvacho, on behalf of the alameda county board of supervisors, we are a cosponsor and respectfully ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tiffany Whiten: madam chair and members, whiten with the service employees international union. representing over 315,000 ihss providers in support of ab 237. ab 237 redefines payroll period for providers of ihss and labor personnel services as two work weeks which is consistent with fsla requirements. currently, ihss providers must calculate their hourly work week that oftentimes cross between pay periods, which causes providers to inadvertently exceed their work week limits. if a provider exceeds their work week agreement. they are in jeopardy of being in temporary suspended, or even kicked out of the ihss program. by redefining the pay period as two work weeks, we can ensure our ihhs providers having more a streamlined timesheet process. that ultimately ensures those who care for our state seniors, and those with disabilities, have their pay done in a timely manner. i respectfully ask for your aye vote. and i'll turn it over to lisa scott, a provider with afscme-udw.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 929, 'end': 939, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lisa Scott: Hello, and thank you for having me today. My name is Lisa Scott, and I've been a provider for 10 years. I have three clients who differ in disabilities and needs very widely. From congestive heart failure and paralysis, to prostate cancer. I provide quality care for my clients in their homes. To ensure that all three of them live with the dignity and Independence that they so deserve. And for this care, I make just $10.60 per hour. But that is not the reason we are here today. We're here today about the injustice home care providers face, when we can't even get paid on time. Because, that timesheet process is so confusing, that simple errors mean weeks and sometimes months of delays. It used to be, that these small mistakes just meant not being able to pay the bills on time. But now, thanks to the new timesheet violation process. These mistakes could cost me and home care workers like me our jobs. But, I recently got a violation on one of my time sheets, because they told me I worked too many hours. But, I hadn't actually worked more hours than my client was alloted. The problem is that my official IHSS work week, which is Sunday through Saturday. Did not align with the bi-monthly pay period. The State Auditor agreed that this is a major problem, and said so in their audit report that came out last month. According to the report, one of the biggest reasons for paycheck delays is the time it takes to process timesheets, and mistakes on them. They essentially have to send providers a new timesheet, and start the process from scratch. And many timesheet errors are related on how complicated it is to track our hours. When our Sunday through Saturday work weeks don't match the bi-monthly pay period. So I'm here today to ask you to please consider passing the bill, AB 237. Because, matching our work week with our pay period will make filing out our time sheets so much easier. And the easier it is to keep track of our hours, and submit error-free time sheets, the fewer paycheck delays there will be. Helping IHSS providers pay our bills, put food on the table, and keep our homes. And, of course, fewer mistakes will mean fewer violations, ensuring that home care providers don't lose our jobs. And that our clients and loved ones see no interruption in their care. Thank you for your time today.
[{'start': 53, 'end': 63, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Greg De Giere: Greg De Giere here, with the ARC and the United Cerebral Palsey California. A collaboration and coalition with people with intellectual and developmental disabilities, and their families, friends, and service providers. People with disabilities rely heavily on IHSS. And anything we can do to get them paid their meager wages on time, so they can provide care for our people, is all for the good.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rosanne Domingo: Rosanne Domingo of Local 2015 in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Teresa Hineman: Teresa Hineman of Sonoma County, I support this bill very, very much, so thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cindy Rolstee: cindy, yes, i support this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Elise Anderson: sorry. elise, sacramento, i support this bill.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Trevia Gates: trevia ruth gates, sacramento, i support this bill, god bless you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Olga Evans: olga trevia evans from sacramento, i support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Angelica Salinas: Angelica Salinas from San Jose, I support this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vicente Vega: vicente olga vegas, santa clara county, i support this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Maria Fuente: hello, maria vicente fuente, and i support this bill for the 2015.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lauren Treadwell: Good afternoon, I'd like to thank Assemblymember Rubio and the members of the Human Services Committee for holding a hearing on AB 480 and allowing me to testify. My name is Lauren Treadwell and I am the advocacy chair for Help a Mother Out, a non-profit based in the Bay Area working to increase access to diapers for families in need. Since its founding 2009, Help a Mother Out has distributed over 5 million free diapers to low income Californians. Not having enough diapers presents a substantial barrier to participation, and work, school, and job training programs for families who are struggling to make ends meet. Most child care centers require families to drop off a full day supply of diapers, and if they don't, they may not be allowed to drop off their child. And without child care, parents cannot go to work or school. We often hear inspiring stories from our partners about families who have received our diaper aid. One client was planning to attend GED classes, but no one was wiling to watch her child because she had no clean diapers. Being able to get free diapers made it possible for her to attend those GED classes. Another client was forced to use folded shirts to diaper her baby and she was embarrassed to leave the house. Once she received diaper assistance, she was no longer afraid to go out in public with her child.  As you can see, a small thing like a diaper can have a very big impact. In 2015, Help a Mother Out partnered with San Francisco Human Services Agency to launch the San Francisco Diaper Bank, which is the nation's first and only publicly funded diaper bank.  The San Francisco Diaper Bank is administered by Help a Mother Out and provides families receiving CalWORKS benefits with a full supply of diapers each month for children under the age of three. As of March 2017, The San Fransisco Diaper Bank has distributed over 1.1 million diapers to 1,500 children. This equates to a total program participation rate of 59% of eligible CalWORKS families within San Francisco. News of the diaper bank program is slowly spreading and participation is consistently increasing. Diaper assistance helps to remove a barrier to work, school and job training program for low income families, but nonprofits like Help a Mother Out cannot cover this gap with private support alone. Therefore, on behalf of the families we serve, we thank you, and thank you, Gonzalez-Fletcher, for your leadership of this important problem.
[{'start': 49, 'end': 54, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 174, 'end': 190, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2390, 'end': 2407, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jessica Bartholow: Thank you, Madam Chair, Members of the Committee. Jessica Bartholow with the Western Center on Law and Poverty, and also, on the Board of the National Diaper Bank Network, in support and gracious for California leading the way and Assembly member Gonzalez-Fletcher. Many states are looking at this bill as the first in the country to establish diaper rights for babies. Thanks.
[{'start': 50, 'end': 67, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 247, 'end': 264, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Samantha Contreras: Good afternoon, Chair and members, I'm Samantha Contreras, Senior Legislative Advocate for SEIU Local 2015. We represent 325,000 long term care workers here in the state. We are sponsoring this bill as a clean up legislation to clarify that information, part of the home care registry is available through public records request. Two specific entities while being subject to non-disclosure agreements to keep this information confidential. Specifically recent amendments narrowed the scope of the bill to only allow governmental and non-profit entities to provide services, training, classes, and educational materials to contact home care aids if they choose. This is a straightforward bill that will facilitate the dissemination of information, training and resources to a growing workforce that will be tasked to care for our expanding aging population expected to reach 12 million seniors by the year 2060. Here today with me is Sunday Diaz, a home care aid who will be sharing her testimony in support of the bill. Thank you so much.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 933, 'end': 944, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Beverly Yu: good afternoon, beverly maria yu with udw asmi, local 3930, in strong support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 38, 'end': 46, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Teresa Heinsman: Teresa Heinsman from Sonoma County, Local 2015, I support this bill very, very, very strongly.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roseanne Domingo: Hi, my name is Roseanne Domingo, I'm from Sonoma County, Local 2015. I'm in strong support of the bill.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Elise Henderson: My name is Elise Henderson, I'm from Sacramento, 2015, and I strongly support the bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sieva Gamele: my name is sieva beverly gamele, i'm from lake county, and i'm in seiu local 2015, and i strongly support. hope you guys support this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Traveri Gates: hi, my name is gates, and i'm from seiu local 2015, and i please praise support this bill.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Olga Evans: Hello, my name is Olga Evans, and I strongly support this bill, and I'm from Sacramento.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Benita Muenos: I'm Benita Muenos from Sonoma County, and I'm from 2015, and I support this bill.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vicente Vega: Hey, Vicente Vega from SEIU Local 2015. I'm here from Santa Clara County, and I strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Angelica Salinas: hi, my name is angelica, and i'm coming from san jose. i'm from seiu 2015, and i support the bill, thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
May Cocoa: hello, my name is cocoa, i'm from oakland. i'm with seiu 2015, and i strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nadia Boshkina: hi, my name is nadia sieva boshkina, i support this bill.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Wanda Rieman: My name is Wanda Rieman, I'm from Sacramento, 2015, and I urge you to please listen to everything that was said today because we really need to come together and support this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robin Bell: Hi, I'm Robin Bell from Sacramento and strongly support this bill for the caregivers in health that we do for the people and their families. Thank you.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Braden Obrowski: good afternoon, chair and members, braden, california association of health services at home. we're in strong opposition to the bill. cahsah strongly supported licensure when it was passed. we worked with the department to ensure that our caregivers were providing adequate and quality care to the industry. the registry was created as a way to ensure that home care clients were receiving quality licensed care. the registry was used so that an individual's can show that they've been trained, they passed tb test. they've passed a background check and so forth. so if i needed care for my mother, i could go on to the registry, say i was working with abc home care. abc home care is listed, michael smith, i can go to michael smith and say, michael smith has been trained, licensed. he's able to provide care in the home. this bill is looking to provide home care aides' name, home address, home phone number, and employment history as a public information's request. it's hard to justify that a public good for that kind of private information. there's countless california statutes that are looking to protect private information, and yet, we're making this information available via public information request. the proponents are saying that they want to do training with this, which is commendable. although why is this information needed to provide training? you can advertise training online. you can advertise training in the newspaper. you can reach out to homecare organizations and say, hey, we'd be happy to work with you, homecare organization, to provide this training. why do we need their personal information to offer training to these individuals? additionally, the department of social services has been talking with the legislature about the need to increase licensure fees. they're looking to raise licensure fees for organizations by over $600 and double the cost for aides to be registered and the argument for this is because they don't have the resources on staff to meet current demands of the licensure process. the department of social services is saying that they can't meet current demands. how are they going to meet the demands of this bill? how is the department going to justify who meets the requirements for this bill? they're going to need additional resources for that. they're already asking for additional resources to meet what they need now. we already work with a lot of organizations to provide training. all organizations as part of life insure are required to make sure that their aides are trained. at the end of the day, the aides need to make sure that they meet their training by their training requirements, but the organizations know that they cannot send an individual that does not meet the training requirements. therefore, the organizations are already providing this training for them. one of the differences is we have home care aides that are associated with an organization, in which case, they have to be licensed. they have to be on the registry and then you have independent home care aides. independent home care aides do not have to be on the registry. that's something that is completely different, two separate entities. anybody that's working for an organization must be licensed, must be trained. the organizations already provide this training. if additional training is asked for, there's ways to do that. we shouldn't be giving anybody private home and phone numbers where their husbands, wives, and children live. we respectfully ask for your no vote, thank you.
[{'start': 693, 'end': 706, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 720, 'end': 733, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 743, 'end': 756, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ignacio Cespedes: madame chair, committee, my name is ignacio nadia cespedes and i'm the owner of brightstar care, a franchise agency with 20 agencies here in california. i'm also on the board of the north in california chapter of the home care association of america and i'm here to request opposition to this bill. i've hired hundreds of caregivers and interviewed probably 2 or 3,000, and i believe they do not want their private information shared with anybody. many of them are scared, and they certainly would not want the information out in public.  they received training from our agency, all licensed agencies, they have to comply with the new law and provide training. so they can obtain that. they're also very resourceful, and they can find their own training in google. so they do that sometimes even without needing our own training. so, i don't understand why this information, unlike any other, we're also a licensed home health agency, and our home health aides are not on our registry. you can't get a list of cnas from our registry, or nurses, or anybody else for that case. additionally, the information that would be released is competitive information because a non-profit could also operate as a license agency and obtain our caregiver's information. these days, there's an extreme shortage of caregivers, and the last thing i need is an agency that is also a non-profit to obtain the names and phone numbers of my employees. so we respectfully request that we oppose this bill.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Clara Baysen: My name is Clara Baysen. I'm a caregiver at Bright Star. I oppose this bill, simply because of my personal information. I wouldn't want anybody knowing where I live, my telephone number, even if it is for learning purposes, which is nice, but Bright Star does also have that for us as well, and I just wouldn't want anybody knowing where I live, or my telephone number and contacting me, whether it's professional reasons or not. If I didn't give it out, I wouldn't want it, wouldn't want it received.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katy Cycle: My name's Katy Cycle, I'm from the Apex Care in Sacramento, and I strongly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tabitha Flores: Hi, my name is Tabitha Flores, and I'm a caregiver, and I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Josh Greenburke: Josh Greenburke, with Right at Home, and I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gail Davis: gail ignacio davis, with right at home sacramento, i oppose this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Capra: good afternoon, chair rubio, vice-chair choi, and other members of the assembly committee on human services. my name is brian gail capra, i'm a senior staff attorney for the children's rights project of public council in los angeles. public council is proud to support ab 1375 which will help solve a longstanding problems associated with the ability of county placing agencies to appropriately and timely place youth with specialized needs. this bill complements the state's continuing care reform efforts by ensuring that all children will be accounted for as our child welfare services system moves away from restrictive and costly settings towards a home-based family care placement model. ab1375 will provide the state with the means to inventory gaps and appropriate placements for certain youth, who for a variety of reasons have historically been hard to place. first, ab 1375 will establish an online database that counties will be able to access to help timely locate appropriate and available placement options for state of the youth statewide after exhausting the process to place these children through resource families, which is that community care reform process. the intentions here are not to sub-plan or to replace, what the continuing care reform is designed to effectuate. we're here to compliment that. the department of social services will create this and maintain this database and specify placements in the bill serving children with specialized needs will report daily as to their vacancies so the county will have this information readily available. second, the ab 1375 will require counties to report the reasons for the change of placement. this department's going to track and publicly report on the number of changes and placements and the reasons for these changes and placements. through this information counties can then make whatever changes are necessary, they can make their adjustments with these particular placement options to fine-tune. public council strongly believes that children should not be deprived of necessary services and supports simply because of their special needs. we have worked closely with los angeles county department of children family services as well as our probation department in la county over the past seven years to develop policies and procedures serving children with disabilities. at any given time, there are over 40 to 50 youth that are housed, that are detained in our los angeles county juvenile halls who have developmental mental disabilities. it's frustrating to think that many of these children could have been diverted from that system had they received timely and appropriate services. so we urge your aye vote on ab 1375.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 40, 'end': 44, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 120, 'end': 136, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Denise Prebella: A little nervous, good afternoon, Chair Choi, oh, Rubio, Vice Chair Chu and the rest of the Assembly Committee on Human Services. My name's Denise Prebella. I'm a children services administrator and I'm a program manager over all our Regional Center kids that we service in the Los Angeles County Department of Children and Family Services and that includes children 0 to 21. The department and the LA County board have not taken a position on AB 1375. I'm here to offer my expertise and personal opinions as someone who does this work placing foster children with specialized needs on a day-to-day basis for the past 23 years. Our county currently services 34,000 youth and non minor dependence. Of these there are 20,000 in out of home care, 7,000 are placed in foster family agencies. 2,000 are in group homes. The rest are placed with relatives or other living arrangements, such as, I currently have 150 of my population with children with developmental disabilities that are in Regional Center placements or in psychiatric facilities. Sadly, some of the children are currently awaiting placement in our transition shelter care homes, including many of our little ones. Recently, I came to work, I had a two year old with Down syndrome in shelter care, only because the staff on duty for the past two days could not locate a home. They reached out to my section, and we got lucky. Someone knew someone that knew someone that might have an opening. So this was done by word of mouth, and because of that, she got placed. But that's not an effective system. Word of mouth is not a good system. More often than not, it takes us days, weeks, sometimes months. I've got placements that we've been looking for for eight months for some of our duly served population. That's unacceptable. A good match for some children at the beginning, close to their family ties, can be instrumental in more successful outcomes for these kids. In addition, the database proposed by AB 1375, will list the placements' populations they serve and what type of treatments are in place to best support the child's needs. Nearly 1,700 children are duly served, those are my Regional Center kids, by our department and the regional's center system. We serve on an average over 600 clients in addition with complex medical conditions. There's currently no tracking mechanism for children with mental health needs, but many of the children we serve are in need of highly specialized therapeutic settings. The system proposed under AB 1375 will allow for the best possible placement, ensuring necessary services are in place and reducing transitions from one home to another. I have children come across my desk who have experienced over 20 placements while under care, often the results of not having adequate experience amongst the staff they're placed with or resources to address their needs. Unfortunately, by not having a full picture of all the placements available, we are left with utilizing places such as an acute psychiatric facility for the developmentally disabled. Our county currently has 12 youth and adults in that psychiatric facility at a cost of $1,250 a day, $38,000 a month, for close to nearly a half $1 million to Los Angeles County each month. Okay, I'm good. I also want to say we have to expand our searches to eliminate placing kids in states like Utah, Iowa and Florida to meet their needs.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 44, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 50, 'end': 55, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 68, 'end': 71, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 140, 'end': 155, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ashley Harrington: thank you, my name is ashley, and i'm with jewish family service of san diego. jfs is a client-centered impact organization, whose mission it is to build a stronger, healthier, more resilient san diego and empower families to move towards self sufficiency. as a comprehensive organization that serves san diegans, who are often working hard, but falling short, jfs has a unique understanding of the needs of struggling california. just as some of dr. arambula's constituents face inequities with safe drinking water, we also work with specific populations that are left struggling when critical safety net services are unavailable or inadequate to meet their needs. for example, jfs operates two separate military food distributions each month. for nearly 10 years, we've provided supplemental food assistance for active duty military families stationed at camp pendleton and murphy canyon military housing. last year alone, our agency served 757 military families with over 35,000 supplemental meals. this unfathomable need is due to the fact that a military's basic allowance for housing is considered income when qualifying for calfresh, with no consideration given to the high cost of san diego and other high cost california cities. in addition to military families, jfs serves another special population, low income holocaust survivors who rely on ssi and ssp. last year, jfs served 160 holocaust survivors whose medical, nutrition, and mental health needs are incredibly complex. due to the ssi/ssp cash out policy, these vulnerable survivors are ineligible for calfresh and rely on limited assistance from charitable organizations, like jfs, for supplemental nutrition.  private philanthropy and local charities are simply unable to meet the sheer scale of need in california. when there are specific populations that are shut out from the federal safety net, local communities would benefit from a flexible and responsive state system to respond with food aid when state funds are prioritized to meet their needs. california has a responsibility to protect our residents when federal benefits aren't available. jewish family service of san diego respectfully requests the state of california pass ab 164 to ensure we can marshal flexible, timely, and more local resources to protect our most vulnerable community members. thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 451, 'end': 459, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Danielle Kando-Kaiser: good afternoon. danielle brian kando-kaiser on behalf of common sense kids action. we've awarded this bill our star rating, in strong support. thank you very much.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Monica Zemi: Monica Zemi with the California Alternative Payment Program Association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christopher Galeano: christopher danielle galeano with the california immigrant policy center, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Harms: Jennifer Harms with the National Association of Social Work, California Chapter, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Herald: herald with the western center on law and poverty, also in support.
[]
Michele Cantwell-Copher: Good afternoon, Chairwoman Rubio and Members of the Committee. My name is Dr. Michele Cantwell-Copher and I am representing Fresno County Superintendent of Schools. I'm here with my colleague Lupe Jaime, who is the Director of the Early Care and Education Department, and Dr. Matilda Sorea ,who coordinates our Fresno County Childcare and Development Local Planning Council. In addition some of our partners who are here in support are in the audience as well. Fresno County has 202,340 children aged 0 to 12 years, and approximately 35% of those children are of low income working families. Approximately 13,922 children are served by subsidized childcare programs. Moreover, the Central Valley Children's Services Network, our local resource and referral agency, reports that there are over 4,000 children currently wait listed for subsidized childcare. In addition to the burden faced by our families, childcare providers are struggling to stay in business. AB 258 will help keep our county's childcare providers' doors open and capable of accepting subsidized children. You'll note we have numerous letters of support, two of which come from the Fresno Business Council and the Fresno County Chamber of Commerce. Despite the great need for child care experience by our families within Fresno County, our county returned nearly 9.6 million in unearned childcare dollars in the 2014-15 year. Approximately 1,300 more children could have been served with these unearned dollars. Our pilot will make immediate use of these funds without encroaching on funds of non-pilot counties leading to an increase in the number of families served, and the stability of childcare providers.  Simply put, this bill will allow more children to reach childcare services at no additional cost to the state. If approved, we intend to engage with all childcare contractor types, particularly those that serve our most vulnerable children and families, and we intend to seek their input in creating the pilot.  While we cannot be certain what our pilot program will look like until we undergo this inclusive stakeholder process, existing pilots provide flexibility in the following areas. One, family and child eligibility. Two, reimbursement rates. Specifically the use of a higher reimbursement rate to keep up with regional costs. Three, family fees. Families currently pay approximately 10% of the income. Pilots use a graduated fee schedule to ensure low income families pay less. And four, other methods of maximizing the efficient use of subsidy dollars. AB 258 provides the necessary flexibility to best meet the childcare needs of Fresno County. For these reasons, I respectfully request your aye vote.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 32, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 78, 'end': 101, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 192, 'end': 202, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 276, 'end': 289, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ken Harren: Ken Harren, a provider in Fresno County. And I think those W2s that I provided provides a compelling case of how poorly paid my teachers are, and we need the SMI index up and we need the SR up. Thank you. Thank you Dr.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ruth Fernandez: ruth christopher fernandez on behalf of the california childcare coordinators association, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cai Jackson: Cai Jackson with San Diego Unified School District, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ericka Erickson: Ericka Erickson, Local Planning Council for the County of Marin, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathy Lago: Chairman Rubio and members of the Committee, my name is Kathy Lago. I'm the Executive Director of Solano Family and Children's Services. We're the child care resource for referral and alternative payment program in Solano County, and I'm here representing our Solano County license, excuse me, local child care planning council. In 2014-15, by the end of that year, we sent back $255,000 of unearned childcare. Last year, we sent back $750,000 of unearned dollars to the state. We estimate that over 100 children could have been served with those dollars that we were required to send back because of the lack of the flexibility of the programs that we run now. As the only childcare alternative payment program in Solano County, we've been able to utilize most of our funds each year since families can take their childcare dollars to family childcare providers or centers of their choice. Our childcare center contractors do not have this same flexibility. Based on the Family Economics Self Sufficiency standard, the required income needed in Solano to meet basic needs including child care is higher than that of California over all since 2008. When it was updated in 2014, Solano standard had increase by 21% whereas the State of California rose by 17%. This is 4% points higher, $3000 more that a family will need to come up with. Present program rules require contractors to end the families eligibility for their child care subsidy due to a little bit of overtime pay and and were very small few cents raise. Childcare centers are having to remove children from their stable, consistent, quality childcare and preschool programs, which would cost a family $4000 to $6000 out of pocket. I want to thank you for the opportunity to share this testimony and I thank the Assembly members Frazier and Gonzalez-Fletcher for sponsoring the bill. And we believe that AB 377 provides the necessary flexibility to best meet the needs of the child care, the children in our county, and for these reasons, I respectfully request your aye vote. Thank you. Good afternoon, Lee Angela Reid on behalf of San Diego County Office of Education. I want to thank Assembly member Frazier and Assembly member Gonzalez for their leadership on this and their tremendous staff work that was done to bring this all together. In the interest of time, I won't echo some of the other comments, I'll just focus on what this means for San Diego County Office of Ed. I will tell you that, in 14-15, San Diego County left $12.6 million on the table in unused funds that came back to the state. Over 11 million was in state preschool. One of the biggest, well the biggest, member of our coalition is San Diego Unified.  Over the past two years, San Diego Unified has returned approximately $11 million in child care funding allocated by the state, and will likely reach around 4 million this year, 15 million over a three year period. That's a lot of families who could be served. AB 377 will help the county and districts leverage this child care resources adjust for income eligibility. Address things like military housing which is included as part of income, adjust the age limit. And we think that it's very, very important given the fiscal pressures that are facing folks at the local level, and our most needy families. One note on the individual county plan versus statewide, we very much want statewide reform, but the statewide reform as proposed doesn't include individual differences and operating costs to be addressed by each county. This is not and instead of for San Diego, it's in addition to. We are concerned a little bit about the Committee Members, although we appreciate and understand the intent very much, and we look forward to looking for Mr. Frazier and Ms. Gonzalez as the bill moves forward on some of the cost issues. This is just too important and we need that flexibility to be able to serve our families. Thank you.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 14, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 56, 'end': 66, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1791, 'end': 1798, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1803, 'end': 1820, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2066, 'end': 2081, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2165, 'end': 2172, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2193, 'end': 2201, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3740, 'end': 3747, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3756, 'end': 3764, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Allen Curzon: good afternoon. curzon, children's network in solano county, strong support. thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Astrowski: jennifer ruth astrowski, parent and resident of solano county, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cai Jackson: cai jennifer jackson with san diego unified school district, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shannan Watkins: watkins, monterey county child care planning council, strong support.
[]
Francine Rodd: Francine Rodd for First 5 Monterey County, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ruth Fernandez: Ruth Fernandez on behalf of the California Child Care Coordinators Association in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Ramirez: Amy Ramirez, Quality Children's Services San Diego, County, and looking forward to other counties getting this support as well.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katherina Rigana: rigana, on behalf of first 5 la and first 5 california, in strong support.
[]
Jennifer Harms: jennifer, of the national association of social workers, california chapter, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michele Stillwell-Parvensky: michele cai stillwell-parvensky, children's defense fund california, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brenda Brown: Brenda Brown, preschool provider, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jesse Aguiar: Good afternoon, Committee Chair and Committee Members. My name is Jesse Aguiar and I'm here representing Journey House as the proud sponsors of AB 1567. We have been working with current and former foster youth out of the Pasadena community for the last 35 years. Our mission is to assist former foster youth reach self-sufficiency, and we do this by supporting them through their educational journeys. We understand the impact that college and vocational degrees have on people's ability to gain meaningful employment. And so we focus our efforts to supporting youth through their journeys. California has the largest population of children and youth in foster care in the nation. Less than half of California foster youth graduate from high school compared to 79% of the general population. By age 26 only 6% of California foster youth complete college compared to 46% of the general population. As a former foster youth myself, I know first hand how important these supportive services are to helping not only navigate our education, but also to build our own personal lives. And so, AB 1567 seeks to address the issue of under utilization of on campus support program services by providing form of falsely used notification of on campus support Programs at the California community colleges and Cal State Universities. Programs such as Extended Opportunity Programs and Services, EOPNS, and the Cooperating Agencies of Foster Youth Educational Success, CAFYES, provides student support such as books, school supplies, transportation, educational counseling and tutoring. These critical supports have a huge impact on a foster youth's ability to successfully complete college. We know that if a youth succeeds in college they are more likely to find meaningful employment, contribute to the economy and less likely to depend on government support, and ultimately break the cycle of poverty that lead children into the child welfare system. For these reasons we urge your support on AB 1567.
[{'start': 66, 'end': 78, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lucero Noyola: Hi, good afternoon, Committee chair and members. My name is Lucero Noyola, and I am a former foster youth. I grew up in South Gate, California and I entered foster care at the age of 16, and after having my daughter at the age of 18, I enrolled in community college. I attended East Los Angeles Community College, and at the time there were few support programs on campus that I qualified for, but I did not know about them. The EOPNS, Care, and now CAFYES, I could have utilized these programs to help me pay for school books and supplies, get assistance with food, transportation, and educational counseling. This experience is not only my own. As Jesse mentioned some stats, a recent study found that 19% of foster youth enrolled in California community colleges and state universities participated in campus support programs. The study also noted that not having knowledge of campus is a huge factor leading to there under utilization. I went about two years without knowing about these campus support programs and when I learned about them, I had missed the deadline to apply. Is imperative that we ensure that students who are eligible for these existing programs and supports are away of them, so they can access them and receive the support they need to live up to their true potential. On behalf of myself and the thousands of other foster youth in California, who are struggling to apply and enrol and complete their college degrees and certificates, I urge you to support AB 1567.
[{'start': 60, 'end': 73, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 650, 'end': 655, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ray Burnell: thank you, ray michele burnell with the catholic church in california, we're in support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Harms: harms, the national association of social work, in support.
[]
Michele Stillwell-Parvensky: michele ray stillwell-parvensky, children's defense fund california, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Arriaga: yes, please, arriaga on behalf of the monterey county board of supervisors. we would like to thank the author for bringing this bill forward. it not only recognizes this important system of care, but would provides resources to support the central coast region. this is especially beneficial in the monterey county, in particular, south county, where family, friend, and neighbor care is the primary source of care. i ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Daisy Castro: Thank you members of the committee. My name is Daisy Castro, and I am representing families of Monterey County that are struggling with the high cost of living and the high cost of childcare. I am facing a difficult time in my life affording quality childcare for my two and a half year old son. My son was being cared for by my mother at my home. Unfortunately, things changed when my grandmother fell and fractured her hip and she can no longer care for my son. She is now caring for both of my grandparents and now I have no other choice but to start looking for childcare. I was very surprised and very sad when I realized that most of my income, half of it was going to be going to childcare and the other half was going to be going to housing. I am one of the families that will be helped by AB 300. When I applied for subsidized child care, I was just a few dollars short from qualifying. In the past, I was also a CalWORKS participant myself and I did finish my education and I'm still struggling, and I cannot become financially stabled because of my childcare and housing situation. This has made me question whether I should stay at home and take care of my own children or if I should go to work. However, I want a better life for my kids. I want a better life for my kids, so I really feel stuck. Pressures on families and providers are causing problems for parents like me and getting childcare in Monterey County. Unfortunately, we live in a time when we can't deny that some children are starting behind because of the income of their parents, the color of their skin, or the location of their home. I have a son and I want to make sure he and other children. He and other children in Salinas have the best possible start in life. By giving these children the opportunity to have eligibility to have affordable and quality childcare. With a few changes to the child age limit, the family eligibility limit and the reimbursement rates, we can provide more opportunities to more children in our county. It just makes sense. AB 300 will help us do that. For these reasons, I respectfully request your aye vote on AB 300. Thank you.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Arriaga: Quickly, just John Arriaga on behalf of the County Board of Supervisors for Monterey in support of the bill.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Francine Rodd: francine michele rodd with first five monterey county and co-sponsor. i support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lisa Faulkner: Good afternoon, I'm Lisa Faulkner on behalf of First Five San Benito. We're in full support of the bill.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lorita Riga: Lorita Riga, former state-funded childcare provider and current consultant for childcare providing in Alameda County and I support AB 300.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kai Jackson: Kai Jackson, San Diego Unified School District in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ruth Fernandez: fernandez on behalf of the california child care coordinators association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Harms: hi there, harms, the national association of social work, california chapter, in support.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susanna Kniffen: Susanna Kniffen with Children Now in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brandon Roberts: brandon francine roberts representing the health officers association of california here in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Patty Chavez: Patty Chavez on behalf of South Bank Community Services in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Emily Hodge: emily brandon hodge on behalf of the junior leagues of california, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ashley Harrington: Ashley Harrington on behalf of Jewish Family Service of San Diego, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brenda Diaz: Brenda Diaz with California Coverage&Health Initiatives, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ray Burnell: ray, with the catholic church of california, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Josh Friday: josh emily friday with golden state opportunity and cal utic for me in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5, 'end': 10, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mario Chavez: Mario Chavez, St. John's Well Child and Family Center in South Las Angeles, representing 85,000 children and their families, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Monica Zemi: monica josh zemi on behalf of the california alternative payment program association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Zainab Badi: good afternoon my name is zainab monica badi and i'm a researcher at sciu, local 2015, we're a long term care worker union that represents over 325,000 workers in california. our union has worked with assemblymember santiago's office on this bill, because this is a very important issue for our membership, the bulk of which are home care providers, and many of our members have family members in the lanterman system. and they rely on respite care in order to provide emotionally, and physically taxing around the clock care to their families. currently, respite services are administered in a way that lacks accountability and does a disservice to respite workers, their families that rely on respite care, and californians as a whole. so this bill aims to improve transparency in this system and ensure that public money goes to direct service. in 2016, the state spent nearly a quarter of $1 billion on the respite program. and an audit conducted by the state auditor revealed that dds does not collect cost reports, prove that payment rates to respite agencies are appropriate, or demonstrate that vendor files are regularly reviewed by regional centers. the audit also showed a huge variation in how much the respite vendors spent on their administrative costs, with some companies spending up to 30% of their rate just on administration. in other dd services, the administration rate is capped at 15%. we believe that egregious spending on administration is unacceptable, especially for medical, a program that's already in a really precarious position. so i urge the committee to consider this proposal and with that i'd like to introduce olga evans. she's a member of local 2015 and a recipient of respite services, thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 216, 'end': 224, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1647, 'end': 1657, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Olga Evans: Good afternoon, my name is Olga Evans. I'm from Sacramento and I am here today to speak on behalf of in-home support service, IHSS workers statewide and respite care. Recipients like my son who depend on us and those who provide respite care to survive. It was seven years ago when my life was rather normal. Imagine a family that includes four children and myself making the best of life and dealing with the ups and downs. Little did I know my family's life was about to change. Seven years ago, my son, who was 17 at the time, was involved in a serious car accident. One that left him a serious brain injury and paralyzed from the neck down. He spent months in the hospital and doctors thought he would never walk again, but through the grace of God, he is now able to walk. The accident itself was a life changing experience And then learning that I would now have to provide 24 hour care for my son for the rest of his life. Well, that was- But, like any mother would, I gladly took on the task, providing my son every need. His childlike mind and physical condition requires me to wake him up, help him use the rest room, prepare his meals, and plan for the entire day. Sometimes the day goes smooth, while others he may act out, keeping us from going out or other things that may have been planned for the day. Regardless of his move, it takes at least three hours to get him ready for the day whether we stay in or leave the house. The 24-hour care I provide for my son is something I take a lot of pride in doing. And I know my son appreciates it. However, the amount of care can make it impossible to get other important things done for the household, my three other young children, and myself. Luckily, Respite Care through ... Regional Center makes it possible for me to address my responsibilities outside of my son. Everything from appointments for my other children to running to the grocery store. The program allows me to have a skilled caregiver to step in while I need to take care of those tasks and give me piece of mind that my son is in good hands. My family is one of million of families across California that rely on Respite Care and see it as a valuable and necessary service, not a luxury. Without it I would not be able to hold it all together. How I, and other families feel, the program is at risk of cuts. In 2016, California spent more than 221 million on in-home respite service, with little accommodations for companies that are making millions in profits from this public money. A trend that needs to stop. That's why the state needs to cap administrative cost to minimize the workers who provide Respite Care have quality wages and benefits. Capping and may it cost will assure that more money goes to the caregiver service through disability and their families. The state needs to step up and resume collecting costs reports on respite care from companies cap the money spent on mid costs to 15% and require at least 85% to be spent directly on service. More money will go to the wages and benefits of IHSS workers. More hours of respite care could be allowed to families and it could also mean expanding the program. All that together means more support for families in need of the service. The time is now for the state to clean up this industry and hold it accountable. On behalf of IHSS workers, we support bill 1380 that includes those changes and will hope you will too. Thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eric Parerez: hi, my name is parerez with sciu local 2015 in strong support of this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Teresa Hinesman: My name is Teresa Hinesman, I'm local 2015. I support this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Benita Munoz: i'm benita zainab munoz from 2015. i support this bill.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pam Ing: Hi, my name is Pam Ing. I'm from 2015. I support this bill.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Trevera Gates: hi, my name is trevera benita gates. i'm from 2015, and i do support this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rosanne Domingo: hi, my name is rosanne trevera domingo. i'm from local 2015, coming from san joaquin county. i'm here in strong support for this bill.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Elise Henderson: Hi, my name is Elise Henderson. I'm from 2015 and I support this bill.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Wanda Raymond: hi, my name is raymond, and i'm from sacramento, 2015, and i do support this bill.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alexander Ojingua: My name is Alexander Ojingua, from SCIU local 2015 in strong support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robin Bell: Hello, my name is Robin Bell and I support this bill.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Rath: Hello, my name is Kevin Rath, I'm with the Supported Living Network, and I would like to say that the audit requirement is already in state law, we already have audits that are going on and on, we have, my agency has four audits, and there is one audit that is mandated from DDS already. The rate review duplicates existing mandates for a rate study AB 2x dash one already mandates that. Why do we need two rate studies, especially when this is only about respite care that takes respite care out of the context of DDS services? The expenditure controls are already in the law, and the state audit specifically said there was insufficient data to actually make any clear recommendations, that's why we need to wait and follow the two year study that DDS is currently implementing. That will actually collect the data and create rate structures in a rational way that in the context of the rest of the GD system, there's no benchmark to compare anyone, any kind of administrative structure, to the other DDS services, and let's wait to do that. The one agency that was cited, that did 30%, is just one out of over 380 agencies that actually exist, so I would agree with the Auditor that we don't have enough information, and we should wait until we get enough. The Regional Centers already have this audit authority, and, again, the fiscal impact is going to be something like 2 to $4 million, we estimate, to do this, and it gets on top of rates that have been frozen for decades. Remember the only rate increase went to direct support staff last time, there wont be any extra money to do these audits. And also, we are disappointed in the background check restrictions, because it makes background checks harder, instead of easier, by legislating there be only one background check. And the last thing, that's the worst perhaps, is the definition of administrative services. Title 17 has a fairly clear definition of administrative services, this is vague and would create, the new definition of administrative services is inclusive, and vague, and open-ended, and would create more chaos in a rate structure system that already is experiencing severe distress, thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barry Jardini: Good afternoon, Barry Jardini with the California Disability Services Association, thank you, Madam Chair, for allowing us to present today. Like the author, we are concerned about the rate structure for Developmental Services in California, the difference is that we don't think that this bill is the right vehicle at this point in time. We understand there was an audit of the in home respite rates done last year, but, as Kevin mentioned, at this point, implementing an 85% requirement on direct service expenditures is premature, the audit itself didn't call for that. It called for rates that it'd determined whether or not the rates being paid were adequate, we don't know that yet. We expect we will know it once we've done the rate study through ABX21, we don't think we need a second rate study for one particular service type when we're already doing a comprehensive review through ABX21. So, again, we think it's a little bit premature on those counts, there's also one important element that we didn't touch on yet, and that's the employer of record model. In 2010, the State of California, which was in conciousness of the state's need to ensure proper accounting and oversight of services funded by Medicaid dollars, imposed an employer of record requirement on Regional Centers for the most common kind of respite care, which was that provided by family members to their family members. And so, some respite providers were asked by their Regional Centers to become these employers of records, to do the administrative duties, to keep the paperwork, to make sure that those respite services were adequately maintained and documented, so, that is a purely administrative service. There's no way to differentiate that employer record model from other respite services. So by putting an 85% requirement on it, direct service expenditures, you will make that model completely untenable, which protects, again, those federal Medicaid dollars. So for those reasons, and the reasons that Kevin mentioned, and The California Respite Association, we are reluctantly opposed, although we are happy to continue working with the author on the bill, thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 425, 'end': 430, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1995, 'end': 2000, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Daniel Savino: And shifting to me too mode, Daniel Savino, Association of Regional Center Agencies, also in opposition for the insertion of state process over family choice with the background checks, and unfunded mandates on providers in Regional Centers.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Sarkissian: Yes, Karen Sarkissian with the California Chamber of Commerce in opposition, we believe it's an unnecessary restriction, and will lead to issues of access, thank you.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Bower: good afternoon, madam chair and members, bower on behalf of premier healthcare, in opposition, thank you.
[]
Braden O'browski: Good afternoon, Braden O'Browski on behalf of the California Association for Health Services at Home, in opposition, thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Herald: thank you, madam chair, mike rosanne herald with the western center on law and poverty. we are a supporter of this measure. when we first started calworks some 20 plus years ago, we knew very little about the best ways to help people move from welfare to work. 20 years later, we now know that education is the key for people to escape poverty and to move forward. every report that we've seen shows that the more education that the poor have, the more likely they are to be employed, the more education that they receive. we strongly support the efforts to get people into community college, give them the stipends and assistance and funding for community colleges to assist them when they get there. we support the measure, thank you.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brianne Hall: my name is brianne and i'm with the calworks association statewide and with american river college. i'm here speaking on behalf of the, or in support of ab 227. i did bring something. i have one for each of you, but i only have one on the table here. it's separated by district. this is a portraits of success. these are success stories of our students from across the state who has successfully completed an associate's degree, have moved on to their bachelor's degrees, are running their own business. so i'm happy to leave these for the committee because it's something very near and dear to my heart. this bill would support our students and would encourage additional students to attend college which is actually speaking to my student on the way up here, she made a good point. she doesn't want a job. she wants a career and that is where our passion is in putting student towards careers not just towards jobs. and getting them and their children out of poverty. we support this. the community colleges support this and the calworks community college association supports it as well.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Hysheena Jones: hello, sorry.  hello, my name is hysheena mike jones, and i testify in support of this bill, ab 227. i am a single mother. and, i could say i've started arc in august of 2009. i graduated spring of 2014. i was a student assistant there, where they gave me jobs in the student service. right now, i graduate from sac state in two more weeks.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 51, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kevin Ethnikolische: yeah, good afternoon, kevin hysheena ethnikolische coalition california rifle rights organizations. we also support this bill. basically, in the 19th century was work first and in the 21st century, it's education first. and we have a lot of students right now who had the audacity to go to school without the permission of the welfare department and because of that, they're being severely punish called the sanction. the sanction means that a family of two rather than getting a 570 a month they only get 350 a month, why? because they had the audacity to try to become self sufficient. this bill doesn't cure that but, what it does, it gives people a reward for doing the right thing. it's a positive incentive and we support the bill.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 36, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Judy Darnell: judy with the united ways of california in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Harms: Jennifer Harms, National Association of Social Work California Chapter in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ray Burnell: ray kevin burnell with the catholic church of california in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shannon Smith-Crowley: Hi Shannon Smith-Crowley representing the American Association of University Women in support.
[{'start': 3, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Monica Zamey: Monica Zamey with the California Alternative Payment Program Association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sherri Farina: Good afternoon, my name is Sherri Farina. I am the CEO of NorCal Services for Deaf and Hard-of-Hearing. I represent the California coalition of agencies serving the deaf and hard-of-hearing, just like NorCal, and each agency throughout the region in the State of California. We strongly support Assembly Member Mullen's bill, AB 322. We serve multiple immigrants, who themselves are deaf and hard-of-hearing. And American Sign Language is not a universal language, but the experience of being deaf, and being deaf is. Therefore, our agencies were founded by the premise of, by and for the deaf and hard-of-hearing individuals throughout the State of California. Whether it's a limited-English, or no English in the household, who have deaf adults, and hearing adults who have deaf children. Either way, they need us to support, to work with them, to learn and read and write English. And assist with communication enhancement in improving their American Sign Language and speech, regardless. In working with them to improve, therefore, that they, for example, driver's exams, applying for applications, domestic violence situations that happened, intakes for emergencies, hospitals. We've had the floods recently here in Oroville recently, and we had to reach out. Each individual, our population who cannot read and write English captions on the television, about the evacuation warnings, for example. We work with those individuals who want to apply for immigration visas, and those individuals have a right to be able to attend hearings. Apply for job applications, job permits and so forth. And today I have brought in one deaf man, who recently moved here from Iran about a year ago. And is now receiving services from NorCal. This is Ahmed Hamani and he uses Persian sign language. And we have a deaf staff member, Mary Mapoor. Who will translate from Persian sign language into American sign language, to the ASL/English interpreter. Molly is here, the voice that you hear who is providing the services of interpreting into English for your benefit. So if you could please, meet Ahmed.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 311, 'end': 317, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1740, 'end': 1752, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1821, 'end': 1832, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1941, 'end': 1946, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2086, 'end': 2091, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ahmed Hamani: good afternoon, thank you very much for having me. my name is ahmed ray hamani. i am so honored to be here today, to speak to you. i am using persian sign language, and learning american sign language. i am so excited to come here to the united states, the life here for a deaf individual is far better. in the israel, excuse me, that's interpreter correction. in iran, i had to wait for a second lottery, and i won a second lottery to be able to come to america. so i finally won that lottery, and i'm here today. unfortunately, the sacrifice is that i have to leave my mother and my father, all my family and friends that i've ever known, to come here in pursuit of a better life. primarily to educate, to learn english and american sign language, and to find employment. luckily, i had a friend that i made here, directed to me to the services of norcal services for deaf and hard of hearing. and by going to norcal, i was able to receive services in american sign language to learn english, to get job employment training and preparation, as well as apply for various different other services in order for me to gain lawful employment like everyone else. and i would have not been able to get this access if it wasn't for norcal. nor cal is committed to making sure that we have access to education and employment. america is my home, and it's my home because norcal made it possible for me. i truly thank you for your time.
[{'start': 62, 'end': 78, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1364, 'end': 1370, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tess Lengel: thank you, chairman beall, and thank you, committee members. my name is tess, i'm with the alameda county transportation commission. i'm the deputy executive director there. and i wanted to thank you for the opportunity share alameda's ctc support for sb 595. alameda ctc is a sales tax authority and a congestion management agency in alameda county. we are at a very central location for transportation in the entire bay area, and we're definitely effected by regional and trans bay trips on our highways and our transit systems. alameda county, in fact, has about 50% of the most congested corridors in the region. we have, and many of these corridors directly connect into the bridges, which are the subject of of a bridge toll for sb 595. we also have three of the seven toll bridges in the bay area connecting into alameda county. and as far as transit goes, we have almost half of the bart stations in our county, and all of bart's transbay trips traverse alameda county. so as a central transportation area in the bay region, we have high stakes in making sure that transportation works for businesses and the traveling public. and for partnering with the rest of the counties in the region in supporting solutions. in alameda county, voters have voted three times to tax themselves with sales tax measures to support local transportation priorities. the most recent passage was 71% support, was in 2014, and that's for an $8 billion program over 30 years. that's for maintenance, operations, and congestion relief. delivery and accountability are paramount for us. and just this week, our commission is going to be acting on over 400 million of that sales tax money going out. but one of the aspects of the local sales tax measures is really to leverage those funds. we put a down payment with the expectation that we'll work with the state, with the regional partners to be able to close those funding gaps. so we, in our measure for example, have $2.8 billion for capital investments. but we need to find and work with partners to close a $5.2 billion funding piece to deliver the transportation solutions.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 25, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 72, 'end': 76, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Long: good afternoon, mr chair and members. thank you senator beall for carrying this bill. rebecca jonah long with the metropolitan transportation commission, which will be administering this toll increase. we think we have a strong record on other regional measures and urge your support for the bill.
[{'start': 56, 'end': 61, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 86, 'end': 104, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gus Khouri: Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and members, Gus Khouri on behalf of the San Mateo County Transportation Authority, and Transportation Authority of Marin, in support. Cornelious Burke with the Bay Area Council, the Bay Area Business Community, in support.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 161, 'end': 177, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Niccolo Deluca: Niccolo Deluca on behalf of the cities of Oakland, Emeryville, San Leandro, Walnut Creek, Palo Alto, and Transit Center in support of NRM3. Looking forward to working with the author and others, thank you.
[]
Niccolo Deluca: niccolo rebecca deluca on behalf of the oakland mayor. i want to thank the senator for all of her work, and respectfully ask for your aye vote. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Turner: Mr Chairman and members, Michael Turner, on behalf of the Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority. I'd like to thank Senator Allen for carrying this bill, and I'd also like to thank you Mr Chairman for working with us, and engaging with us on this important piece of legislation. We think there are a number of valuable opportunities that are presented by the use of P3s in California. They'll give us the ability to expedite projects, but also take advantage of private sector innovation. At the same time, we are also aware that, there are risks that are unique to this delivery mechanism. We believe that there are opportunities within the structure to address the concerns that have been specifically raised by the opposition. I would also want to recognize that when we use the word partnership, what's within the word partnership here has to be a partnership not just with the private sector, but a partnership between the public agencies. In the case of a project sponsored by regional agency. There needs to be a very strong partnership with Caltrans in that, and that begins early in the development of the project, but it also has to continue through the implementation of the project. So we're not talking about just the partnership between one public agency and the private sector. There needs to be a strong partnership between both the regional agency and Caltrans. I would also want to affirm our commitment to working with the opposition, and negotiating in good faith on the issues they've raised. And we would of course work with the Committee in working those issues out, and with that I will conclude.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 142, 'end': 147, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tim Cremins: tim niccolo cremins, international union of operating engineers, in full support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Todd Bloomstine: mr chairman, members, todd tim bloomstine for the southern california contractors association, in support.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gus Khouri: mr. chair and members, gus todd khouri, on behalf of suffolk county's coalition executive director keith dunn in support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 99, 'end': 109, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Felipe Fuentes: felipe, on behalf of the associate general contractors to california, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eddie Bernacchi: Eddie Bernacchi, on behalf of United Contractors, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ted Toppin: Good afternoon, Mr. Chair, Ted Toppin for the Professional Engineers in California government. Let me respond first with thank you and your staffs for good conversations, lots of opportunities to provide our input, and for putting up with our persistence. I guess that would apply to all Committee Members, thanks to you and your staffs for putting up with PEG's persistence. And of course to the authors, thanks for taking the time to talk to us we appreciate it. PEG is no fan of P3s that's a privatization model. I think the record will show that they were failures. Every one in the end used public sector dollars as a backstop everyone. But not here to talk about that today. PEG has merely requested a simple amendment that the department perform the construction inspection on public private partnership projects. The department is ultimately responsible for all state highways. Liable for them, and must ensure their safety. It's in multiple street and highway code sections. For this reason, every alternative procurement ever approved by this Legislature since 2004, I think, provides that the department perform construction inspection. It's in every single bill and I've provided that to the Committee and to the authors and to the Members of the Committee. If you didn't set up that circumstance where the department did the inspection you would be allowing a private sector contractor to design, build Inspect, operate and maintain a facility without any public agency oversight or inspection. That's no way to do business that's bad public policy. This bill, or the language that we provide it in, in previous bills, very explicitly says the department can perform the inspection function with it's own employees or with consultants that work with the department. The issue is whether the department performs its role, not whether it is a state engineer or an outsourced consultant position who does that. The inspection should be reported to the department, and the department as in previous authorities can collaborate with the Regional Transportation Agency, or the design builder to correct deficiencies in construction. That's the way, the model's supposed to work and it has worked. It has worked on design builds and it's worked on CMGC. The exact same languages in those builds and it can work in this role, and for a P3 project. Inspection is a terribly important function it's a public agency function. That's why we inspect our schools and our hospitals and our state highways and our water projects. And we would encourage the Committee to adopt the same presidential inspection standard here.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joshua Golka: Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and Senators. Joshua Golka with the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees. We share the appreciation expressed by PEG to both the Committee and staff as well as the author's for talking to us about these issues. We are concerned, however, about the effect of this effort to reauthorize public, private partnerships. Because of its potential to both validate and facilitate the Trump Administration's infrastructure plan which would privatize valuable public assets. At a time when this state has taken the steps to invest substantially in our infrastructure, we're concerned about the ability that could be provided for profit companies to siphon some of that money off for their own efforts. To the extent this Committee and this body chooses to pursue this reauthorization AFSCME has asked for two things. First, language that would protect public sector workers against displacement as a result of these projects. And secondly, language that would create a more robust evaluation system that leads to greater transparency and accountability in these projects. Something that has been recommended by the Legislative Analysts Office and others over the past. As a result of some of those previous efforts at public, private partnerships that have not been as successful as they were advertised. Thank you.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 163, 'end': 166, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ashley Martinez: Mr Chair and Committee Members, Ashley Martinez, on behalf of SCIU Local 1000 and we echo similar sentiments from our colleagues from PEG and AFSCME. Thank you.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kome Ajise: Yes, Senator, my name is Kome Ajise, the Chief Deputy Director at CalTrans. Obviously, we don't have a position on bill at this time, but we'll offer some technical updates on technical responses to questions. The issue at hand, I think it's fundamental to P3s, and the P3 construct. You have a situation where you've transferred enough risks to the private consulting to do the work, which includes construction inspection. And so they're responsible for the quality control and quality assurance. What we're talking about is CalTrans getting in the middle of that risk transfer, and taking that back.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chanelle Fletcher: and i'll keep my testimony short. so, hi i'm chanelle gus fletcher with climate plan. we are very happy to support this bill. we believe that it'll help us achieve our state's climate goals and we're very excited to partner with senator allen on this.
[{'start': 45, 'end': 66, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 237, 'end': 242, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Victoria Rome: good afternoon, chairman bell. i'm rome with nrdc and we are also in support. i think that the regions currently implementing sb 375 have seen that higher greenhouse gas targets. allow people to spend less time in their cars, less time in traffic congestion, which leads to better health and environmental outcomes. we urge your support, thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 29, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sandy Emerson: sandy chanelle emerson for 350 bay area and san diego 350 in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Sadler: sadler with st. francis national partnership and also representing the center for climate change and health in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gloria Ohland: gloria sandy ohland, move la, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Lyon: good afternoon, mr. chair. richard gloria lyon on behalf of the california building industry association. i understand that the author has taken some amendments, so we'll look at those when they come into print. what i'd like to focus on, and what evidently wasn't addressed in the amendments that the author took, have to do with the setting of the regional greenhouse gas reduction targets by the air resources board and the way that this bill handles that. so by way of very, very brief background, ab 32 and sb 32 are the economy-wide emission reduction goal legislation set up by the legislature. and then sb 375 comes along and is the transportation, housing and land use component of that overall statewide plan and it's been a challenge for regions to be able to adopt their sustainable community strategies. the process that was set out by the air board was that they'd be aggressive but achievable. they're definitely aggressive, but one of the problems is that we don't have the tools that we had back when sb 375 was originally adopted. i refer to tax increment financing. we don't have the tools to be able to locate the housing in the areas and the density that we would like to see. but specifically, this bill has some additional provisions that are added and that direct carb in the establishment of the targets. the bill says that carb has to consider any other economy-wide greenhouse gas emission reduction targets in state law or executive order. so, i'm aware that ab 32 and sb 32 are the economy-wide greenhouse gas reduction laws. i'm not aware of any other statewide statute that fits this description. so i guess that really begs the question, what is it? what are we talking about here? and let's be specific. so, that's one of the fundamental questions we have. it's important that we have certainty in this process. it's important that all the players understand what the rules of the game are and, again, if we're adding new criteria that reference state laws that are economy-wide that go beyond sb 32 and ab 32, we shouldn't just be vague and ambiguous in the way we phrase it, we should specifically identify what those are. the second part of it has to do with the executive orders and, again, this bill is pretty vague in its reference to executive orders. i think what they're getting at, is the 80 by 50 executive order that was first enacted by the schwarzenegger administration and then carried forward with this current administration. importantly, that was not contained in ab 32, that was not contained in sb 32, so it is not state statute. so we, i think it's important that we be clear and define what both the state laws and the executive orders are, put them into statute so we can have a reasoned debate about whether those are appropriate or not, and then finally i would just note that with respect to the 80 by 50, this is exactly the issue that is in front of the california supreme court in the matter of the san diego association of governments. and the question there is whether that 80 by 50 standard is an aspirational goal that just applies as executive order to state agencies, or whether it's a binding target that must be met by local agencies.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2387, 'end': 2401, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Moira Topp: thank you, mr. chairman and members, moira richard topp on behalf of the orange county transportation authority and i apologize to the author and to the committee that we had a very late letter of opposition, but we are opposed. sb 375 recognized the uniqueness of the scag region and, in fact, authorized counties to contribute to the scs specifically. orange county cog did take up that responsibility in our scs this last time and we think we play a vital role in the discussion on the bill, would like to be a part of the dialogue with the author as we move forward. specifically, in the 375 debate, there was a lot of conversation about ensuring flexibility for the regions and not imposing mandates on a project by project basis. we worry that that discussion about vmt moves us more into a project by project kind of regulatory scheme and we have concerns. but, again, we're very, very late. we appreciate being a part of the dialogue and look forward to working with the author and sponsors as the bill moves forward. thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Speck: mr. chair and members, jennifer moira speck on behalf of the california association of realtors. we're also here in opposition, echoing the concerns previously expressed.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 37, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Felipe Fuentes: felipe jennifer fuentes on behalf of the associated general contractors of california, both chapters. appreciate the effort in making the amendments, but we remain opposed at this point.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Niccolo De Luca: Niccolo De Luca, on behalf of the City Council of the City of Berkeley and the Berkeley will be brief. I thank the Senator very much for his leadership. Strong support, respectfully ask for your aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Leese: Okay, I'm sorry, I didn't realize I could take that. My name is Bill Leese, I'm a former waterproofing contractor. I also was a condo manager. And I'm now a consultant and inspector at Decks, specifically water proof decks similar to the one that collapsed in Berkeley.
[{'start': 64, 'end': 74, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Cremins: cremins of international operation of engineers, in full support.
[]
Jackie Donahue: Jackie Donahue, mother, and of Ashley Donahue and Oliver Burke. Okay. Who died at the Berkeley balcony.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 31, 'end': 45, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 50, 'end': 62, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nicole Bautista: I'm Nicole Bautista with the California Building Officials. We have a support if amended position, based off of the March 2017 amendments.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Svec: mr. chair and members, jennifer felipe svec on behalf of the california association of realtors. we are actually in a tweener position. we were opposed to the previous version of the bill, but we thank the author for the amendments that he's recently agreed to make. take the bill back to what it was. we do have concerns, but we're going to continue to try to work those out with the author and his staff as we move forward.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nick Cammarota: Good afternoon, Nick Cammarota, on behalf of the California Building Industry Association. I appreciate the fact that we're moving away from the bill that is in print. I was led to believe that we are moving back to the March 27th version of the bill, but I now understand we are going to be doing random sampling of potential units out there. I have to say that we're categorically opposed to that. We're happy to work with the author on the bill on other areas where we can find agreement. Those are areas where we have wood. We're looking at wood construction, only for balconies and exterior elevated surfaces. And we need to, even on the previous version of the bill, tighten up the areas that are going to be inspected. I think that as we mentioned in our letter, I think that making repairs consistent with the existing building code is extremely problematic, and I think we need to have a discussion about whether or not California's 5.5 million multi-family units can be inspected every 5 years, whether or not that's actually feasible. But happy to sit down and talk.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Gale: good afternoon, mr. chairman and members. i'm gale. i'm here on behalf of the california association of community managers, cacm. cacm is the largest statewide organization of managers of common interest developments commonly known as homeowners associations throughout the state of california. cacm fully supports the goal of protection of all building occupants. but has some significant concerns with this bill for a couple of reasons. first, this bill doesn't distinguish or recognize the distinction between homeowners associations and other types of structures, for example, apartments. for example, this bill would hold association managers, in its present form, potentially liable and responsible for the completion of inspections and destructive testing that under current california law, homeowner association manager don't have the legal authority to make decisions to perform. homeowner's associations are governed by an elected board of directors, typically owners of property within a condominium building, for example. the board of directors makes decisions, the managing agent executes the administrative functions of those decisions, but typically doesn't have decision making authority. this bill would potentially impose liability on managers, for the completion of such inspections and destructive testing, that managers currently don't have the legal authority to order, or obtain. second, homeowners associations under california law already have overt obligations.
[{'start': 46, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debra Carlton: thank you. debra with the california apartment association. we're opposed and we'll continue to work with the author.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jackie Donohoe: hi, my name is jackie jennifer donohoe. my life was changed forever on june 16th, 2015. i lost my past, my present and my future when i lost my daughter. actually, when the balcony she was standing on collapsed. i'll never get my daughter back. we try and protect our kids. we try to teach them right from wrong. how many of you here have children? how many times, think about your children or your grandchildren, have you told them, don't text and drive, don't drink and drive, don't get in a car with someone who's been drinking. don't drive too fast, stay safe. text me when you get there or text me when you're leaving. ashley did all those things. the night she arrived, even, she texted me after a long day's work she had at her internship at the coroner's office in santa rosa, then she went to work a part-time job as a waitress. then she left to go to berkeley to be with her cousin and to her friend's 21st birthday party. if you think about it, i got the text at night that she'd arrived. never in a million years would i have thought to tell my daughter don't step out on a balcony in the united states of america because it could be your last step. how many of you walked out on a balcony and think, this could be the last step you'll ever take? we failed these kids by allowing this to happen. the girls were only living in this apartment for less than 10 days. i know ashley was so excited that her cousin olivia was coming over and friends to berkeley for the summer on the j1s experience, they'd so many plans. because even though ashley and olivia were cousins, they weren't only cousins, they were best friends. ashley had been to ireland over 20 times, olivia the same. when we got here, even on may 28th that year, she just turned 22. they went to the joint game. i look at my youngest daughter now, the three girls who died on that balcony were all with my youngest daughter 10 days before she died in her last high school graduation photograph. think if that was your kid, a picture of your daughter who'd just graduated with her sister, her cousin and friend. that's a great picture of a memory to have that died on a balcony. that's the last photo that she has. they were all planning to go back up to canada, because the girls from ireland were all been in canada the week before. if the contractors license board had been aware of the past issues with balconies, these deaths would have been prevented. and if the balconies had been inspected by a licensed inspector, these kids could be alive today. so i'm asking you guys to think about these inspections and to do the right thing because here i'm sitting, i've lost my daughter, i've lost my niece. but how many other balconies are waiting to come down? she should have graduated last year from sonoma state. you know, she's not here, she'll never get married, her father would never walk her up the aisle. her cousin olivia, who was her best friend, would have been a bridesmaid, will never walk, be her bridesmaid and will follow her behind. although her farther did carry her up that aisle in a coffin and her beloved olivia followed in her coffin. so for those of you who are parents, imagine the hell that we've been through, and the pain, and the suffering. and for the last year and a half, the amount of time that i've taken and spent night after night going through report, detail balcony, everything. i'm meeting with so many people because i do not want this to happen to any other family. think about it. we were the first family, the only family at the scene that night. i see my daughter's legs on the ground, i try to help all the other kids because their parents were not here. i was the only irish mother here. what can we do to help ensure that this kind of tragedy never happens again? think about it. that's why this bill is so important. this bill requires balconies to be inspected and are safe and up to code. because, if you think about it, if the state contractors license board, they can determine that they can improve their oversight of the construction industry. defensive work means there's a difference between life and death for people. this is not just a little light switch or something. for our children, it was death. i want no more secret settlements. i want to see balconies being inspected. because one thing you have to ask yourself, if you look at how many more balconies are ready to fall down in the state of california. think about berkeley, small city, they inspected about 2,176 balconies after the balcony collapse. over 400 of them had issues. that's about 18%. so if you want facts, take tiny little berkeley and put it california. how many are going down if you're thinking la. the clock is ticking. if this data doesn't concern you i want you to start thinking about your own family members. you've the power here to do something and to make this work for everyone. i'm not asking that with the bill whatever. it has to be right for everyone, but we have to protect the public. so many californians, so many people don't know about it. i'm speaking out today in honor of those who no longer have a voice. i look at olivia burke, shes forever 21. eoghan culligan, forever 21. niccolai schuster, forever 21. lorcan miller, forever 21. eimear walsh, forever 21. and my beloved daughter, ashley donahoe had just turned 22. i really urge every flipping one of you guys to make sure that their deaths are not in vain and to bring about changes. do the right thing to make sure this doesn't happen again. because if someone else had done the right thing. and there was no secret settlements and someone had went back and looked at those balconies, our kids would be alive today. so we need inspections.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 624, 'end': 630, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1383, 'end': 1389, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1421, 'end': 1427, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1548, 'end': 1554, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1559, 'end': 1565, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1631, 'end': 1637, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1673, 'end': 1679, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2898, 'end': 2904, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3101, 'end': 3107, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5146, 'end': 5158, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5177, 'end': 5192, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5206, 'end': 5223, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5237, 'end': 5250, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5264, 'end': 5276, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5315, 'end': 5329, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Candace Grubbs: Good afternoon chair and members. My name is Candace Grubbs. I'm the Butte County clerk-recorder and registar since 1986, elected officer. California's current online voter registration system allows anyone with a driver's license to vote online. With AB 60 drivers licenses available for non-citizens there's a critical flaw compromising the integrity of California voter rules. In fact, there are no laws or protocols in place that prevent the DMV from completing the voter registration of those AB 60 driver license holders. SB 682 provides a needed fix to this problem by prohibiting DMV from giving SOS the information of non-citizen driver's license holders for the purpose of voter registration. Which is why am I here and I respectfully request your support of this measure. Thank you for your time. And I'm available to answer questions based on my experience.
[{'start': 45, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eduardo Valario: good afternoon, mr. chairman and honorable committee members. my name is eduardo jackie valario, i'm the owner/operator of the subject signs and the subject land that where the signs sit on. i've been working really hard. we have been working really hard to put these signs into production. we've been encouraged by the county of imperial. they recently did a letter of support for this legislation because it's at a crucial entry way to imperial county there. and they largely sit blank. they're there. they've been there since 1994. and all we're asking for is, as senator hueso said, some fairness here. we want to be able to advertise commercially so that we can advertise to small, local businesses, not national advertisers. we're a small business. we own four signs. that's it, we're not looking to expand and add additional signage anywhere to be honest with you. we're petitioning our government here for some legislative relief because administratively, we've tried to do everything. and it's always come back as you can't. and so, we approached senator hueso here to help us with this, and that's why i'm here. i'm asking for some support on something that i think is a matter of fairness. and i'm hoping that this body will support it because as the senator said, whether or not it's granted this exemption, those signs will stay there. they're there, they'll just sit there, blank.  thank you.
[{'start': 73, 'end': 95, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 575, 'end': 580, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1064, 'end': 1069, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Richard Harmon: richard here on behalf of the county of imperial. i'll leave the discussion kind of on the distance from freeways, loss of federal funding to some of the other speakers. maybe paint a little bit different picture for you in terms of the county's support for this. in a good month, i think unemployment in imperial county, high teens. in a bad month, it's happen to high 20s. and there's multiple reasons for this. dominant agricultural industry in imperial county. it's often seasonal in nature. and also, you may or may not know this, but imperial county is the only county in the state of california that borders not only another state, but another country, and with the availability of less expensive labor, and other things. very easy for employers to go to yuma, arizona, go to mexicali, mexico. so economic development has always been a challenge for imperial county. and the senator described the location of where these signs are intersection of interstate 8, state route 111 which is an expressway. so the interstate 8 cuts through in imperial county east to west. uma or all points east toward san diego. 111 goes from mexicali to all points north. where those two come together people on their way quickly to go somewhere else. we see this bill as the potential. and i like to say, similar to other bills, there's no funding arrangement with the county. the county doesn't know these bills. so our perspective is this is something that has all the benefits to improve our economy, get people to shop, see what's going on in imperial county, spend their money, employ our local residents. so for all of those reasons i think, like to say we're supportive of the kindlier, gentler version of outdoor advertising.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Billy Wynn: billy eduardo wynn with general outdoor advertising, also a small billboard company and representing the california state outdoor advertising association. as small companies and large member companies of our association spend tremendous resources, following the rules on every level, state, local, county, we spend tremendous resources and years, literally years on these projects prior to any development. our concern in this situation is that it encourages people to build signs and then go back later and try to fix the problem. so just simply, this and other exemptions are not helpful to the industry in general and not helpful especially to small operators who don't have the resources to make for these exemptions. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Harmon: harmon again. as far as i know, because this would have happened about back in about 94, the county does have ordinances on the establishment of advertising and signs throughout the county and their local permitting. so there'll be some size restrictions etc. i don't believe there's a piece in there that requires the state or federal permitting and approval before the county can take action. so my understanding is that it went through the normal county processes. if you were to put up a sign, it was allowed in a location, it met the size restrictions in terms of square footage etc., it met all the county requirements.
[]
Jonathan Clay: jonathan on behalf of the city of coronado. we appreciate the senator's efforts to try to improve safety on the bridge. just really quickly, context. this is a very iconic bridge, but it gets heavy use. 77,000 daily trips is typical. this is also the main link between san diego over to coronado both for residents and the military. largest naval installation on the west coast. additionally as the senator highlighted with the low barrier, this bridge is built in 1969 so it's nearly 50 years old. what makes it iconic is that low railing but it also is part of the safety issues, and so we really appreciate senator's efforts on this. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rhonda Hasten: yes, thank you. rhonda billy hasten, founder of the coronado bridge collaborative for suicide prevention. thank you for granting us this time and senator hueso thank you for making this bill so important to all of us. i come from san diego to support 480 and we've started many different things to try and get awareness to increase on this matter. on change.org we had a petition started and have well over 1500 signatures. and i just read to you today if it's okay the letter that we want governor jerry brown to get if that's okay?
[{'start': 16, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 154, 'end': 159, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 499, 'end': 510, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jim Lights: jim rhonda lights on behalf of reviver mx, one of the two companies currently in the pilot program, with the dmv. the thrust of this expansion of the pilot is around payments. one allowing for payments in the specialty licence plate program. and two, to explore the opportunity of allowing folks to pay their vlf fees to the dmv on a monthly basis.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Billy Wynn: thank you, mr chairman and members of the committee. my name's billy jim wynn, i am general manager of general outdoor advertising. most of you have probably never heard of me as we're a small family owned business in inland empire. we've been doing business for over 60 years in california. i also currently serve as president of the california state outdoor advertising association. so i'm representing on both, wearing both hats. the current law provides a level playing field for all advertisers, big ones and small ones. we know the rules, and even though we compete with each other, we compete evenly. these exceptions create an uneven playing field. and what happens is small companies like myself really get hurt. the big companies have the lawyers, the lobbyists, they can afford to get these exemptions bills passed. a company like me does not have the resources, by any means. the existing laws and regulations protect the public investment in state highways, preserve scenic beauty on land adjoining highways. and ensure information is presented safely and effectively to the traveling public. these exemptions eat away at these goals. so, just, i urge you, as both a small business family owned company and as the state association, to please vote no on these bills.
[{'start': 63, 'end': 77, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Craig DeLuz: Mr. Chairman, Members of the Committee. Craig DeLuz on behalf of the Finance Policy Coalition. If I might bring up a brief point that hasn't been express yet.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marc Burgat: marc billy burgat on behalf of clear channel outdoor, we're also opposed for the reasons previously stated.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melanie Perron: i understand, melanie marc perron, caltrans. we have no position on this bill, i'm are here for technical assistance. to our knowledge, and we're just confirming that, i have actually just sent another note back to my team. we do not believe we have received a permit, but we are certainly willing to work at the senator's office. i did meet with them yesterday, they indicated, if this is just regarding declassifying a landscape portion of the freeway, there is an administrative process for that. we're certainly happy to take a look at that, and we are continuing that due diligence.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Darren Greenley: thank you, senator leyva, mr. chair, and committee members for your consideration of this bill. my name is darren. i'm the chief collections executive for the american red cross west division. that means i'm responsible for all blood collections west of the mississippi river, with exceptions of the states of arkansas and missouri. they spared me those two states. i've been in blood banking for 32 years. i started after my father was a blood user, used 336 pints of blood to treat his illness, and many of those units of blood were delivered to him on a stat bases because they were necessary to save his life. in california, every year nearly 1.1 million units of blood are donated. and those units of blood must be transported in a timely manner back to the manufacturing location so that they can be divided into three different products to help three different patients. and that must be done within eight hours of collection to maximize the number of components that are made. after that manufacturing, that blood is made ready for the hospital. and as senator leyva mentioned, at least 120 times a day there's a hospital that calls the state order which requires delivery of that product within 60 minutes in order to save a patient's life. often, that 60 minutes is exceeded because of traffic, particularly in large metropolitan areas. and this is particularly problematic in times of a traumatic mass casualty event, or when there's an unexpected hospital surgeon which the hospital needs more blood than they keep on site to transfuse. so, on behalf of the residents of the state of california, particularly for those individuals who are waiting for a blood transfusion, or their family members. each has the right to expect that that blood is going to be available at at timely manner to save their life. the red cross and other blood banks across the state appreciate your support of the bill so that we can do so and fulfill our obligation to meet that right, thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 24, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 107, 'end': 113, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1069, 'end': 1074, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lydia Bourne: lydia melanie bourne representing blood centers of california. we are an alliance of 12 non-profit blood centers located throughout the state. we supply 1.4 million units of blood and blood products which is over 90% of the need here in california. most of the blood that is collected in california tends to stay in california. our mission is to provide safe, high quality and readily available blood and blood components for californians. we also provide public education on the challenges facing blood centers and the future of transfusion medicine in california. we support sb 406 by senator leyva, which will allow vehicles transporting life saving blood products to access the hov carpool lanes, particularly in our larger metro areas. high volume traffic, construction, accidents sometimes provide a barrier to allowing these products to get to the hospitals as well as provide for the patients that are in need. we are in full support of sb 406 and i concur with the comments of my colleague. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 595, 'end': 600, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Amy Everitt: thank you, and good afternoon. thank you, mr. chairman and members of the committee. i am amy lydia everitt, the state director for naral pro-choice california, we mobilize over 150,000 member activists to protect and expand reproductive freedom. and we are a proud sponsor of sb 309. the time for this bill has never been more urgent. we have an anti-choice white house, and anti-choice congress, an anti-choice senate, all focused like a laser beam on not only defunding planned parenthood. but also any medical provider who provides reproductive freedom or reproductive health choices including abortion care. across the country, medical providers are facing defunding threats as well. in the state and california has an opportunity to be a leader. now is the time no matter what in case, even regardless of the defunding fight, for pro-choice californians to be able to stand up and demonstrate their pro-choice values. what better way for californians to show their values than on our cars? as the senator said, over 3,000 folks have already indicated an interest that they want to buy one of these license plates. we are going to continue to market this and promote it, so that all pro-choice californians can stand up and be heard. creating an additional dedicated funding stream to protected funding for reproductive health is critical, because it disproportionately affects low income communities and communities of color. the california trusts women license plate is one way everyone can stand up and make a difference for our communities and to demonstrate the fact that californians, our legislature and our citizens support women's dignity and respect their decision making. respectfully urge an aye vote.
[{'start': 90, 'end': 107, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gregory Cramer: thank you, mr. chair and members, gregory amy cramer on behalf of planned parenthood affiliates of california. we would like to thank senator jackson for bringing this bill forward. and i would just like to cover a few points about the family pack program and how planned parenthood is been targeted by the white house and congress. and really, why the need for this bill is so urgent. in addition to federal attacks on planned parenthood as far as defunding us the administration along with congress recently moved to target title 10 planning funds, leaving hundreds of thousands if not millions of folks with compromised reproductive healthcare. but as far as family pact is concerned it is a trusted cost effective program that saves lives, however as family pack providers we are reimbursed for services and small amounts and support all efforts including senate bill 309 bolstering this effort, including efforts to increase provider rates. current family pack reimbursements are very, very low, and for planned parenthood do not even cover half of the cost in providing these services. for example, a typical family planning visit for planned parenthood is about $129, and we get reimbursed about $54.00 of that. so we're absorbing the cost there. planned parenthood last year served over 150,000 patients, 87% of which are low income and 49% of that are family pact patients. senate bill 309 will undoubtedly improve the health outcomes of hundreds of thousands of our patients in addition to hundreds of thousands of other patients that go to other fpact providers. for every $1 spent on family pact services, taxpayers save, on average, $4.30 in medical and social services costs in from contraception to age 2, and $9.25 on the dollar to age 5. so therefore, the total cost savings in one year exceeds $1.9 billion from contraception to age 2 and $4 billion from contraception to age five. again, we commend the senator for bringing this bill forward, and urge your support on the measure. thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 142, 'end': 149, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brian Johnston: Thank you, Senator. Brian Johnston with the California Pro Life Council. We have several problems with this bill, particularly the use of language that specifically is intellectually dishonest. We know that calling this reproductive is in fact a code-word for human abortion. And there's nothing reproductive in the act of human abortion, it kills a unique human being, scientifically, objectively a unique human being with a beating heart, genetically distinct from the mother. And dependent on the mother for protection and sustenance. If we believe in human rights, it's very much as if someone says they believe in the rights of kangaroos. But they're willing to kill joeys because the joey lives in the pouch of the mother and therefore is disposable. Reproductive rights is a code word for unlimited abortion. Currently in the State of California it's a government sponsored industry and these folks are here to get more government money. This government sponsored industry brings a great pressure against young mothers. And if this is about choice. And this is where perhaps, the Senator could be ameliorative in her proposal. If it's about choice, the other choice is letting the child live. But there's no discussion of that in this proposal. In fact, the State of California has given literally millions upon dollars, for only one definition of that, and that is for the intentional abortion. A unique human being. So I would suggest if the advocates are indeed interested in true choice, that means there's another decision that can and should be made. 37 states have license plates that affirm life. And we would suggest in order to make this a balanced bill and not an ideological one. That there would be license plates offered to affirm the choice to keep the child, and care for that vulnerable child. So if the Senator is willing to do that, we'd be willing to consider dropping opposition. But as it stands, this is an intellectually dishonest use of language, it is clearly the promotion of abortion, of a government-sponsored industry, and there is young women under incredible pressure by the state funds of California and through these organizations to kill that child. And this is something we don't need to continue throwing money at. We need to continue affirming life because that's the basic purpose of having laws is to defend those that can't defend themselves.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 672, 'end': 677, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Lovell: john jonah lovell on behalf of the association for la deputy sheriffs, california association of code enforcement officers, college and university police chiefs, narcotic officers, la county professional peace officers, la police protective league, riverside sheriffs association. this is a very important bill. senator stone is absolutely right. when people voted for proposition 57, and they voted for it comfortably, they had an expectation that it would not apply to violent felons. not violent felons as narrowly described in one section of the penal code, but violent felons in the sense that people understand that certain felonies are, in fact, violent, domestic violence being a very good example. i would suggest that if this bill does not pass what you will see is a loss of public confidence as people who commit crimes, but are not narrowly classed as violent felons under current statutory law are in fact, paroled and, i've been around here since 1984 and i've seen the pendulum go back and forth on the criminal justice issue. what you don't want to see is the pendulum to move because the public has lost trust with their institutions. this is a very important intellectually honest bill and deserves support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 320, 'end': 325, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sean Hoffman: hoffman on behalf of the san diego county district attorney bonnie dumanis in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 60, 'end': 74, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jessica Bartholow: thank you, mr. chair and members of the committee. bartholow with the western center on law and poverty also in support of this piece of legislation. as many members of this committee know, we've been working with a host of grass roots organizations and organizations here at the state capitol to reduce the size of the prison population, mostly because people are in prison for reasons that are unjust. but as we work in that direction we also need to make sure that we're not creating new spaces and opportunities to house prisoners or detainees. and so in general, we oppose the development of new prisons as a coalition of people. but in addition to that, when prisons or jails are built, they should not be further leased or loaned to outside entities like ice or the us marshals. jails and prisons can really only be jails and prisons. it will be fantastic if we were building housing and schools. we can't turn these jails and prisons into those different types of structures. leasing these structures to ice or the us marshal is against the values that have been shown by this legislature, by this administration, and by the people of california. and for these reasons, and because people in prison are disproportionately people of color and low income people who have been criminalized only because they are poor. for all of these reasons, we're in support of this legislation. appreciate the senator bringing it forward.
[{'start': 51, 'end': 60, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Haze Ankush: haze john ankush with the contra costa county racial justice coalition. we are in support of sb 630 just to echo what skinner has said. right now the county is trying to pursue $75 million, trying to say that we don't have enough space in the jail. so it doesn't make sense that we're renting out to the us marshals 200 beds. so we strongly support the sb 630, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 118, 'end': 125, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Usha Mutschler: good afternoon mr. chair, members, senator skinner, usha haze mutschler on behalf of the california state sheriffs' association in a respectful opposition to the bill. we are grateful for the significant investment in legislature and the governor have made over last decade to help counties achieve their mission of rehabilitating inmates, reducing recidivism, and protecting our communities. specifically, crucial jail funding directed to counties results in appropriate facilities to provide education, rehabilitation, vocational programming, medical and mental health treatment that we desperately need at this time. these jail improvements are a direct benefit to the persons housed in these facilities, and they demonstrate the sheriff's commitment to providing appropriate services and treatment to our incarcerated populations. sb 630 will keep counties from applying for or receiving this crucial funding by tightening restrictions on leasing beds to other entities. we are concerned about this bill for a number of reasons, chief among them that it may keep counties in serious need of improving their jail facilities from accessing funds for which they are currently eligible. for example, sb 844 was negotiated as a part of last year's budget and received overwhelming bipartisan support in both houses. counties are already limited to minimal increases in housing capacity and must focus on projects that replace compacted, outdated, or unsafe housing capacity and that add treatment space. while sb 844 contains a restriction on leasing beds, it only applies if the county is adding housing capacity. sb 630 expands this restriction to a county applying for sb 844 funding even if the project results in no new net beds or a decrease in housing capacity. these projects revolve around a desire and a need to replace outdated facilities. sb 630 attempts to change the rules late in the process after legislative and executive approval of the funding, submittal of county applications and the commencement of the review of submitted proposals have taken place. counties have partnered with the state in good faith to address the shared challenges in our correctional systems, and sb 630 creates a serious impediment in the pathway to improved correctional facilities. for these reasons we respectfully oppose, thank you.
[{'start': 43, 'end': 50, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 52, 'end': 71, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Frankie Guzman: Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you members of this Public Safety Committee. My name is Frankie Guzman, I am a Staff Attorney at the National Center for Youth Law in Oakland. As an attorney and also a person with this 707(b) felony offense on my record, I support this bill, not only because it's good for rehabilitation, but also it's good from a public safety standpoint. At age 15, I was arrested for committing an armed robbery, a 707B offense. I was tried in Juvenile Court, adjudicated guilty, and sentenced to the California Youth Authority for this offense. After serving six years, I served six years in all before turning my life around. I ultimately graduated from UC Berkley with a BA in English and UCLA School of Law with a law degree. And today, I have committed my life and my career to providing opportunities for rehabilitation for youth charged with serious offenses. But not only that, but creating opportunities, I would say to provide hope and purpose for young people as I have found in my own life. Unfortunately, current law stands in the way of rehabilitation by imposing a lifetime ban on youth with 707B offenses. Without record sealing, people with old offense histories like myself experience significant barriers to re-entry resources like jobs, military enlistment, professional licenses, higher education, and other recovery options. I would say the one that I have been personally affected by is barrier to housing. And, for example, in 2012, after I had graduated from UCLA School of Law and passed the bar, I moved to Oakland to start my legal practice. And as an attorney, I was repeatedly denied housing because of the robbery on my juvenile record. And on one occasion, a property manager personally called me and told me she was refusing to rent to me because of my criminal record. My adult record had been expunged, and my juvenile record was still accessible to her, and so I drove down to meet with her. Disappointingly, she refused to meet with me in private, and I believe it was because of this record. She, I mean, to create some, I think, some form of distrust but also fear about who I was. And so, she openly chastised me, admonished me in an open setting, in front of strangers about my criminal record. And urged me to seal my record in order for me to be given housing through this particular agency. The experience was both frustrating and demoralizing. And I would say, no doubt, this type of rejection happens to numerous young people or former 707(b) offenders who need a stable home, who need employment and other reentry opportunities. I will say, fortunately for me, I was able to find housing, due in large part because I am an attorney. But I would like to say that I am not the typical case. Each year, there are thousands of 707(b) offenses that are imposed on young people. And although I was able to navigate the numerous obstacles, I know that there are thousands of people like me who aren't able to make it through the maze and ultimately do not receive the benefit of housing and education and the resources that I received, that they need and that Senate Bill 312 would provide. And so, I would just like to state my position, both as a person who's directly impacted, but also as a juvenile justice advocate. I believe that all young people, even youth with serious offenses like those that I have, who go to the juvenile system and demonstrate the rehabilitation should be given the opportunity to become eligible to seal their records when they can satisfy to the court that they have been rehabilitated, so they can contribute positively, not only to their families but to their communities, and that is what public safety is all about. So for these reasons, I ask your support and your aye vote on Senate Bill 312. Thank you.
[{'start': 86, 'end': 100, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Steinhart: Thank you, my name is David Steinhart. I'm the Director of the Commonweal Juvenile Justice Program. I've had a hand in drafting and co-sponsoring three major juvenile record sealing bills over the last three years. And they have been immensely successful and popular with the courts and probation and law enforcement by and large going forward. But this class of young people has been left out in the cold of the sealing law reforms, the more serious juvenile offenders. And so, we opened a discussion with the California District Attorneys Association about what might be done because we anticipated their opposition. And I cannot speak for them, they don't have a position on the bill at this point. But I have to say that they were openly receptive to a reappraisal of the lifetime ban on this class of juvenile offenders. Because their interest, like ours, is not standing in the way of rehabilitation, not supporting a law that contradicts rehabilitation, but allowing these young people who are retained in the juvenile justice system to move forward productively with their lives. So I want to talk about in my portion here about the balance we have built into this bill based on some of those conversations with prosecutors and others. So first of all, we are talking only about those offenders who are retained in the juvenile justice system, not about adult offenders and not about kids who are transferred to adult criminal court. And these are young people who remain in a system founded on a premise of rehabilitation. But for this class of youth subject to a lifetime ban, their rehabilitation bumps into a wall. And that wall needs, at this point, to come down. So that's what SB 312 is about. But we have not flung opened the door, this record sealing for these youth. The sealing terms that are offered in SB 312 are different from the sealing terms that are offered to all other classes of youth now in law. So they must apply to the court, like other youth. There must be a hearing in which the DA is present. They must demonstrate full rehabilitation to the satisfaction of the court, and then the court can grant record sealing. And an important qualifier here is that for these youth only, record sealing is provisional. It's not final like the other kids get, it's provisional. So we are step laddering into relief for this class of offenders. The record can be opened, as Senator Skinner mentioned, in a subsequent prosecution whether it's in juvenile or adult court. So we have taken a measured and balanced approach to remedying the situation that these young people face. So again, we're going to have further discussions with the district attorneys, who I think are interested in possibly looking at the bill again. But for now, we think that this is a very balanced measure, and we would urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2404, 'end': 2411, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Caliph Assagai: Caliph Assagai, California Public Defenders Association. We've sponsored previous versions of bills that do juvenile record sealing. We're happy to see it extended to this class of offenders. And we are a strong supporter of this bill. Do we have any witnesses in opposition? Do we have neutral witnesses?
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sean Hoffman: there we go, hoffman with the california district attorneys association. i think mr. steinhart appropriately characterized the discussions that we've had with the sponsor, the author's staff. as he mentioned, our issue is not trying to preclude someone from getting access to housing, a job, an education. our issue is more, what do we do with the folks who don't show that commitment to change, and they end up in front of a court in a subsequent prosecution. our ability to go back and access and utilize that record. i think the way that the bill is currently drafted, i don't know that it goes quite where we were hoping it was going to go. but we can continue to have conversations on that, but it absolutely reflects, i think, an acknowledgement of sort of the general parameters that we talked about in our discussion a couple of weeks ago. so we are passionately neutral at the moment.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 85, 'end': 94, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Leonard Anderson: My name's Leonard Anderson, I'm with the Anti-Recidivism Coalition, and I just want to say I support the bill.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jamal Bowie: My name is Jamal Bowie, and I'm here with the Anti-Recidivism Coalition, and I support the bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Catherine Falk: good afternoon, chairwoman and committee members. my name is catherine usha falk, i'm with the catherine usha falk organization. i would like to discuss my testimony with you here today. as you know, my name is catherine usha falk, peter falk was best known for his role as the lieutenant colombo, and he was my father. he passed away june in 2011, and today i'm testifying, not only as peter falk's daughter, but as a national activist for guardianship reform, elder abuse awareness. my father was a staunch advocate for the elderly as well. i watched how he brought his mother's caretaker to justice with criminal charges in new york city when my grandmother was isolated, exploited, and abused in new york. and my father was relentless with the district attorney's office in bringing criminal charges. my father then made a public service announcement in a commercial regarding financial exploitation. my father was the greatest influence on my life as an example of standing up for the abused and the voiceless, which is very much a part of who i am today. what began as a quest to help others trapped and suffering in isolation and separated from their family has led to all of my advocacy of guardianship reform for the elderly and the disabled. through my proposed legislation in the past called the right of association, also known as the peter falk bill. we passed in utah, south dakota, new york, arizona, hawaii, tennessee, and the virgin islands. we currently have sponsorship in 10 other states. my passion about the crime and concern for isolation of our elders and disabled population subjected to exploitation and inhumane treatment. caretakers have the most important job looking after our loved ones, who are aging, disabled, or incapacitated, and there seems to be this huge epidemic growing regarding oversight, enforcement of current laws, and accountability for such unscrupulous behaviors on the part of their caretakers. after my father's passing in 2011, i pondered the idea of creating a stronger penal code in the state of california with criminal accountability and consequences as stipulated in this sb 416. over the 2016 summer, i approached senator hertzberg's office and senator moorlach's office, chief of staff, who helped me draft legislation. i received two different drafts, one longer than the other. i asked senator joe anderson to sponsor this bill, since both those senators had their plates full. i garnered support with arch of california, with canhr, california advocates for nursing home reform, and ccs, who have all submitted letters of support for this bill. while issues involving financial and physical abuse of our most defenseless family members have received much needed attention over the past few years. to understand the importance of this particular legislation, we must first understand the isolation of vulnerable citizens is a huge foundational step to ending abuse. in the same way abusive spouses seek to isolate their partners, unscrupulous conservators isolate their wards from family and friends as a means of retaliation. control convenience, and thereby neutralizing their words, only advocates and their only defense. once their estates have been drained, these citizens are relegated to relying on the public social safety net for the remainder of their lives, regardless of the foresight many exercised to make financial plans for their golden years. furthermore, many of the remaining golden years are lost in nursing homes under the guise of providing care and oversight. these individuals may not desire or even need premature death from physical abuse, routine illnesses, and lack of human interaction are exacerbated by old age and are all too common. the irony is that it is too often supported by the same legal system charged with protecting these defence-less citizens and their constitutional rights, all for the sake of expediency. social isolation is at the very core of exploitation and recognizing it for the crime that it is can accomplish three specific objectives. one, it provides the legal standing for concerned family members to have access to and champion in their loved one's cause. secondly, it creates a judicial checks and balances by providing criminal courts as an additional objective venue to pursue charges, and finally, it saves tax payers money by reducing the number of exploitation cases requiring adjudication. however, additionally, it will save additional tax payer funds by preserving the private assets of dependent adults for their own use in providing for their care, thereby keeping them free and off of public assistance. this is how americans truly want to live. this bill seeks to give elders and the dependent adults the protection all americans want and deserve. thank you for giving me the opportunity to testify today and to tell my story.
[{'start': 61, 'end': 80, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 211, 'end': 230, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 232, 'end': 242, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 289, 'end': 296, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 387, 'end': 399, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2180, 'end': 2189, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2211, 'end': 2219, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2355, 'end': 2367, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2488, 'end': 2493, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Richard Calhoun: richard with cedar, isolation is a widespread problem. in santa clara county, the public guardian, our taxpayer public guardian, isolated people until we got abc news to sue 28 minutes of airtime on isolation. we need sb 416, so local law enforcement know it's a penalty. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Kincaid: I'm Linda Kincaid, daughter of Carol Han, who was kidnapped from her home, held prisoner, and isolated for over a year. There was overwhelming evidence of repeated sexual assaults. Yet San Bernardino County Sheriff Department determined that no crime was committed. This bill would be a first step towards protecting our loved ones from predators. Thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 31, 'end': 40, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Micah Doctoroth: Yeah, Micah Doctoroth on behalf of the ACLU of California, we share the Senator's goal of protecting vulnerable communities, and while we had opposed the bill based on existing crimes and penalties, it sounds like the amendments may address our concerns. So we'll be happy to look at them and communicate with the author's office.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jonathan Feldman: chair and members, jonathan catherine feldman with the california police chief's association also in support. our officers are the ones that get called when a drone flies and buzzes somebody's head or there's a privacy violation. the faa is not going to respond to those calls, if you call their hotline to report something. if you get through, all the automated responses and everything you get to talk to an analyst, not an enforcement officer, because they don't have the enforcement powers, we do. and that's why this bill's important. it gives us that clear authority to respond to the calls from the public. so, we ask your support.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joshua Shaw: And Madam Chair and members, Joshua Shaw for the City and County of San Francisco's Mayor, Ed Lee. San Francisco is known for its innovation and support for new technologies, we want to, and we're eager to support our residents in using these drones, but in a deliberate manner in a way consistent with our local government powers of regulating time, manner, and place. And we support the bill. We think these are reasonable regulations. We're concerned about the reckless operations we've seen some places in the state and across the country for lack of such regulations. Yesterday we learned, and we submitted a letter to the author asking for some specificity going forward with regard to, as I mentioned, regulating time, manner, and place. We hope to bring that up with her, going forward, but support the bill today, and ask for your aye vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 91, 'end': 97, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tynisha Bootner: good afternoon chair and members. bootner with the california state association of counties, in support. thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brad Icard: Good morning, my name is Brad Icard, I'm a Deputy District Attorney in the Los Angeles County District Attorney's Office, my specialty is child sexual assault, sexually violent predator law, sex offender recidivism and child abuse. When the Los Angeles County District Attorney's office came to be a co-sponsor and an entity that helped author the bill, essentially at every step of the way, we wanted to make sure that this was a bill which protected future victims, which was pro-law enforcement, pro-District Attorney, and that it absolutely made sense. Part of this was to ensure that there was insurance policy after insurance policy built into the bill. Some of the features that are built in are the tier that you're placed in, the years of that tier, it does not begin to run until you're released from custody or civil commitment. For example, if a rapist was sentenced to 15 years, when they got out 15 years later, they would have another 20 years on the registry. Meaning that it would be 35 years before they could even begin to petition. That person would have had to have complied with the law, never committed another violent or serious offence, properly registered, and then would still have to petition to get off of the registry. Part of the other insurance policy that we put in place is that when someone wants to petition to get off the registry, they go into their local law enforcement agency. They have their record run, their registration run, the police actually have a say, and actually give input as to the person proceeding with their petition. Then there's another insurance policy. It goes to the District Attorney. They have the right to oppose anyone getting off the registry. People don't automatically get off when their tier expires, it must go through the District Attorney's office and law enforcement. The other measure which we have already in existence in the State of California is since 1996 we have had a sexually violent predator law. In 2006, it was even made stricter by Jessica's Law. Any person in the State of California who goes to prison on a predicate sex offense is evaluated when they are going to be released by the Department of Corrections and the California Department of State Hospitals. If they are still found to be a likely risk, then they are civilly committed in an indeterminate commitment to Coalinga State Hospital, and they are not released from custody. So we already have that insurance policy in place. When that person is released, that person's tier just then begins to run. One of the important aspects of the bill is, every single event which is now registrable, remains registrable. All of the serious offenders who have committed violent child molestation, who have committed murder, who have committed kidnap, they all remain in the lifetime tier. Absolutely nothing has changed as to that. We maintain that they are a risk and they remain lifetime. As District Attorney O'Malley stated, we have the Static-99R and it is highly predictable. Anyone, period, even on their first offense, if they are found to be one of the people to be high risk on that tool, it is lifetime registration. That is yet another insurance policy that we have put into place. It has become evident to us, those who are child sex crime prosecutors that the list has become meaningless. There is no way when a child is kidnapped or we have a stranger molestation to go to the registry and use it as an investigative tool, because everyone, including the 80 year old who committed an indecent exposure 60 years ago, is still on the list. We need to have the purpose of the list restored. It is for law enforcement to be able to go to the list, and see who are the risky offenders in their area? When a child is kidnapped to be able to look at it, and quickly find suspects and try to prevent that child from having any future harm or possibly death. The Los Angeles County District Attorney's office wanted to make sure that we had a common sense bill, which brought into the bill all the of the science that we have Learned in the last several decades. And, hopefully, prevent there from being future victims. Thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2019, 'end': 2026, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2951, 'end': 2959, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lorana Campos: Hi, good afternoon, Madam Chair. My name is Lorana Campos. My name is Lorana Campos, I am here representing the California Coalition against sexual assault on behalf of our Executive Director, Sandra Henriquez. And as the professional organization representing 84 rape crisis programs, we know that the current sex offense registry does not improve the safety for survivors, as they have mentioned before, of violence. And often it undermines the rehabilitation and, Reintegration of those who have harmed. Research indicates that most sexual offenses are committed by someone the victim knows, either family member, friend, intimate partner, or acquaintance, which can have unintended consequences for survivors and create further victimization. So we ask respectfully for your aye vote on this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 70, 'end': 83, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 193, 'end': 209, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Lovell: john jonathan lovell, in the interest of time i'll just incorporate by reference all of the folks i have indicated in either testimony, with one exception, the riverside sheriff's association was inadvertently included on the coalition list. they do not support the bill. i informed both committee council and republican council and the authors office of that oversight, and i apologize for that confusion.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joe Michael: Madam Chair, members. Joe Michael for Equality California. We are a co-sponsor for this Bill, specifically for the LGBT impacts that Senator Wiener mentioned, in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 141, 'end': 147, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Natasha Minsker: natasha, aclu of california, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marty Baranacar: marty john baranacar on behalf of the california district attorney's association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Janice Balucci: Janice Balucci Alliance for Constitutional Sex Offense Laws, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kim White: Kim White, Huntington Beach, California in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ray Lee: Ray Lee, from Los Angeles, and in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ann Sherry: ann marty sherry, mother of a sexual abuse survivor, sacramento country, and i'm in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ro Delaski: Ro Delaski, Sacramento county, I support this bill, please pass it.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joshua Clump: joshua ann clump, i'm from sacramento, and i support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lynn Magovern: lynn joshua magovern, ventura county, i support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Emily Juneau: Emily Juneau on behalf of Root & Rebound, I support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jay Rice: Jay Rice from Novato, California, I support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stanicia Boatner: Stanicia Boatner on behalf of the California State Association of Counties in support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Boles: mike father of three, grandfather of one in support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Les Lozano: Les Lozano from San Mateo County strongly support this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roger Honeycutt: Roger Honeycutt, Modesto strongly support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amal Kumar: hi, my name is amal lynn kumar, and i strongly support this bill, thank you, from stanislaus county.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stacy Kumar: I'm Stacy Kumar, I'm from Stanislaus County, and I strongly propose this bill.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert Reed: reed from san bruno, i support this bill.
[]
Aaron Bicamp: Aaron Bicamp from Sacramento and I support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Arox Craline: hi, my name is craline, i'm from wooden hills, california and i support this bill, thank you
[{'start': 15, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Heron: Hi, I'm David Heron from El Dorado County, and I strongly encourage you to support this bill.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert Curtis: robert amal curtis from orange county representing hairdressers across the state, please support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pat Demond: pat huntington beach, strongly oppose, i mean support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Doug Anelow: doug robert anelow i support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Will Arliana: will doug arliana los angeles, i support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carol Urie: Carol Urie, Returning Home Foundation in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joseph Blasi: Joseph Blasi San Mateo County, supporting this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bruce Hamlin: hi, i'm bruce will hamlin from orange county california, and i support this bill.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Adler: david bruce adler from san jose, california, and i strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Heron: mary david heron from el dorado county, and i urge you to support this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Russel Atkinson: Russel Atkinson of Danville, I support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dave Hal: Dave Hal, Alameda County, in support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Douglas Juris: Douglas Juris from Sacramento, single father of three, my children and I all support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Moore: jason from elk grove, i support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Burba: Mark Burba, San Jose, advocate on behalf of all thousands of sober, law-abiding, taxpaying, productive members of society who are on the registry, I support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rosanna Corvacho: Good afternoon, Madam Chair, Rosanna Corvacho, here on behalf of the Alameda County Board of Supervisors, in strong support.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Khalif Asagai: Khalif Asagai, California Public Defenders Association, also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Johnathan Feldman: Chair and members, Johnathan Feldman, with the California Police Chiefs Association, in support, thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dan Aaron: dan mary aaron, from el dorado county, and i support this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Frank Lindsey: frank dan lindsey, grover beach, california, axol board member and i support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicole Pittman: My name is Nicole Pittman, I'm the director on the Center on Youth Registration Reform at Impact Justice in Oakland, California as well as the leading national expert on impact of sex offender registries on juveniles. We are neutral on Senate Bill 421.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mika Moulton: My name is Mika Moulton, and I'm the founder of Christopher's Clubhouse, and I'm representing all surviving parents of children that were sexually assaulted. In 1985 I lived in California when my son Christopher was born. But a few years later we moved to my hometown in Illinois. And Chris, at the age of 10, was abducted, heinously assaulted, and brutally murdered by a repeat offender. Reagan's Law was sitting on the desk of our Governor at the time, and had not yet been signed. I moved back to California 10 years ago, and I've been working tirelessly to ensure our communities are safe, and to provide prevention education to keep children safe, and to provide all over public safety. My opposition comes from the lack of clarity in several sections and great monetary cost to our state. While not clearly specified in the bill, it is presumed that the state sex offender registry, which is the California Department of Justice, will be responsible for retroactive tier assessments for registrants totaling over 100,000. Thus creating significant monetary costs on the department. Immediately upon implementation of the bill, approximately half of all tier one and tier two registrants could be eligible to petition for termination. Penal code 261.5 is the statutory rape code and it is not a registerable offence in California which means that those Romeo situations that were testified to, which is the 19 and the 17 year old, those are not considered a sex offender situation, and are therefore not impacted by changing this law. A tier system is an excellent idea, but not as currently written in SB 421. How can we justifiably say that exposure with intent to commit lewd and lascivious acts against the child, or that possession of child porn is something that doesn't need to be listed on Megan's Law Site, how can we say that? Statistics repeatedly show that an offender molests usually about 30 times before ever being caught the first time. And that initial crimes are normally not enough to continue the perverse pleasure they receive. They usually have to accelerate the crimes to more sexually violent offenses. So the bill as currently written would say these offenses and many others are not bad enough to be greater than a Tier 1 and therefore not worthy of listing on the public site. Stating that there are too many registrants on the system for the public to decipher seems to be saying the public is not smart enough to know how to read or use the Internet registry. The parents I know, and the majority of the community used the registry to be aware of those around and to be informed. The registry clearly lists what the offenders crimes are. Parents want to know who live in their neighborhood and want to be able to let their kids know where to stay away from. An argument states that recidivism is not a thing. I can tell you that if I knew there was an offender in my neighborhood, you can be sure that I would have told my kids and shown them a picture so they knew exactly who to stay away from. And if I knew, I'd probably be playing with my grandchildren right now instead of sitting here, because my son would be 32 years old and probably married with kids, instead of buried in a cemetery. A registered offender was convicted in Riverside County. My county, that's where I live, just last week of attempted lewd acts on a child, annoyance of a child by a registered sex offender, and two counts of being in possession of child porn. He tried repeatedly to lure this child in his car flashed money to get her attention and followed her as she tried to get away. The loss of a child through death or innocence is a loss like no other. And when I stepped out of that limousine to walk across the grass to my son's grave site, I saw that beautiful royal blue coffin carried by the kids in their neighborhood he played with. I never imagined I could move beyond that horrible pain and gut wrenching knot. But here I am to let you know that I believe a tiered system is important, but that it needs to be written to benefit the families and communities, not the offenders. We need to take a step back and work together both sides of this issue to make it mutually beneficial to all members of the community. The sexually assaulting a child is not something that is forgivable or that happens by accident, and losing a child is something you can never imagine before or after it happens.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 200, 'end': 211, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 285, 'end': 290, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 389, 'end': 395, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark Klaas: yes, my name is mark frank klaas, i'm the president of the klaaskids foundation. we started klaaskids in 1994 in the aftermath of the kidnap and murder of my daughter, polly. in 1996, roughly at the same time that megan's law was signed into law, we created our website, klaaskids.org. and since 1996, we've put a comparative analysis of every state's megan's law, where we've published that on an annual basis and updated it. so i don't come lately to this particular issue. i can't really add a lot to what my dear friend micah has testified to and we were actually brought together years ago through our common tragedies. but what i would like to do is i would like to remind the committee and all those who sat here in support of this piece of legislation, that the real victims here seem to have no voice. that this whole idea of victimize sex offenders, individuals who made decisions to harm other people, i find personally offensive, offensive in every way. my daughter was the victim, mike's son was the victim, all of those thousands of rape victims that are out there, they're quite possibly agree to a plea deal believing that the offender would somehow be held accountable for their crimes for their lifetime, as they were told are the real victims in here. so this idea of turning offenders and somehow flipping this over and turning the offenders into the offended, i find extremely offensive. thank you for your time.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 168, 'end': 173, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 524, 'end': 529, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 994, 'end': 998, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nicole Pittman: Okay, thank you. Thank you, my name is Nicole Pittman. I am the Director of the Center on Youth Registration Reform at Impact Justice in Oakland, California, as well as the leading national expert on the impact of sex offender registry laws on juveniles. We are neutral on Senate Bill 421 while the bill, as it relates to adults, is a step in the right direction. But we're concerned about the implications for juveniles who are currently treated the exact same as adults in the bill. Since 1986, California has placed thousands of children handled in juvenile court on the state's sex offender registry for life. Many of whom are 14, and they're with a 12 year old, and because someone under the age of 13 cannot consent to sexual acts, they are on the registry. Holding children appropriately accountable for harmful behavior, and providing them with evidence-based treatment can reduce their likelihood for future offending, subjecting them to registration cannot. Juveniles handled in juvenile court should be treated differently because they are different. They have vanishingly low recidivism rates, less than 3%, rehabilitation, not lifelong stigmatization is the cornerstone of the Juvenile Justice System. Brain science shows that children are works in progress, and that laws must be calibrated to the reality that children are fundamentally different than adults, not miniature versions of adults. The correct response is fully removed juveniles from registries. There are 12 states that do not register juveniles. Their recidivism rates are actually lower than the other states, they're 1%. Please, do understand that we are neutral and we have been engaging with the author and the sponsors of the bill, really, who's been amazing, Stan Feliciano. We also work with CalCasa and nationalized and sexual violence in almost every state, Equality California as well. To align, but we'd like to, we look to work with the sponsors to align this bill with the State's movement towards improving outcomes for system involved youth. I look forward to continuing to work with them on this issue. Thank you for giving me time.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1745, 'end': 1759, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jack Bair: Thank you. I'll be brief, my name is Jack Bair with the San Francisco Giants. I'm here representing All the baseball teams in California, Major League Baseball, and most of the other sports franchises in the State of California. This is an increasing concern for us with people running onto the field and the context that Scott alluded to, the players behind the scenes face threats, are stalked, have people impersonate them on social media. And overall feel a bit vulnerable on the field, especially when they're on an opposing team surrounded by 40,000 people. And so when a player encounters somebody running on the field, the player doesn't know what that person's intent is. And so, we'd like to limit the times in which this happens. And it happens more often then you think, about once a home stand for us. So last September we were playing the Dodgers in a pennant race, we had two people that ran on the field, and ran up towards Angel Pagan, our left fielder, who to defend himself, took that person down and awaited security to arrive, and he didn't know what that person's intent was. In other states, where there is a misdemeanor or greater, which is pretty much everywhere else, announcements are made to the fans before the games that people that intrude on the field of play will be arrested and prosecuted in a way to effectively communicate the message to everybody attending that this is not an activity that will be tolerated. Unfortunately, in California we don't have that ability, because it's just a $250 fine, and we don't have the ability to arrest them. And so, we really can't make any announcements. And so we can't deter that activity, and that's where the law comes into play, where's there's a possibility of charging misdemeanor, unlikely that it would happen in the first instance. But, it could be charged as an infraction or a misdemeanor with nominal jail time. That allows the person to be arrested. It allows us to make the announcement. People will be arrested if they run on the field. And we think that will be a deterrent for some portion of the cases where this occurs. So we appreciate your support and interest in this issue, and we'll be available to answer questions.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 322, 'end': 327, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 940, 'end': 951, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Al Casciato: my name is casciato, i'm a retired cop in san francisco police. since 1989, i was liaison to the san francisco giants and the 49ers. and this bill would greatly help the education process, so that would cause a deterrent to the people that are going to run on the field. and primarily, a lot of the people that run on the field are being encouraged by others. and they fuel them with alcohol and then they use the ticket as a trophy, because it's only $250 and it's an infraction. so, we're hoping to change the behavior of not only those that are going to run on the field but their friends, so that they will prevent them from running on the field. so i echo the comments of the senator and mr. bair.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 697, 'end': 701, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sean Hoffman: thank you, madam chair and member. hoffman of the california district attorneys association in support.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Lovell: John Lovell Los Angeles County, Professional Police Officers Association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mica Doctoroff: madam chair, members, mica mark doctoroff on behalf behalf of the aclu of california. very briefly, we have opposed this bill because we think that existing penalties are sufficient, though we're encouraged by the recent amendments, and we'll be happy to look at them and work with the author's office further. thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kim McGill: good morning. kimigan from the youth justice coalition. on behalf of our members and their families, we urge you to support senate bill 620, which would allow a court, at the time of sentencing, to strike a sentence enhancement for using or discharging a firearm. currently, california law requires courts to extend the term of imprisonment when a person uses or discharges a firearm in the commission of a felony. unlike many other enhancements, these enhancements are mandatory in all cases. this bill is an historic effort to repair our overuse of enhancements, that have imposed mandatory minimums on tens of thousands of people. most important, it is an important first step toward returning judicial discretion to judges. these justice coalitions work with families to understand and prepare for court. and we have seen directly the extreme impact that sentencing enhancements have on people's lives, overwhelmingly youth of color. while nearly all of these cases have been tragic, one case in particular stands out. travis was 19 and had severe learning and developmental disabilities. he entered a game stop and asked for a $100 game while holding a bb gun. a month later he took that same game back to gamestop to turn it in for a new game not even understanding the consequences of his actions. the police were called and he was arrested. it was his first arrest. for his controlling offense robbery, travis was facing up to five years in state prison and or a fine of up to $10,000. in many cases, robberies without a weapon result in probation. but with the gun enhancement, even with the bb gun that was never fired. travis faced up to an additional 20 years. we met with the county public defender's office, to change travis' lawyer, because the first public defender was so over stretched, that he failed to challenge the gun enhancement, based on the fact that travis had a bb gun and developmental disabilities. even with our packing the court, and submitting several powerful testimonies at his sentencing hearing, travis was sentenced to 17.5 years in state prison. the judge stated that under california law, he could not make any adjustments due to travis' cognitive disabilities or his lack of a past criminal record. the term required by these enhancements are additional and consecutive and can be added for each potential victim if a group of people is present. which is often the case. in travis' case, the potential 20 year enhancement was based on there being two clerks in the store, even though one of the clerks wasn't involved in the transaction in any way. in addition to eliminating judicial discretion and imposing cruel sentencing on many of california's most vulnerable residents, sentence enhancements do more to erode our justice system, including these facts. prosecutors use enhancements to force plea deals. people plead out their cases even when they are innocent of all charges, for fear that they will lose at trial and be subjected to extreme prison sentences. this undermines our public safety by greatly expanding wrongful convictions. extreme sentences caused by enhancements decrease hope in the state prison system. and thus increase mental anxiety, suicide, and violence rates inside. enhancements are not imposed equally across california's communities, overwhelmingly contributing to harsh sentencing for young people of color. and, finally, enhancements cost californian's hundreds of millions of dollars a year in unnecessary prison costs. there are tens of thousands of travis' in our state prison system. to ensure that california build a future for all its residents, we urge you to vote yes on senate bill 620.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 21, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1023, 'end': 1029, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1411, 'end': 1417, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1630, 'end': 1636, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1732, 'end': 1738, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1877, 'end': 1883, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2033, 'end': 2039, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2170, 'end': 2176, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2415, 'end': 2421, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
D'Rosa Akile: D'Rosa Akile on behalf of the Alliance for Boys and Men of Color, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Glenn Backes: glenn mica backes for ella baker center for human rights and drug policy alliance in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 22, 'end': 32, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Frankie Guzman: Frankie Guzman, National Center for Youth Law, we support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: Ignacio Hernandez on behalf of the California Attorneys for Criminal Justice in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Leonard Anderson: leonard, coalition, i support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Wilson: wilson on behalf of yjc, youth justice coalition, in strong support of passing this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marty Veranacar: madam chair and members, marty glenn veranacar on behalf of the california district attorney's association. regret to inform you that we're strongly opposed to this measure, which would give courts the digression to strike the enhancement to felonies where firearm or an assault rifle was used in commission of the offence. in the current environment where cities and communities are seeing increases in violent crime, it is inexplicable that this approach dealing with gun crime is what is necessary. in los angeles alone, last year, robberies were up 13%. aggravated assaults were up 10%, homicides up 5% over 2015. overall, as reported by the la times, violent crime was up 10% over 2015, and 38% over two years ago. currently, under california's 10-20-life law, the personal use of a fire arm in the case of murder, kidnapping, robbery, or rape would result in the 10 year enhancement. if there is an intentional discharge of the gun, then the enhancement in those offenses is 20 years. and if the person causes death or great bodily injury, then the term is 25 to life. it is difficult to imagine that there would be circumstances in mitigation which will lead the court to strike the enhancement in those violent offenses. in addition, as stated by the senator, because prop 57 excludes violent felonies from early parole eligibility, ineligibility, striking the enhancement would also lead to early releases for some serious cases. and the example that the senator indicated is correct. the additional term is imposed for assault on a police officer with a firearm under section 12022.53. any violation of 12022.53 is then considered a violent felony, and ineligible for early patrol. striking that term makes that primary offense only a serious felony and then as such, eligible for early parole. i think the core of the problem here is that gun crimes have the most serious impact on crime victims, both an emotional impact and if the firearm is used, physical consequences. the legislature has consistently worked to tighten up gun laws, to keep them out of the hands of those who would misuse their power to damage or kill. yet this measure sends those who would misuse these firearms, in the commission of felonies, the wrong message. use a gun, avoid the time. for these reasons, we remain opposed to this measure, thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lucia Maschler: good morning mr. chair and members, lucia marty maschler on behalf of the california state sheriffs' association respectfully opposing senate bill 620. the use of a firearm in the commission of a felony is exceedingly dangerous behavior that is worthy of significant and appropriate punishment. allowing a court to strike these two enhancements undercuts the role they play in deterring criminal behavior and incapacitating convicts who violate the law. that's why we respectfully request that you vote no on this legislation, thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sam Peredes: mister chairman and members, peredes representing gun owners of california, an organization founded by former retired state senator h.l. richardson. one of the toughest law supporters of strong laws against criminal acts, and we are a committee dedicated to crime control and not gun control. so, we're in strong opposition to this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 132, 'end': 147, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Susan Love: good morning, chair skinner and committee members. my name is susan lucia love. i'm the sole associate board member from the california public defenders association. i'm also the former lead attorney at the san francisco police commission. i administratively prosecuted police officers for what was then known as the office of citizen complaints. i'm currently an adjunct law professor at golden gate university in san francisco. i'm in private practice. i'm a statewide trainer for federal and state criminal defense lawyers in policing issues. sb 345 is low-hanging fruit. it only covers issues that are already public records. in reading the sheriff's opposition, it concerned me that they were thinking that we were trying to get information online that is not covered by cpra. and the exemptions are very clear in 6254-f. so i just want to be clear that sb 345 doesn't change the substance of the california public records act. in fact, as senator bradford mentioned, there are at least 20 that i could find in california, 20 law enforcement agencies. berkeley police department, san fransisco police department, san diego sheriffs' department. several of our law enforcement agencies across california are already doing it without concerns over these issues opening up. things like tactical reviews or juvenile records, no one wants to see those things online. they're already covered under exemptions. so all we're trying to do is keep those exemptions where they are, but in the meantime provide access to information about policing. including enhancing police community relations with easier communication, saving law enforcement agencies valuable time and resources. making the criminal justice system more fair and efficient and effective by providing defense attorneys with easier access to what they need. and, finally, ensuring full statewide california public records act compliance by law enforcement. so i'm happy to answer any questions you might have. and i respectively hope that you will vote aye on this bill.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 62, 'end': 78, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 953, 'end': 961, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Natasha Minsker: Natasha Minsker, on behalf of the ACLU of California. We're pleased to support this measure. This is a very simple measure that's about making it easier for the public to access the records that the public already has a right to view. We regularly use the Public Records Act in our office to access records. And it's very cumbersome. You have to send a letter to the agency. The agency then sends a letter in response. We frequently have to follow up with the agency just to make sure that the letter got to the right person and that they have responded to it. And then sometimes we have to pay for the cost of duplicating the records. And we're a pretty large organization. We have lawyers to help us do this. For the average person, it's really hard to access records through the Public Record Act request. So this is a simple bill that really just gives the public the right to see what the public should have the right to see, in a form that in the 21st century makes sense. We urge your support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Greg Degiere: greg susan degiere, with the arc and united cerebral palsy california collaboration, a coalition of people with intellectual and developmental disabilities and their families, friends, and service providers. and we support it, particularly as it affects elder, independent, and adult abuse, child abuse, and hate crimes policies. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Kincaid: linda greg kincaid, daughter of elder abuse victim carol hahn. our family supports the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 51, 'end': 61, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Richard Calhoun: richard linda calhoun with cedar. in july of 2014, i started public records requests. there are about 525 law enforcement agencies in this state. to date, about 200 have responded. that's not enough. internet, please.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Lovell: john, on behalf of the la county professional peace officers association and the california college and university police chiefs association. we're in support of this bill. and the principles of this bill actually parallel a bill that a number of us are co-sponsoring that is coming over from the assembly, ab 1428 by assemblymember lowe.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 333, 'end': 337, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Usha Mutschler: good morning, madam chair and members. usha, on behalf of the california state sheriffs' association. we respectfully oppose senate bill 354, with respect to the author. as has already been mentioned, we agree that law enforcement agencies should be transparent. and currently we have many law enforcement agencies which are now starting to put their policies and standards on internet. so we would respectfully ask that this bill just not pass, that you vote no until all law enforcement agencies start putting all their standards and policies on the internet. we're working very hard to make sure that all our citizens are aware of what we are doing. and of course we want, as taxpayers, we want to know what it is that our law enforcement agencies are doing. so respectfully oppose at this time. and i think as we work with the author and get all our agencies to put all their policies on board that we can get to where the author would like to go. thank you.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jonathan Feldman: Madam Chair and Members of the Committee. Jonathan Feldman, with the California Police Chiefs Association. We are the sponsors of the bill. When the audit came last August, we took note, took it very seriously. It was a very critical audit, and we understood that there were problems that we had to own up to. Auditor made more than 30 recommendations of DOJ and the Legislature. And we got to work over the fall, working with other law enforcement allies to make sure that we crafted a bill, took ownership, and were proactive on this issue. Each one of those recommendations is reflected in this bill, we did not do a halfway approach to addressing the concerns that were raised. Because they were serious, and they do have serious implications for an individual who may have been on this database that was erroneously put on it, past their purge deadline. It was not backed up by the substantial evidence that's required. Things like training, requiring DOJ oversight, standards, new regulations, advisory, public hearings, all of that's included in our bill. And we anticipate the system to be up and running as soon as possible, with all of these things taken care of so that we can continue using it as an effective crime fighting tool. But ensure that individuals are not being compromised, their privacy is not compromised, and no one else is erroneously put on the database that shouldn't have been. With that, I look for your support.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kim McGill: good morning committee members. my name is mcgill and i am an organizer with the youth justice coalition. today, i'm also here on behalf of several organizations that sent a letter of opposition to senate bill 505. while we agree with much of what 505 attempts to do, we also greatly appreciated the amendments we are taking today. we're also concerned with many sections of the bill that could undermine california's privacy, human rights, fair treatment in court and access to opportunities and resources. we have met with senator mendoza's office, with the california police chiefs association and with the california district attorney's association, and outlined our concerns. at this time, we are urging the legislature to support a much stronger effort, assembly bill 90, authored by assemblymember weber. ab 90 will address accuracy and fairness in the collection and accessing of gang allegations through cal gang and other shared gang databases. including fully enacting reforms outlines in the 2016 audit, of shared gang databases released by the california state auditor. in addition to the amendments just taken assembly bill 90 also addresses additional concerns not included in senate bill 505. including protections for immigrants at high risk for deportation if they have a gang designation by limiting access to the federal government to gang data bases here in california and creating a fair purge process. for all of these reasons at this time, we urge you to submit a no vote on this bill and push for a passing of assembly bill 90 when it comes to the senate. thank you.
[{'start': 43, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 533, 'end': 540, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 805, 'end': 810, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Christopher Sanchez : christopher richard sanchez with chirla, the coalition for humane immigrant rights. we do want to commend the author for his leadership in this area, and looking to fix the concerns that were brought through the audit. however, when it comes to immigrant communities, having this type of database is very concerning because of the repercussions such as deportation. we seen in seattle that there was a doctor recipient who was detained on the basis that he had alleged affiliations with gang members. and unfortunately we don't believe that we're unsure whether he had or did not have those affiliations. however, in california since we do have a database. there are three levels of people that are on this, and it's gang members, the affiliates and associates. and i think the affiliates and associates who might just associate with somebody, live with somebody, live in the same area. are those the ones that we're definitely concerned about. we would not want to see deportation for someone who shoudn't be in a gang database.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Frankie Guzman: frankie christopher guzman on behalf of the national center for youth law and the california alliance for youth and community justice. we urge a no vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Wilson: michael frankie wilson from youth justice coalition, urge a no vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Janae Wheeler: My name is Janae Wheeler from YJC and I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jose Gurrola: Yes, thank you, Madam Chair, Committee Members, and staff. My name is Jose Gurrola and I'm the mayor of Arvin. Thank you for the opportunity to speak before you to express my strong support for SB 453. The City of Arvin is a small, low-income community in the Central Valley. Our water's contaminated with arsenic, the air pollution in our metro region is consistently rated among the worst in the nation, and only 3% of our residents have a Bachelors degree. And our unemployment rate is significantly higher than the national average. These challenges and the lack of a robust tax base make it difficult to finance much needed investment in our public facilities. With four members of this Committee, at least, have been members of the City Councils of either Berkeley, Temecula, Garden City, or the County of San Francisco, you understand the importance of having to balance public safety and the budget. The radio system our dispatchers use and our computer systems and our police vehicles need to be replaced. Our vehicle fleets consist of older vehicles with high miles and need to be replaced in order to bring a current fleet. And this will cost approximately hundreds of thousands of dollars. We're also in a desperate need of a new public safety facility because the cost of a facility will likely cost between 8 to $10 million, which is significantly higher than what this bill allocates. We can leverage funding, if we would receive funding to design and study the facility and possibly put us in a better position in the future to solicit and be successful in getting funding for that facility. We would highly appreciate support that we receive from the state. And we are currently working to improve our public safety. And a small amount of funding for these smaller communities, we do what we can to leverage it and do what we can to do the most with it. Thank you for your time.
[{'start': 70, 'end': 82, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alma Beltran: Madam Chair, fellow Members of the Committee, it is a great pleasure to speak here on behalf of the strong support of SB 453 from the City of Parlier. My name is Alma Beltran, I am the mayor for the City of Parlier. A small rural Police Department are too underfunded to keep up with the evolving list of standards posed by the Board of State and the Community Corrections. We can't meet safety ADA standards when we can barely keep our doors open. The last election cycle our residents passed a measure that was essential to keeping the Police Department open. The measure passed by a very narrow number but it prevented the city from having to shut down the Police Department. The city has faced a number of issues posed significant threat to the community and employees of the department and officers themselves. Employees at the facility have been exposed to several attacks consisting of automatic weapons fired into a building and arson, of vandalism of police vehicle equipment parked at an unsecured perimeter of the Police Department. At the beginning of this year, Indie, the department's canine, only canine was taken from the Police Department and brutally killed nearby. It is recent years that there has been increasing numbers in violent crimes throughout the city. The city would like to construct a new building that meets the department needs and makes the public and the employees feel safe. The exiting Police Department once served as a senior center and a preschool. Although there are improvements have been made over the years, the building was never designed to be functional for a Police Department. Additionally, the current structure houses a preschool center In the rear building that is not conducted for a safe environment. The children and teachers alike create a logistical problem with the parking and the foot traffic of the accessing traffic. The children and the parents that are accessing the preschool facility often encounter caged aggressive dogs, felony arrests, and other potential harmful encounters from the front of the adjacent to the Police Department lobby of the jail facility port areas. The support of this bill is very important to our residents. Thank you for your time.
[{'start': 162, 'end': 174, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sharon Gonsalves: sharon michael gonsalves on behalf of the cities of orange cove, reedley, and dinuba in support.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 24, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Venus Johnson: Good morning, Mr. Chair and members of the Public Safety Committee. My name is Venus Johnson and I am the Public Safety Director for Mayor Libby Schaaf for the City of Oakland. As Senator Galgiani stated, the purpose of this bill is to address a vehicular nuisance. By using alternative penalties that limit the criminalization of the individual while providing for peace and safety in our neighborhoods and on our freeways. Essentially as described, a sideshow is either a planned or an impromptu event. These sideshows are impacting not just cities in the Bay Area, but the Central Valley and Los Angeles as well. Due to the growth of the issue and the sheer magnitude in the number of participants, more enforcement is needed hence the need for the bill today. I wanted to give you just a couple of recent examples. November 15th of 2015, the Oakland Police Department received information that a large group of vehicles were en route to Oakland, from Los Angeles and Fresno with the intent of taking over certain parts of the city. It was first reported that 100 to 150 vehicles would appear in the City of Oakland, and this number quickly grew to over 700 vehicles in the city. Officers reported multiple gunshots from within the sideshow, and bottles and other foreign objects began being thrown at the officers and their vehicles. A large crowd then charged forward toward the officers and vandalized their vehicles to a point where the vehicles actually can no longer be driven. In February of 2016, the California Highway Patrol reported that a sideshow of approximately 100 and 150 vehicles and pedestrians had taken over 54th Avenue and International Boulevard in Oakland. Approximately eight units were responded, but it was seen at the time, that the crowd was just too large, and that officers were not able to disperse the crowd. When officers respond to the scene it is really challenging for them to not only gather evidence at the time, but their main focus at the time is really to dismantle, disperse, and try and protect other pedestrians and individuals and bystanders as well. There was a recent incident unfortunately as well last year, where an individual actually died as a result of being a participant in the sideshow. CHP, the Alameda County Sheriff's Department, are also participants and partners in the City of Oakland with stopping these sideshows. Just in January of this year a freeway was taken over along Northbound 880 in addition to again the area of International Avenue and Oakland. We need additional tools to stop this ongoing epidemic. There's an officer here from the Oakland Police Department in the event that anyone has questions today. But we ask for your support and respectfully again ask for your aye vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 79, 'end': 92, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 139, 'end': 151, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 188, 'end': 196, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jonathan Feldman: chair and members, jonathan sharon feldman with the california police chiefs association. we're proud to be a co-sponsor with the city of oakland. it's nice to find things to work on together. i just want to clarify really quickly that existing law requires an officer to fill out one of these affidavits and establish reasonable cause, and nothing in this bill limits that. it allows us to use different evidence, video footage, photographs. but we still must establish probable cause for a judge to eventually sign one of these warrants and grant us the impediment warrant. that requires us to establish time and place. attached to each one of these videos as they use them in criminal evidence there's metadata that will actually allow the officer to identify exactly the date and time, in some cases the location of where these videos were taken. but ultimately, it will rely on the judge to sign it. to say that, yes, you have done enough to establish probable cause and sign the warrant. so i want to make sure it's clear that those requirements, those standards, still must be met. nothing is limiting those by this bill. and in fact, by expanding the evidence beyond just what an officer see in their physical presence, they might actually be using better evidence that's more substantiable than what is already required, so. happy to answer any questions and would request your support.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Lovell: john on behalf of the association of deputy sheriffs, california association of code enforcement officers, college and university police chiefs, california narcotic officers, la county professional peace officers, la police protective league, riverside sheriffs association. all in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Oosha Machelera: oosha jonathan machelera on behalf of the california state sheriff's association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mica Doctoroff: good morning, mica oosha doctoroff, on behalf of the aclu of california. i understand that there are some amendments under consideration.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Lovell: Yes, John Lovell with the LA County Professional Peace Officers' Association. We are the sponsors of the bill. Our members, we represent Peace Officers who are in the LA County Sheriff's Department in the LA DA's office, and in the LA Coroner's Office. Under current law, if you, deputy coroners are peace officers. They are post certified and trained. Under current law, if they are housed inside a sheriff's department, as they are in 50 of the 58 counties they are covered by the Peace Officer Bill of Rights. If by some organizational, organization chart accident, they are not housed in the Sheriff's Department, they are not covered by the Peace Officer Bill of Rights, even though they are peace officers. This Is just simply inequitable. We have had instances in our agency where deputy coroners have not had the procedural protections that their brother and sister deputies have in other parts of the state. This is a clean-up bill, this is not an expansion of POBAR. It is a clean up consistency bill and it affects very few people. When we first crafted this bill, we thought it affected about 100 people. Well, the Committee consultant for the Senate Public Safety Committee, did a much better research job than I did, and determined that about 65-66 people were affected. We respectfully ask for an aye vote, happy to answer any questions.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dale Gieringer: yes dale mica gieringer with california normal. i would reiterate what natasha said here. i'm not clear exactly on what the limits are for the various drugs here, but i did hear this five nanograms for thc or marijuana, and i just wanted to say this has not been scientifically validated. there are real problems trying to put any kind of number on marijuana impairment, and i quote from the national highway traffic safety administration which says, it is inadvisable to try and predict effects based on blood thc concentrations. five nanograms has been shown to stay in people's system for over three days in some instances and we also know that if people ingest edibles, if they eat edibles which can get them much more stoned than smoking, their blood levels never reach five nanograms. so this is really an arbitrary kind of number that we've got out here. we are going to have some studies done by the center for medicinal cannabis research to really look at the science here, and how you measure impairment, and i think we should wait and see what the science says. thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 71, 'end': 78, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: Thank you, Madame Chair and members.  Ignacio Hernandez, on behalf of the California Attorneys for Criminal Justice,a state-wide Association of criminal defense attorneys. We also have an opposed position, though we have not seen the amendments, our understanding of the amendments, as they were described, we would remain opposed, I think for the reasons that have already been stated. Both as far as the, we're very early on, on the scientific research. have not seen the amendments. Our understanding of the amendments, as they were described, we would remain opposed, I think for the reasons that have already been stated. Both as far as the, we're very early on, on the scientific research. undefined We think the UC San Diego study needs to go forward, and that there has not been a definitive determination on the science related to the five nanograms. So, for those reasons, we remain opposed.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 54, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tim Shmelzer: Madam Chair and Members, Tim Shmelzer representing Wine Institute. We have not taken a position on this measure, but I did want to note our concern with the bill's provisions related to the lowered blood alcohol content. This bill creates a worrisome situation where a person can have responsibly enjoyed a glass of wine, be an absolutely normal-sized person, and run the risk of being brought down to the station, to get their blood tested and without what we see as adequate scientific evidence here,
[{'start': 25, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kalifasa Guy: kalifasa dale guy, with the california public defenders association. i'll associate my comments with those of the aclu. we are also opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Summer Stephen: Thank you, I'm Summer Stephen. Thank you, Chairperson Skinner, members, and Senator Atkins for allowing me to bring my hands on experience here. This bill is really important, and I tell you that it is important not from my own experience, but from the experience that comes from the survivors and victims of this crime who have informed my opinion on this. Often, I encounter victims years later when they've survived, and they tell me that they wish they can go back because they know that their exploiter and abuser has new victims. They wish now that they're stronger, they can go back and help those victims. Put simply this new evidence code 1110 would allow victims who are able to escape and become survivors of this horrific form of sex trafficking exploitation to help support the current victims who are not yet strong enough to testify, and are still trapped in the cycle of abuse and manipulation. At its very core, sex trafficking and commercial sexual exploitation is really sex abuse and domestic violence on steroids. As Chairperson Skinner already noted, crimes of sexual exploitation happen within a circle of trust. And it's no different in sex trafficking. The only real difference is the steroids is the money that fuels it. But the form that it takes is familial relationship that's established. In fact, a new study from San Diego that showed that our industry is at $810 million with about 5,000 victims yearly, also informed us in that what we're seeing is true. And that the number one recruitment tool is someone posing as an older boyfriend, that's how they recruit these 15 and 16 year olds and keep them trapped. Recently, a case really exemplifies why this bill is important. We encountered a victim that was skin and bones, we'd see her come in and out of hotels. We tried to get her to talk, and she would not talk. We knew that this person, the exploiter, had other victims, a 23 year old that ran to another state, but yet, we could not really use that evidence. And the new victim wouldn't talk, until Senator Mitchell's bill, that allowed us to use a state wiretap, allowed us to actually listen in, and which is a rare tool to be able to use, it takes so many resources. When we listened in, we learned that this trafficker was not allowing our victim to eat, sleep, even get her beloved dog out of a shelter until she fulfilled her daily quota. She could not leave that life, that what appeared like pimping and pandering was really at its core horrific human trafficking and enslavement. This bill would allow us to bring those victims that survive, like this 23 year old, to come, and testify, and support the victim like a domestic violence victim who'll get on the stand and say, we're just partners. He's here to protect me, I'm doing this out of my own free will. When we know that if we encounter her three years later, with the right help, she will really tells us the truth that this was slavery.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 54, 'end': 61, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 84, 'end': 90, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1050, 'end': 1057, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2047, 'end': 2055, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Randy Perry: sorry, randy kalifasa perry with aaron reed and associates on behalf of porac. we're very involved in the human and sex trafficking world in the last five years, working with all the statewide organizations. fully support the bill.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 33, 'end': 43, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michelle Tamashaw: Michelle Tamashaw representing the Alameda County District Attorney's Office, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Lovell: John Lovell, Association for Los Angeles Deputy Sheriff's Association of Deputy District Attorneys, California Association of Code Enforcement Officers, California College and University Police Chiefs, California Narcotic Officers Association, Los Angeles County Professional Police Officers, Los Angeles Police Protective League, and Riverside Sheriff's Association, all in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lauren Michaels: michaels, on behalf of the california police chief's association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Oosha Machelera: good morning, oosha randy machelera, on behalf of the california state sheriffs association, in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Natasha Minsker: Good morning, Natasha Minsker on behalf of the ACLU of California. Regretfully, we do remain opposed to the bill. The rule against propensity evidence actually dates back more than 300 years in our legal tradition. It has deep roots, and any change to that rule raises serious due process concerns. The current exceptions to the rule against propensity evidence are narrowly drawn to crimes of sexual violence and intimate family violence. The United States' Supreme Court has not yet ruled on whether even the existing exemptions are constitutional. But the lower courts that have considered the issue have found these current exceptions to be constitutional, because the exceptions themselves have long roots in our historical legal tradition. In fact, courts for a very long time allowed propensity evidence in cases of sexual violence and intimate family violence. Based on what some courts called a lustful exception to the rule against propensity evidence. The theory behind this is that in these kinds of cases, sexual violence and intimate family violence, character evidence, propensity evidence is in fact more relevant, because it is believed that the underlying criminal behavior is driven by a deep propensity, by a compulsion to engage in the behavior. That is not true in the case of commercial sexual exploitation. The offenses that we're talking about here are driven by desire to make money. They are offenses that are largely engaged in by criminal legal, I'm sorry, criminal enterprises such as gangs that are engaging in human trafficking, in sexual commercial exploitation, along with other illegal criminal commercial enterprises, such as drug trafficking, and selling iPhones and identity theft. Their motivation continues to be financial even though the means by which they are caring out their offense is sexual exploitation. And so the theory behind allowing propensity evidence in sexual violence and intimate family violence, doesn't apply in these kinds of offenses. We understand that these are difficult cases to prove and we understand that they are horrible cases with significant impacts on people's lives. That is also true about homicide, and yet, we do not allow propensity evidence in homicide cases. We believe that extending the use of propensity evidence base on the theory that the case is difficult to prove, or that the case has harmful impacts is not a role that has boundaries to it. And it will lead to the expansion, and allowing propensity evidence, in pretty much any kind of case at all. And this gets back to our core concern that this simply goes too far in terms of the due process protections, that have been part of our historical legal tradition for more than 300 years. We appreciate the good intentions behind this bill, and we appreciate that there are existing  measures that allow character evidence for other purposes, besides proving propensity. And that there are existing provisions in law that allow, for example, cross jurisdictional prosecution in human trafficking cases, to address the concern of gangs and human traffickers moving across the state. We believe that this bill is simply not the right approach and goes too far in abridging fundamental due process protections. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Lovell: John Lovell and with the Committee's leave, I'll simply incorporate by reference the representatives who have supported the previous bills today. This is a very important bill, and the city attorney pointed out something important. This is malicious conduct that is going on with an intent to harm the victim. This is an appropriate bill and we all in law enforcement strongly support it.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lucia Maschler: Lucia Maschler on behalf of the California State Sheriff's Association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Patrick Wang: good morning again. patrick oosha wang with santa clara county district attorney's office on behalf of da jeff rosen. as the senator indicated, this bill does provide options for law enforcement as well as prosecutors. again, these types of prosecutions, marijuana or thc, driving under the influence, are some of the most challenging cases that we prosecute in misdemeanor court. it's largely due to the fact that we don't have that quantifiable limit that jurors expect to see as it relates to alcohol related dui. i am no criminalist, but in prosecuting these cases, and supervising individuals who prosecute these cases. i know that there's a synergistic effect between someone who has consumed alcohol and has also ingested marijuana or thc. and that creates an additional risk on the roadway when someone gets behind the wheel of a car. and that is why this bill, i believe, provides a first step. it provides alternatives for charging purposes. if the facts support driving under the influence, someone is impaired for operating a motor vehicle safely, then we can pursue that. but if those facts aren't present, and sometimes, we don't have the most extreme facts. we don't have a collision, we don't have a fatality, we don't have somebody driving recklessly. but we do have indicators such as, the level of nanograms within one's system of thc, and we have someone's blood alcohol level. and that alone provides us with an option. this bill provides us with that alternative that we can present to a jury and provide somebody the appropriate warning sign that they should deter this type of behavior in the future. so again we ask for your support on this bill. thank you very much.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 106, 'end': 116, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Lovell: john patrick lovell on behalf of the association for los angeles deputy sheriffs, association of deputy district attorneys, california association of code enforcement officers. california college and university police chiefs, california narcotic officers, los angeles county professional peace officers, la police protective league, riverside sheriff's association. we are in strong support of this bill. this bill is not a drugged-driving bill. this bill is in concurrent use bill. and the literature is very clear that when you combine controlled substances in the case of marijuana 5 nanograms of delta 9 thc. and you mix that with jack daniels, the level of impairment is exponential. what happens is is that the impairing features of the controlled substance, and they're different from alcohol. impairment symptoms are different. and the impairment features of alcohol are both exponentially increased. this is a good sense, well-measured bill and we're strongly in support and we commend the author for bringing this forward.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Fred Jones: senators, fred john jones on behalf of the california council on alcohol problems, primarily a faith based group, in support.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jorge Garcia: Jorge Garcia representing Alcohol Justice in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Patrick Vanier: Thank you Madam Chairperson, Chairwoman, and Committee. My name is Patrick Vanier, I supervised a narcotics prosecution team with the Santa Clara County District Attorney's Office. I also supervise misdemeanor protection of drug cases in the county. Last year, I worked very hard on the Adult Use of Marijuana Act in trying to defeat it. And I did that and held a summit in Santa Clara County to bring awareness to issues pertaining to marijuana. When we look to states like Colorado and Washington, two states who have seen marijuana traffic deaths double, since legalization of recreational marijuana was passed there. California can be expected to have a similar outcome, with the passage of the Adult Use of Marijuana Act. THC DUI prosecutions are by far the most challenging driving under the influence prosecutions that we handle in Santa Clara County. Because there is no standard for evaluating impairment. At least not one that has been recognized and codified into law. And certainly as we prosecute these cases, jurors look to how we handle alcohol related DUIs. And they want to see a quantifiable standard for driving under the influence. SB 65 provides a reasonable alternative to the extent that scientific testing for quantifiable THC standards for DUI is still under research by the State of California. We believe that SB 65 will provide that alternative in charging and in prosecuting such offenses on our roadway. And we believe it's the first step to provide a meaningful solution to what we expect to be an increase in traffic fatalities as a result of people driving while intoxicated, or while using marijuana. I'm happy to make myself available for questions regarding THC DUI prosecutions. And what we deal with in Santa Clara County. We thank you for the time.
[{'start': 67, 'end': 81, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marty Veranacar: Thank you Madame Chair, members, Marty Veranacar on behalf of the California District Attorney's Association, we're proud to be cosponsor of this measure. Although Prop 64 which legalized recreational use of marijuana created a section under Health and Safety Code 11362.45, which in part started that the intent of the measure, not to amend, repeal, restrict, or preempt the laws relating to marijuana use while driving. It failed to set limits on its use while driving or operating a vehicle. This common sense measure does just that. It sends a clear message, don't smoke marijuana while driving. Given the experience in other states that have legalized recreational use, and have seen marijuana related collisions and traffic deaths increased dramatically. It makes sense to have this measure in place before recreational use is fully implemented. For these reasons and others we ask for your aye vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Lovell: lovell on behalf of the association for los angeles deputy sheriffs, the association of deputy district attorneys, california association of code enforcement officers, california college and university police chiefs association. california narcotic officers association, los angeles county professional peace officers association, los angeles police protective league, and the riverside sheriffs association. all in support of this very good sense bill.
[]
Tim Chang: madam chair and members of the committee, tim fred chang, for the auto club of southern california, in support of the bill.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Greg Herner: greg tim herner on behalf of the aaa of northern california, and nevada and utah.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lauren Michaels: Lauren Michaels, on behalf of the California Police Chief's Association, happy to be in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Fred Jones: Fred Jones on behalf of the California Alliance of Alcohol Policy in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jorge Garcia: jorge greg garcia on behalf of alcohol justice in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Perry: perry with aaron reed and associates on behalf of porac in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Natasha Minsker: i'm happy to speak from here. natasha jorge minsker, on behalf of both the aclu of california and drug policy alliance. we haven't seen the amendments, and so we're not prepared to re-evaluate our position today. but i appreciate that it sounds like the bill is getting much better. and we appreciate that the author is continuing to work with us, thank you.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dale Gieringer: great, great. yes, dale natasha gieringer with california normal. just got in late here. but i understand the amendments are in the right direction here. so okay with us for this to go ahead.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Caliph Assagai: good morning. caliph dale assagai with the california public defenders association. we also are pleased with the amendments. we're not able to officially move our opposition but we'll be reviewing the amendments moving forward.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barbara Chavez: My name is Barbara Chavez, I'm a very strong advocate in Fontana. So, of course, I would be here today to advocate for all children. I have spent my life advocating for children and education. Because I'm a mother of five, and six grandchildren, I fear for my grandchildren's safety because of the broken policy. And, another fear that comes upon me, is that I was also a victim, when I was eight years old. But thanks to a strong grandmother, who took me away from the predator, I am here today to fight. I care so much about the children's safety that I served as a trustee in Fontana. I understood, without clear policy that placed children's safety first, how can we expect our children to learn under those circumstances? It shocks me that we have to be here today, to fight, to beg, for this bill to be passed. We should have clear law, and do not place violent registered sex offenders unattended on school campuses. My children, my grandchildren, all the children, should have the same safe environment. I'm calling on you today, I'm asking you and begging you today, to please support this bill and vote aye, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Treva Kelly: my name is treva caliph kelly from incest survivors speakers bureau, in support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Connie Valentine: Connie Valentine from California Protective Parents Association, we urge your aye vote on this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jacquelyn Kera: kera, protective mothers of solano county, strongly in support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mahana Ward: Mahana Ward, a single mother of two children strongly in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mika Molton: mika treva molton with christopher's clubhouse, strongly in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrea Ranstill: andrea mika ranstill, issb of california, strongly in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Janice Bellucci: Good morning, Madam Chair, and good morning, Members of the Committee. My name is Janice Bellucci. I'm a civil rights attorney and I'm also the Executive Director of a nonprofit, The Alliance for Constitutional Sex Offense Laws. We represent more than 1,000 families here in California. I'm here today asking you to oppose this bill, for several reasons. First, I want to say we recognize that the bill has been amended several times now and that the bill has improved through those amendments. But the fact is, it's still a bad bill and the reason is that it doesn't address the real problem. So I hope that the Committee will take notice of the real facts of the situation and that is, according to the US Department of Justice, in the year 2013, the last year that this information has been made available, there were over 35,000 assaults of children and we're talking about children ages 6 through 17. But of that total number, and it's a very large number and it's very disappointing and, again, it's a nationwide number. Of that 35,000, less than 2,500 of them actually occurred at school. So 35,000, 2,500 occurred at schools. Almost all of those assaults were one minor assaulting another minor. We're not talking about adults assaulting children on schools. So of that number, 155 of the 35,000 involved an adult, of those sexual assaults and then of the 155, 9, nationwide, there are 9 sexual assaults of children on campuses, 9. And nationwide, and that's the year 2013. This is the US Department of Justice. Of that number 9, we don't know if any of them were actually on the sex offender registry in their state, so 9 out of 35,000. So this bill is not going to solve the problem because, principally, the people who assault children are people that children already know. And by the way, many of them are teachers. Many of them are coaches and many of them even are members of the clergy. But the fact is that they're not usually strangers and it doesn't happen on school campuses. In addition to which, this bill if it's passed will harm children. They don't about that side of the aisle here. But the National Education Association has stated unequivocally for many years that children need parental support. They need their parents to come and support them. Back to school nights, athletic events, graduation and this bill will eliminate that for many people. So anybody who's on the registry, their kids are not going to have their parents there. And I know that the bill now says, well, they'll have to be supervised. So if the parent comes on campus to see their kid participate in a sporting event, for example, or how about this, graduation or anything else, that they're going to have to be supervised while they're on campus. The stigma is going to be so great that no parent will bother to do that. They don't want to stigmatize their children, okay? And the National Education Association, rather, says if children lack parental support, they are less likely to graduate from high school, they will have lower grades and they won't attend college. So that's what you're doing for everybody, every child, every registered citizen, ten you're basically dooming those children to those facts. And, additionally, I'd like to say there are other rights that are affected by this bill. So ability to worship, for example. Many times campuses have church services during the weekend, either Saturday for the Jewish community or for Sundays on the Christian community. They will not be able to attend those worship services and also there are other meetings that go on school campus, for example, AA meetings. And, again, the parents won't be able to do those things, the registrants, even whether or not they're parents or not and the fact is there's a complete prohibition that's still part of this bill that's absolutely unconscionable because it does in fact include misdemeanor offenses. And so, for example, I have a client who was a teacher who helped a student in his class adjust her backpack and he was accused of a sex offense. Not by her family, but by somebody else. And so that person was convicted of penal code section 243.4, which is a misdemeanor or a felony and because of that, he will not be allowed on a school campus in the future. Thank you.
[{'start': 82, 'end': 97, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : My name is Emily Juno. I am an attorney for Root&Rebound. We're a non-profit that provides services to people with criminal records. And I am also speaking to you as a survivor of sexual assault.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 21, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Natasha Minsker: Natasha Minsker, on behalf of the ACLU of California, we have not registered formal opposition. We have expressed our concerns to the author's office and we have continued to work with the author's office. And I appreciate that they have taken many of our suggestions and the bill has gotten significantly better than where it started. We do continue to be concerned about the broadest category of prohibition for individuals going on campus based on the listed offenses. We understand that those offenses sound frightening. In fact, they are a range of offenses, some which are serious, some which are not serious and the list is not narrowly drawn to show a nexus with the the purpose of the bill to protect the safety of children and so we really urge reconsideration of that specific list of offenses that has the broadest category of prohibition. And part of the problem here really relates to the problem of our registry itself, the fact that we have lifetime registration. So this bill in fact unwittingly sweeps up individuals who have misdemeanor convictions that are literally 50 years old and these are individuals who are grandparents and who should really have a role in their child's life. So part of the problem here is the underlying problem with the registry, which we do hope to fix. So we urge continuing to work to improve this bill alongside the registry reform, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pam George: my name is pam. i'm from santa clara and i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alex Stuart: My name is Alex Stuart, I live in Citrus Heights and I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jay Rice: my name is jay andrea rice and i live in novato and i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Howe: howe, dublin, california, opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert Kurtis: this is robert jay kurtis, i'm with all the hairdressers in orange county and throughout the state. i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kim White: morning, my name is kim robert white. i'm from huntington beach, as a parent of five, i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : my kim name kim is kim blass kim luzano, kim san kim mateo kim county kim and kim i kim oppose kim this kim bill. kim thank kim you.
[{'start': 3, 'end': 6, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 12, 'end': 15, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 19, 'end': 28, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 29, 'end': 39, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 41, 'end': 58, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 70, 'end': 73, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 78, 'end': 94, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 95, 'end': 98, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 99, 'end': 112, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 114, 'end': 117, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 124, 'end': 127, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jason Morrow: my name is jason  morrow. i live in elk grove. i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Douglas Jurist: my name is douglas jason jurist. i'm from sacramento. i'm a single father of three. i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ted Demone: my name is ted douglas demone, huntington beach, california, and i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Darren DeAngelo: darren ted deangelo from nipomo, and i oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Aurochs Creeling: Good morning, my name is Aurochs Creeling. I'm from Woodland Hills, California, and I urge you to vote no on this bill.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ray Lee: I am Ray Lee from Los Angeles and I strongly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bruce Hamlin: hi. my name is hamlin, i'm from orange county, california and i strongly oppose this bill, father of two.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Hare: my name is mary darren hare and i'm from el dorado county and i urge you to oppose this bill, thank you
[{'start': 11, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Frank Lindsey: My name is Frank Lindsey from Grover Beach, California, and I vehemently oppose this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amal Kamar: My name is Amal Kamar, I'm from Stanislaus County, and I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brett Olusky: hi, good morning. i'm brett, i'm from sacramento, i oppose this bill, please.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Heron: i am heron, i live in el dorado county. i have two grandchildren in the schools of orange county and based on a lifetime of experience, i urge you to strongly oppose this bill. it will not make schools safer for children.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joe Blasey: Joe Blasey, San Mateo and I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Perry: perry, i apologize, on behalf of ...  in support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Darren Bynum: bynum from sacramento. i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Adler: David Adler from San Jose, and I oppose this bill and ask you to vote no.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Boles: hi, i'm mike mary boles from san jose, father of three, and recent grandfather. i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Russell Atkinson: atkinson of danville, i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roger Honeycutt: roger mike honeycutt from modesto, i strongly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dan Harren: Good morning. I'm Dan Harren from El Dorado county, and I oppose this bill. Thanks.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert Reed: good morning, reed from san bruno, and i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brittany Stonesifer: Good morning. I'm Brittany Stonesifer from Legal Services for Prisoners with Children. Because California's current system does not allow for people to show their inability to pay for tickets, many people are forced to choose between paying for rent and food, and paying for a traffic court ticket. Consider, for instance, Nichelle, a mother supporting two children on her limited income as a nonprofit case worker. A few years ago, Nichelle got a couple of tickets because she couldn't afford to get her car up to smog emission standards. When she couldn't make the repairs in time to meet her fix-it ticket date, her tickets ballooned to almost $2,500, and her driver's license was suspended. For months she saw hundreds of dollars garnished from her paycheck. In the end, she overpaid for her tickets, and suffered added financial strain that caused her to be late on rent and other bills. Nichelle was rejected from the traffic amnesty program because her wages were already being garnished when she applied for the program. License suspension is a counterproductive debt collection tool that actively prevents many people from being able to pay off their debt. For 78% of Californians who drive to work, or drive for work, not having a license means not having a job. Riley, for example, got a speeding ticket in early 2016 when she was rushing for an emergency. It was her first ticket ever, so she didn't realize that she had to go to court. But she also couldn't afford to pay for the ticket. When she did go to court to resolve her ticket, she was only offered a payment plan that was still unaffordable on her limited income. Her license was suspended and she has since had to quit her job as a caregiver because she had to drive to people's homes and take them to the Doctor. Similarly, when people can't afford to pay for a ticket but have to drive, they risk being convicted on the misdemeanor of driving with a suspended licence. Andrew, a young dad in LA, regularly needed to drive his two-year-old son to the hospital for cancer treatment. After he was no longer able to afford the amount that they had been paying towards a couple of his traffic tickets, a court ordered his license to be suspended and told him that it would not be restored until he could pay the entire amount of his tickets in full. Andrew was arrested when he continued to drive his son to his chemotherapy appointments. As parents themselves, Nichelle and Riley were sometimes forced to risk arrest and conviction just to take their children to school or daycare. It doesn't make California any safer when our traffic courts punish people just because they can't afford to pay for their tickets. So I respectfully urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 323, 'end': 331, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 433, 'end': 441, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 893, 'end': 901, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1273, 'end': 1278, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1944, 'end': 1950, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2320, 'end': 2326, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2432, 'end': 2440, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2445, 'end': 2450, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brandon Green: understood. my name is brandon, i'm a staff attorney at the east bay community law center. i appreciate what seems like there is support for this bill and just want to provide a little bit more context. so in the last couple of days there's been reports from hud that in alameda county, where i work, $80,000 a year for a family of four is considered low income. $100,000 in san francisco. and so the broader context that these license suspensions exist in have other collateral effects. when i was a public defender in contra costa county, one of the ways in which you would bargain with the district attorney's office is if somebody could get their license back within six months, they would get a 12500, unlicensed driver, which has no jail time and a lower fine. but oftentimes our clients could never afford to get their license back, so they ended up actually suffering harsher criminal penalties via jail time and increased penalties. the other collateral consequences are, for instance, i have a client who currently might be being denied a license to sell insurance because he had driving under a suspended license convictions from 20 years ago. and finally, i got a call from a colleague, that one of her co-workers was denied the ability to go visit her incarcerated partner because she owed fines and fees, and had her license suspended. so all this exists in a broader context, that has extremely broad collateral consequences and so i urge your support, thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Carroll: Madame Chair, Mike Carroll with the Western Center on Law and Poverty. One of the co-sponsors of this measure and we urge your support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Glenn Backes: good morning, glenn for ella baker center for human rights in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Lynch: danielle roger lynch on behalf of the california association of local conservation corps in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maya Ingram: ingram, aclu of california, co-sponsor in strong support.
[]
Sophia McGurkney: sophia danielle mcgurkney, housing partnership, and we strongly support this bill, senate bill 185.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kalifasa Guy: Kalifasa Guy, California Public Defenders Association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marty Veranacar: morning, madame chair, members, marty sophia veranacar on behalf of the california district attorneys association. regret to inform you that we're opposed to this measure, as currently drafted. our particular concerns revolve around the changes to vehicle code section 40508 which reduces a willful failure to appear for misdemeanor to an infraction, in all cases and a person who willfully refuses to appear the first time faces no penalty, but is given 60 days to appear at another hearing. failure to appear at that hearing then could result in an infraction. add to this problem, the courts are required to send notice of a new hearing date to someone who's already willfully failed to appear and it appears that this is just delaying the inevitable. some amount of responsibility must come from operating a motor vehicle and promising to appear in court, when violating the rules of the road. the elimination of the misdemeanor penalty in vehicle code section 40508, especially for repeat offenders represents a dramatic lack of consequences for such violations. for these reasons, we remain opposed to this measure unless it is amended to restore vehicle code section 40508 to a misdemeanor, for the willful failure to appear. thank you for consideration of our concerns.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rand Martin : Thank you Madam. Rand Martin on behalf of the California Charter Schools Association. Well, you've taken away the first part of my testimony so I won't repeat that. I do want to jump into this issue of whether we have settled law or not in this field. We would argue actually pretty strenuously and respectfully disagree with the analysis. We do not believe this is settled law. There is no case law on the issues of any of these transparency or conflict of interest laws. There is no statute on any of these laws. There is no regulation on any of these laws that indicate that charter schools are already covered by the Brown Act, Political Reform Act, Public Records Act, or even Government Code 1090. Without any of those three, it's hard to claim that this is settled law. I would also point out that there are a number of appellate decisions and one Supreme Court decision where there is some decisions relative to what the status of charter schools is. And in every single one of those cases, the status is that they are not public agencies. So there is a case called Knapp versus Pacific Palisades Charter School that had to do with the Tort Claims Act. In that decision, the appellate court concluded that charter schools are not public agencies. In Wells versus One to One, a Supreme Court decision, the Supreme Court concluded that charter schools are not public agencies. In Gateway versus, I can't remember who it was against, but Gateway, they decided that pertaining to certain labor codes, charter schools were not public agencies. So the question about whether there's any settlement of law, I mean the only indication so far is that the courts have been drifting towards charter schools not being public agencies when it comes to the application of a number of laws. There is again, as I say, no case law, no statute at all that deals with the laws that are before us currently in this bill. I would also point out, with all due respect to the chair and to this Committee, this Committee has passed virtually the same bill several times before. So our conclusion is that this Committee also doesn't believe that this is settled law, because they passed AB 709 last year. They passed AB 360 in 2011. They passed AB 572 in 2010. All of which did everything this bill did, plus 1090, but clearly there was an opinion by this Committee over the last seven years that these are laws that need to be clearly applied to charter schools. I'd also like to talk briefly about Government Code 1090 because that seems to be the one issue that we keep getting stuck on, and I'm talking about over the last five or six years. We all agree on Brown Act, we all agree on Bagley-Keene, the two PRAs. We totally believe that charter schools should have those laws apply to them. We disagree on Government Code 1090, and it's for a very practical reason. It's not because we're not supportive of conflict of interest laws or transparency or anything like that. Government code 1090 prohibits a City Council member or school board member from having any financial arrangement or relationship with the entity on whose board they sit. When you apply to that a non-profit charter school, you are talking about board members who actually are there to help keep the doors open. I know many of you have probably sat on non-profit boards. You know what it's like. The non-profit needs your help. They need you to raise money, but they sometimes also need you to step up and do extraordinary things. So a few years ago when the Legislature and the Governor deferred payment of Prop 98 dollars to all schools including charter schools. School districts were able to go out and get 2% and 3% interest bridge loans to get them through the hard times until the Legislature was able to send money again. Other schools were getting 13% and 14% and 15% and our board members were stepping up and making sure that they could get loans that they could actually afford. They would not be allowed to do that under government code 1090. They would not be allowed to lease a facility for a dollar a year under government code 1090. That only accrues to the benefit of the charter school, it does not accrue to the benefit of the person. And these are things that it's so important for a charter school to be able to do. Because we have one source of funding and that's our Prop 98 ADA. Everything has to come out of that. We can't rely on our charter school board members to step up and do the things that we need them to do to keep the school open.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 28, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2672, 'end': 2678, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bill Lucia: madam chair, lucia from ed voice. i wanted to point out, i talk to the conflict provision specifically since that's kind of seems where things are boiled down to. and->>very briefly, we just gave the one witness four and a half minutes, so- the bill goes beyond the putting it just in the conflict provisions of the corporations code to bear here, and clarify that for the purposes of courts and any other referee looking at it. but it goes beyond that. currently, even under 1090, with the d'amato situation in 2008, you would be only as a prosecutor, be able to to go after the bad actor. what this does is actually goes beyond that and makes a provision that says the authorizer is the school district. if there's systemic conflict, they can actually take similarly situated board members that even weren't the bad actors and remove them from office. so i just wanted to highlight that. and also highlight the point that this has been going on for a decade and a half. and to have clarity in the statute would help a lot of people focus on educating kids, instead of paying lawyers to have these disputes.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 24, 'end': 32, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 491, 'end': 498, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Christopher Carpenter: mr. christopher jonah carpenter, from young.... i serve as legal counsel to, or our office serves as legal counsel to, over 70% of charter schools throughout the state. and i can say conclusively this is not a settled issue of law and definitely does need some clarity.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Seth Bramble : madam chair, senators, seth christopher bramble here on behalf of the california teachers association. you'll see very diverse opposition this evening. we do respectfully oppose senate bill 806. charter schools do not have to comply with many laws, and this law seeks to peel away the few protections we have, even in the face of a steady stream of waste, fraud, and abuse in the charter school environment. as the analysis points out, legislative counsel explains that government code 1090 does apply at charter schools. the law subjects governing board members to criminal prosecution for self dealing in efforts to protect tax dollars. it makes clear that no member of a governing board may have a financial interest in decisions before the board. on the other hand the corporations code does allow half of the governing board members to be making a profit from the contracts they are approving. this is because the corporations code is meant to protect the corporation, the public record, i'm sorry, the government code 1090 is meant to protect the public. this bill that charter schools comply with government code 1090, why now? amendments that were taken in senate education committee allow a governing board member, at a charter school, to lease property provided that it's below market rate. if one board member does own the property on which the school sits, the balance of power tilts. if it's my school, i'm calling the shots. you can tell me i have to abstain on the contract or that i can't tell others how to vote on the contract. but at the end of the day i own the property that the school's sitting on and i make the decisions. democracy breaks down. this question about why now is especially important. considering some of the recent horror stories we have seen. last month the director of three charter schools in oakland was charged with fraud and money laundering. from 2007 to 2011 ben shavis direct $3.8 million from the school to his wife who was the bookkeeper and various real estate companies that they own. he was using tax dollars. from his school to pay his companies that he owns serving as both the landlord and the tenant and raising the rent. he may very well go to jail but this bill is suggesting we should not subject these kinds of cases to criminal prosecution. far from a new phenomenon in 2015, the senate for popular democracy released a report documenting more than $80 million. of waste, fraud and abuse of california tax dollars in the charter school environment to date. this evidence and trend line suggests we should be increasing transparency and accountability, not scaling it back and not limiting what authorizers can do around conflicts of interest. we urge your no vote. thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 47, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1905, 'end': 1915, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Eric Premack: eric seth premack, charter schools development center. we oppose the bill for a very different reason. i represent several hundred charter schools, many of which are very small, lack the technical capacity and horsepower to be able to implement them. so we're very concerned about the practical implications of having these imposed. a fundamental purpose of the charter law was to shift from a rule based to a performance based system of accountability. this is the epitamy of rule based accountability and takes us backwards or rather forwards.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Branche Jones: madam chair and members branche eric jones on behalf of k12 california virtual academy and several individual charter schools. i would second mr. premick's comments and urge a no vote. thank you.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 146, 'end': 153, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bryan Ha: ha california federation of teachers we are in opposition.
[]
Michael Young: Michael Young with California Labor Federation we are also opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Peterson-Fisher: good evening, thank you, mr. chair and members of the committee, for your time today, especially at this late hour. my name is rebecca. i'm a civil rights attorney. i'm a partner with the liu law firm of san francisco, and i previously was a senior staff attorney with equal rights advocates, an organization that works to advance the rights of women in economic and educational institutions. i've represented student sexual assault survivors in their claims with the federal office for civil rights and also in litigation. and i've also worked collaboratively with california school districts to improve their sexual harassment policies at the local level. as you consider this bill, i urge you to bear in mind why sexual violence is an educational civil rights issue. sexual violence disproportionately affects women and lgbtq and gender nonconforming people and especially women and girls of color. and it often has a devastating effect on students' abilities to succeed academically. in the absence of a fair and effective grievance procedure, students who are victims of sexual assault by classmates or by school personnel are left with the impossible challenge of attending school each day with the person who assaulted them. combined with the normal effects of sexual assault, which include depression, nightmares, loss of self esteem, and difficulty concentrating. these students are faced with constant anxiety about encountering their assailant and often with further harassment from that person or their associates. under these circumstances, students drop classes, their grades suffer, and many drop out of school. but the consequences go beyond the classroom. as one report on what has been called the sexual abuse to prison pipeline explained, when schools fail to support girls who are victimized by gender based violence and harassment on campus, girls no longer feel safe. and as a result may disengage, may become truant, or exhibit challenging behaviors that are rooted in the trauma they have experienced. yet instead of being viewed as victims of sexual violence, these girls are often disciplined, including being suspended, expelled, or referred to law enforcement. the effect of sexual violence on women's access to education is a critical educational equity issue. time and again, studies have confirmed the prevalence of sexual assault, both at the college level and in our middle schools and in our high schools. during the obama administration, students benefitted from increased enforcement of title ix and from guidance issued to schools to better equip them to respond to sexual violence fairly and compassionately.
[{'start': 127, 'end': 134, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 188, 'end': 191, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Matthew Siverling: mr chair and members, matthew on behalf of the college and university police chiefs association, in support.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Romo: michael branche romo, 350 bay area, in strong support and we appreciate senator jackson's leadership on this.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 80, 'end': 87, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kyra Ross: Good evening. Kyra Ross on behalf of the Marin County Council of Mayors and Council Members, in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jamie Go: Jamie Go on behalf of the Nature Conservancy and the Environmental Defense Fund, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Melissa Romero: good morning, madam chair and members. melissa jonah romero with the environmental group californian's against waste. ab 1219 is going to fill the gaps in current law in order to feed more people in need. and it's going to create a method to actually promote these donor protection laws to businesses. so that more potential donors can understand how to make safe donations to those in their communities who are in need. and there should be minimal cost to the state because these promotions of the donor protection laws should be done within the existing interactions between the environmental health officers and the food facilities, thank you.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Larisa Cespedes: thank you. larisa melissa cespedes, here on behalf of so cal edison in support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathryn Lynch: Good morning, Madam Chair and Members of the Committee. Kathryn Lynch representing the California Alliance for Arts Education. Again, as the author indicated, this is not a mandatory program. But we do think that collecting data and providing information on course offerings for K-6 is really important. It provides great opportunity for parents to know what's being offered at the school. And also for districts to share information and learn in a professional development setting, thank you.
[{'start': 56, 'end': 69, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: kyle larisa jones with sierra club california, in support of ab 355 today. it will create a lot more efficiency in getting us to a more compliance with underground storage and water quality violations in small, disadvantaged communities. we urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Gauger: madam chair and members, jessica kyle gauger on behalf of the california association of sanitation agencies, also here today in support of ab 355. in particular, we're supportive of the provisions relating to increasing the population threshold for small community compliance programs. this change is consistent with thresholds for other small community assistance programs. and will allow rate payers in these small communities to finance repairs to their systems, rather than financing penalties over a small rate base. so cassis sees this change as good public policy and we would urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 525, 'end': 531, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sean Hoffman: Sean Hoffman with the California District Attorneys Association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sean Hoffman: Good morning, Madam Chairmembers. Sean Hoffman with the California District Attorneys. We're the sponsors of AB 264. As Mr. Low said, these deal with post-conviction protective orders. These can already be obtained through the post-conviction process for victims of sexual assault and domestic violence. AB 264 expands this authorization in two modest but important ways. One, it expands the universe of offenses to which they would apply to include gang crimes. And two, it expands eligible individuals to include witnesses of those crimes. These can currently be sought through a separate civil hearing. But to the extent that this allows more to be resolved during the post conviction process of the criminal trial, we believe this could cut down on the need for those separate civil hearings, which would ultimately have a positive impact on the court budget. And we ask for your support.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 124, 'end': 127, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Natasha Minsker: Natasha Minsker for the ACLU of California we remain opposed for policy reasons. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tia Nguyen: Good morning, Madame Chair and members. Tia Nguyen, with Public Advocates, here in support.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeff Tordeguia: good morning, jeff jessica tordeguia, an advocate, in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Natasha Minsker: minsker, aclu of california, in support.
[]
Mike Carroll: madam chair, mike with the western center on law and poverty. i know you heard this in the policy committee, so i won't take too much time. i will let you know, though, that we actually had a larger crowd coming, but the bus is late from los angeles. so it's going to be a shorter presentation, and we anticipated this morning so with that, we, mr. kalra, i think, really outlined the case well. this bill went through your committee last year. we're hoping that the same will be able to happen this year, that it will be able to get to the floor again. so thank you for your time, and i will now introduce our witness, mr. copeland, a recipient. thank you.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 349, 'end': 354, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 624, 'end': 632, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Robert Copeland: My name is Robert Copeland I belong to Dogfight which is a disability rights group. Shock which is a homeless rights group here in Sacramento. And that care for people with disability, development disabilities group, and I know people that on SSI living in their trucks, in the streets. In the Winters Sanctuary, half the people there did not have any income at all. And a lot of people on SSI gotta choose between food, medical, rent, and it is tough in California rental markets. I urge Aye vote on this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrew Shane: andrew jeff shane, the california association of food banks, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeff Tordeguia: Jeff Tordeguia, advocating, but also, Carr is definitely behind this.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 38, 'end': 42, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Natasha Minsker: natasha andrew minsker aclu of california in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kirk Child: Kirk Child, Disability Rights California in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jared McCreary: Jared McCreary with Californians for SSI, and the California Partnership, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Darla Boyerman: darla natasha boyerman , santa cruz health choice, strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carly Finkle: Carly Finkle with the Food Bank of Contra Costa in Solano in strong Support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Greg De Giere: de giere with the arc and united cerebral palsy california collaboration. we support the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Gonzales: Rebecca Gonzales, National Association of Social Workers California Chapter in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rachel Tucker: tucker california hunger action coalition in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jay Alburez-Sevilla: good morning, mr chair and committee members. jay darla alburez-sevilla with the california credit union league in support of assembly bill 198. assembly bill 198 would allow first time home buyers to claim an income tax deduction for cost paid or incurred for qualified home buying expenses. such as closing costs, federation fees and home inspection fees. up-front cost are a inhibitor to buying a first home. assembly bill 198 helps alleviate some of these costs by reducing the state tax liability on just a gross income on first time home owners. we thank assemblymember patterson on his work for this issue and ask for an aye vote. thank you.
[{'start': 46, 'end': 71, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 576, 'end': 585, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Patrick Barrett: good morning mr. vice chairs, and members patrick jay barrett deputy director of legislation for the department of motor vehicles. the dmv is pleased to co sponsor ab 791 with the california department of corrections and rehabilitation. our two agencies have partnered over the last several years by facilitating the issues on identification cards too upon their replace from prison. and we believe that this can be attributed to reduced recidivism. we believe that the reduced fee id card for pre-release inmates will promote participation in the program, and it will further benefit inmates upon their release by having valid identification in their possession which will allow them to apply for services and programs to assist them in successfully reentering society. we appreciate your support.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Caliph Assagai: Good morning, Mr. Chair and members. Caliph Assagai on behalf of the California Public Defenders Association. We're the sponsors of this bill. This is a simple clean up bill that will allow individuals who did not go through probation to have their records sealed automatically, just as anybody who completed a regiment of probation has. It shouldn't cost any more money than is already being spent on the record seals. It will just keep individuals from having to go through the court process to obtain the sealing of their records. So no additional costs, the same population. And, actually, those people who have been acquitted or their cases have been dismissed. So we ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kara Corches: good morning, corches on the behalf of the california optometric association. so we all know that glasses have a life changing impact, many of you up here on the dais have a pair of glasses, and you know it'd be very hard to read, do your job or drive without the ability to see clearly. clear vision however is not the only life changing impact of this bill, restoring the eyeglass benefit for the adult medi-cal population also increases the likelihood of early disease detection. we all know that diabetes is a very costly condition that affects too many californians, in fact 55% of all californians have either diabetes or pre-diabetes, an eye exam is often the first place where diabetes is detected. studies do indeed show that consumers are more likely to get an eye exam if they have the eyeglass benefit. therefore, it's more likely if this benefit is restored that we're going to detect diabetes and save healthcare costs downstream related to losing your sight, or even just life threatening complications due to this chronic condition. because, you know, clear vision is so important to californians to do their job, to drive, to read, we think that this just makes sense, and we respectfully request your aye vote, thank you.
[]
Mary June Forest: Mr. Chair and Members, Mary June Forest on behalf of Health Access California in support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Schacht: mr chairman and members, mark patrick schacht with california rural legal assistance foundation. as the committee analysis notes, this is a follow-up to last year's ab 2895 which failed in the senate. we've scaled to build back in an effort to try to encourage employers to make these documents available to their workers. and we're continuing to talk to the employers and have every hope that we'll limit our differences with a few additional tweaks to the bill. be happy to answer any of your questions and ask for your support.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marti Fisher: Hi, Marti Fisher on behalf of the California Chamber of Commerce. We are opposed to the bill. There are some terms that are undefined and will create some confusion not only for employers but also for employees and for Cal OSHA and we're also concerned for the definition of who is allowed to request and receive the copy. The authorized representative is a very expansive definition which we would like to see narrowed. Thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicole Rice: Nicole Rice, California Manufactures in Technology Association for all the reasons stated we're opposed as well.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laiseng Saechao: good morning and thank you for the opportunity to testify today in support of ab 523, equity in clean energy investments. my name is laiseng mark saechao, and i am the state organizer at the asian pacific environmental network, a community based organization working in many of these environmental justice communities. ab 523 ensures that communities overburdened with environmental injustices have an equitable opportunity to engage in clean energy innovation. while meeting with the california energy commission, we found there'd be no fiscal impact of the bill. and if any, cost would be minor and absorbable. thank you, and i urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 133, 'end': 153, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matt Almy: Matt Almy, Department of Finance no file. No file.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cathy Senderling: thank you, mr. chair pro temp and members. cathy jonah senderling with the county welfare directors association of california pleased to support the nomination of mr. cervenka to the position today. we work very closely with the state department of social services. i personally work closely with you and your staff here in the building but what you don't see is my members and my staff and me working closely as well, with the state departments that we administer programs on their behalf. our 58 counties administer pretty much every program that the state department of social services run. and at times, there are issues that get elevated and i've worked personally with the nominee to work through those issues. we don't always start at an issue with the same side but, i will say he clearly does have a passion for the mission. just as he said his staff do, he does as well. and we've been able to work through issues and get a compromise that is favorable to us and to the services that we provide to the people of california. urge your support. thank you.
[{'start': 43, 'end': 65, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 167, 'end': 175, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Karen Keeslar: Karen Keeslar on behalf of the California Association of Public Authorities, and also here for the 47 members of the IHSS Coalition that signed a support letter on this confirmation. Just like Miss Senderling, we don't always start at the same position with Mr. Cervenka when there are negotiations impacting the IHSS program. But he's honest, he's always available, he gives us good information. We don't always have to end at the same point even in agreeing. Those three components of being honest, and available, and listening are so important and I would tell you, after 37 years of being a lobbyist. It's more important to have those things in place, than sometimes somebody that's just the yes person for the administration. We trust him, we like him, we appreciate his passion, and we ask for your support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 198, 'end': 208, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 262, 'end': 270, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Carroll Schroeder: Carroll Schroeder with the California Alliance of Child and Family Services. We too work very closely with the Department of Social Services and with our colleagues at the Child County Welfare Directors Association. I have had the good fortune of knowing Pete Cervinka, when he was in the Department of Finance, later when he was with the Health and Human Services Agency. And again now at Department of Social Services. I want to tell you I was delighted when I heard he was appointed to this position. We have worked with him very closely through the Continuum of Care Reform effort. If you're hoping to confirm someone who is a quiet leader with integrity, with an incredible work ethic, with compassion, with knowledge of the issues and somebody who's a problem solver, you couldn't do any better than Pete Cervenka and I encourage you to confirm his appointment.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 255, 'end': 268, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 806, 'end': 819, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tiffany Whiten: Tiffany Whiten with the Service Employees International Union in support of Pete Cervenka. He's definitely had an open door policy with us. He's been very direct, and as Karen said, he's been a great listener. We look forward to working with him in the future. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 76, 'end': 89, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 170, 'end': 175, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Robert Benson: Robert Benson, with the California Person's Standard Advocacy Partnership. And I'm IHSS Client. I am an IHSS client. That strongly support Peter. And strong support for Pete.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 139, 'end': 144, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 169, 'end': 173, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Marty Omoto: and then i'm almost also testifying in support. my name is marty. i'm a family member, also with the california person centered advocacy partnership and ...california disabilities senior community action network. my sister when she was alive had developmental disabilities and also used ihss among other regional center services. working with pete and echo everyone's comments, it takes a special kind of person to hold the position he does. especially during difficult budget times when there was budget cuts, there were reductions or new ideas or new procedures put in place that were very difficult for people receiving ihss and also for the workers. pete, as other people have said, has always been open and responsive to all of us: to family members, to recipients. he has shown compassion and as karen keeslar said, he has been honest with us. and i think that, the bottom line is that is the most important thing that we could ask any public officials, so, strong support.
[{'start': 59, 'end': 64, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 343, 'end': 347, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 654, 'end': 658, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 802, 'end': 815, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jim Lights: Good afternoon, Chairman and Committee Members. Jim Lights on behalf of Blackstone. We basically disagree with the premise of this measure that cash buyers are competing with first time home buyers. As I look at the Committee analysis, if I may Mr. Chairman. It reads in part under purpose of this bill, according to the author, instead of renovating and selling homes, or just waiting for the real estate market to recover. They've converted these properties into permanent rental homes. This is not an accurate statement at all. First of all, there were 416,000 single family home resales in California in 2016. The large scale cash buyers in 2016 purchased a grand total of 250 homes in California and sold 150. So a net increase of 100 homes. So we think that we are frankly a statistically insignificant portion of the current buyer's marketplace. That does not warrant a reporting regime to be created that the industry is being asked to pay for. Secondly, the vast majority of the homes that have been purchased, were all purchased out of foreclosure. So that's an all cash transaction. You cannot view the house and you can not inspect the home. You are buying it sight unseen. So that is the nature of the auction on the courthouse steps. And so you don't find that many first time home buyers on the courthouse steps buying a house that can not be inspected. Last but not least, much of the information that this bill is asking the state to collect is already publicly available. The sheet that was passed around to you is but one example of a publicly traded companies data that is recorded quarterly to the Securities and Exchange Commission. They're required filings. That information is filed quarterly so there is an ability to assess and track on a quarterly basis the acquisitions and sales of homes that are occurring, not just in California, but all over the country. And we would certainly suggest that the information that is currently available be accessed. To our knowledge that has not happened. It's kind of akin to doing a literature review before you embark on a research project to see what's out there. And understand that before you create a reporting requirement that you ask the industry to pay for. We would ask for your no vote, thank you.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 51, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Lane: chair and members, michael with the non-profit housing association in northern california, our communities need an anti-displacement tool to addressed the jobs housing gap and some of the patterns of re-segregation that we're seeing across the bay area and other parts of the state. and while corea is an existing law focused on disadvantaged communities, ab 1598 focuses on disadvantaged households who are most at risk of displacement given these trends that we're seeing on the ground. we also need a tool that local governments can use, that is user friendly and can be stood up quickly and begin to capture some of that tax increment and reinvest it in work force housing. communities with job growth are able to invest in infrastructure and our permanent new commercial and office development. but what's lacking is the affordable housing for lower wage workers in these areas who are having to commute farther and farther back in to job centers. 1598 will allow for the investments and work in force housing and we urge your aye vote. thank you very much.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debra Carlton: carlton with the california apartment association in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matt Schwartz: Matt Schwartz, California Housing Partnership, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tiffany Phan: phan on behalf of bridge housing, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debra Carlton: Hello again, Debra Carlton with the California Apartment Association. There are many bills that you all introduced this year to promote housing and provide funding for housing but I would say all of those are for naught if we don't have a law like this that strengthens what cities can and cannot do. This provides clarification so that cities and the NIMBY groups in particular don't unjustly prohibit housing. Going forward, we still continue to find that at the local level. This obviously, Mr. Bocanegra has stated it very clearly, will provide added, we think, value to the law, and for those reasons, we ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 498, 'end': 507, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brian Hanlon: Good, still it's morning, my name is Brian Hanlon. I co-founded CaRLA, the California Renters Legal Advocacy and Education Fund, and I'm the Policy Director of the YIMBY Party. Thank you for considering AB 678. The Legislature passed the Housing Accountability Act way back in 1982, the year of my birth. It has amended it 15 times since then. In 1990, 27 years ago, the Legislature substantially expanded the HAA and included a preamble that sounds like it was written yesterday. It reads, in part, the lack of affordable housing is a critical problem which threatens the economic, environmental, and social quality of life in California. California housing has become the most expensive in the nation. The excessive cost of the state's housing supply is partially caused by activities and policies of many local governments which limit the approval of affordable housing, increase the cost of land for affordable housing, and requires that high fees and exactions be paid by producers of potentially affordable housing. In 2001, the Legislature again amended the HAA and dropped the word affordable from its findings, why? Because problems that once afflicted the least of us, now afflict most of us. Today, the Legislature is again confronted with amending the HAA. For 35 years, many local governments have thwarted the will of the Legislature, violated the Housing Accountability Act and, worst of all, have created a housing crisis, both acute and chronic, that immiserates renters and aspirational homeowners throughout the state. On a personal note, as a renter, as a moderate income earner, as a not-so-young person who wrestles with the effects of the state's housing shortage every day, I implore you to strengthen the Housing Accountability Act and make good on the promise of California. The YIMBY, or Yes In My Back Yard movement, consists of mostly renters in their 20s and 30s who are locked out of home ownership, struggling with rent, or living with housemates when we want to be starting families. We know that our housing struggles are not the result of impersonal economic forces or lack of individual effort, but derive from bad policy and bad laws that have restricted housing growth for decades. In short, we are angry and we vote on housing. We are not asking for public assistance. We are asking that the Legislature make its own housing laws enforceable, so that California's construction tradespeople may build a future, and construct a state affordable and accessible for all of us. I'd be happy to answer any questions that you might have of AB 678, especially the need for a heightened evidentiary standard, expanded attorney's fees, and an HAA analysis. Thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Speck: jennifer on behalf of the california association of realtors here in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erin Guerrero: Erin Guerrero with the California Building Industry Association, also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Lane: Michael Lane with the Non-Profit Housing Association of Northern California in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sonja Trauss: trauss, sf bay area renters' federation, strong support.
[]
Chad Pradmore: chad jonah pradmore, san francisco yimby, strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jordan Bickett: jordan chad bickett, yimby action, strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matt Schwartz: matt jordan schwartz, california housing partnership, support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bob Tillman: bob matt tillman and you know who i am and i strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anya Lawler: anya bob lawler with western center on law and poverty. we had substantial concerns with the introduced version of the bill. very pleased with all the amendments that have been taken this far and once we've had a chance to review them, hopefully we'll be able to come on and support, thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Rhine: Good afternoon again, Mr. Chair and members, Jason Rhine, League of California Cities. We have concerns with the proposed to be amended version that is in mockup form in your analysis. We certainly acknowledge there's a housing crisis, there's no doubt about it. Two of our goals this year at the League of California Cities that were adapted by membership say that we need to do more on housing and we are making a very conscious effort to do that. However, the measure as it's going to be amended, we have two very significant concerns. The first deals with the burden of proof and it seems like it's easy to change substantial evidence to clear and convincing evidence, and that it would go on and be not that big of a deal. But it actually is a very fundamental and just a huge concern and problem because land use decisions at the local level are enshrined in the Constitution. And not only are local land use decisions in the Constitution, but the Legislature has taken it a step further and they have provided further limitations in the civil procedures code. So the whole underpinning to that process is that evidentiary standard of substantial evidence and if the Legislature were to do away with that and have a different standard of proof, it would just upend that entire process and what it would do is that there would be separation of powers issues between the judicial and the legislative branch, which essentially would be the city council at that time. And the reason for that is the city council is applying the law, which is the Housing Accountability Act or whatever the law, to a set of facts. It is not second-guessing whether the city is right or wrong in that decision, it is did they apply the laws that the Legislature has made appropriately? If they did not, it gets sent back to the city and you must fix it. You need to change your application of the law and redo it, basically. That can't possibly happen in a clear and convincing standard because it would allow the courts to say no, your conclusion is wrong, and essentially rewrite that law. So we believe it's unconstitutional and the measures, we'd oppose based on that alone. The second point, which is in our minds, equally as important, is the fine provisions. Not so much on the size of the fine, I mean $100,000 per unit fine is quite significant, but it's really the application of that fine and when that fine shall be applied to the local government. Under existing law now, if a city violates the law, the court sends it back to the local government and if they don't fix it and do it right and they act in bad faith, which is key, then the courts can fine you. Under the provisions of the bill now, it eliminates that bad faith provision, so the city would be faced with a fine if they just accidentally violated the law, not that they actually made bad faith. So with that, we ask for your opposition.
[{'start': 45, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sande George: sande anya george representing the american planning association. we do appreciate the amendments that the author took and they did remove some of our concerns. unfortunately, like the league, we also have major concerns with the things are remaining in the bill and we think when taken together, not only will it prohibit cities and counties from denying housing, which we think is pretty difficult right now, we think it's almost impossible right now. but the way the law is set up, it would make it almost impossible for us to impose any conditions, fees, exactions, mitigation, and that's because the change in that standard will now require that we look at conditions, fees, etc, through the lens of this new clear and convincing standard. we can't do that. it would require us to make sure that the project remains feasible with all these conditions, etc., and that it's necessary to safeguard human health and safety. some are, some aren't, but that doesn't mean that they are not legitimate conditions. most of these are required to serve the project, it's local infrastructure that we don't have any other funds available to provide. so if this were to go into effect, we do think it would be a major state mandate, because we'd have no other source of infrastructure financing available to us. it also, clear and convincing requires agencies to predict the future. you have to be very certain about what would happen with the project, including development projections, and we don't have the ability to do that. the $100,000 fine and the ability to impose that fine as a mandate rather than allowing jurisdictions to cure first, we do think that is another huge problem for us and it is really penalizing, whether or not you have a severe penalty or whether or not it's some minor violation. it increases the fines if a city or county fails to meet a target that isn't even required in law. unfortunately, it ties the fees and increased fees to whether or not you've met your rhna production requirement, there is no such thing. rhna is a planning statute requiring you to provide adequate sites and being allowed to increase the fees is just, on top of that, is just too difficult for us. and finally, it expands bad faith to apply to paperwork violations. currently, bad faith is if the court finds that a local jurisdiction had made an action that was frivolous or otherwise entirely without merit. making this now apply to paperwork violations, we think, is not appropriate for that standard and certainly imposing additional fees on that is not appropriate either. so unfortunately, as much as the bill has been amended, we still have major concerns and the combination of these things we think will be very, very difficult for local governments to comply with.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Fernando Martin: thank you. my name is fernando sande martin with the council of community housing organizations in san francisco in support of this bill. as many of you know, san francisco recently voted to increase our inclusionary housing. we went through a very long period of technical advisory committee with a number of market rate developers and for-profit developers sitting together in a room with a number of consultants to come up with what the maximum feasible amount in san francisco would be. however, unless this bill is passed, what the state density bonus would do is actually lower our inclusionary housing in san francisco and we saw that with the first project back in december that was approved. under an area that required an 18% affordability and it was lowered to 13% when that developer took the state density bonus. as you know, the state density bonus adds market rate units in a certain, sort of, coordinated fashion, with the addition of certain affordable units. it was never, we believe, the intention of the state density bonus to actually lower the inclusionary amount, so what this would do is create an equivalence to what we have now in san francisco. developers may choose to use the state density bonus or not. they would still be providing the underlying inclusionary. thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debra Carlton: good morning, mr. chairman and members, debra fernando carlton with the california apartment association. you know we respectfully request what you're trying to do. san francisco of course has the largest inclusionary percentage that we see in the state. we just agreed this morning to provide an inclusionary program. we just don't believe that now changing the rules when it comes to density bonus and we do believe that it's changing the rules, is going to provide added incentive for developers, so we ask that you not move this bill forward as is. we ask for your no vote.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 62, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Hamlin: my name is brian debra hamlin, i co-founded the california renters legal advocacy and education fund. and i'm also the policy director of the gimby party. the density bonus law has been in effect since 1979. and for 37 years, san francisco has refused to grant density bonus units for inclusionary housing. after the latinos unitos de napa court case, begun by the late housing hero david greybull, san francisco began to realize that they would need to abide by state law. the city's response and proposal, the affordable housing bonus program was vigorously opposed by the organizational sponsor of this bill, the council of community housing organizations. in fact the head of ccho, peter cohen referred to it as the quote redevelopment model, unquote, meaning the intentional destruction and displacement of low income communities of color. in fact, the founder of ccho, calvin welch, called the affordable housing bonus program quote ethnic cleansing unquote. i urge you to not give in to this absurd fear mongering and do not let san francisco exempt itself from state law. just to be very clear, this kho and ting bill would significantly reduce the economic incentives to use the density bonus law, which would make housing less affordable. it would create huge financial, legal, and political uncertainties for developers who have state density bonus law projects already in the pipeline, in many instances for several years. it would create huge financial, legal, and political uncertainties for developers considering using the density bonus law for future projects, and for landowners wishing to sell their land for such developments. if you permit san francisco which is hostile to the density bonus law to make density bonus units economically infeasible, it would also reduce the supply of new housing which san francisco definitely needs by making it financially infeasible to land increasing cost of many projects. in san francisco which recently passed prop c that upped the inclusionary percentage to 25% many proposed housing development projects are now only feasible if granted the density bonuses under current state law. this bill completely circumvents the spirit, intent, and function of the state density bonus law. which is to, quote, be interpreted liberally in favor of producing the maximum number of total housing units, unquote. i respectfully ask that you vote no on ab 915. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 383, 'end': 397, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 686, 'end': 697, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 875, 'end': 887, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1108, 'end': 1111, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1116, 'end': 1120, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Erin Greuer: Erin Greuer on behalf of the California Building Industries Association. We also see that this is up-ends the density bonus law and oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Speck: jennifer brian speck on behalf of the california association of realtors also in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bob Telamon: Bob Telamon, I am a developer of the 75 unit density bonus project in the mission district of San Francisco. This law basically cuts me off at the knees. I have to ask you why would you possibly pass this law when you passed AB 2501 last year, strengthening the state density bonus law. And then, particularly, why would you pass it only in San Francisco, the poster child of anti-development opposition and high rent costs in the United States? I mean it flabbergasts me. I urge you, strongly, to vote against this law.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sonia Traos: sonia, sf bay area renters federation. the idea that the density bonus reduces the amount of affordable housing is wrong. that is a not-true thing. if you pass this bill, that will reduce the amount of housing, and the amount of affordable housing. thanks.
[]
Tim Colin: tim, on behalf of the san francisco housing action coalition, we strongly urge you to oppose this, and further, just wanted to say, the idea that somehow san francisco is in consensus in support of this is simply not true. this type of thinking of this legislation comes from way out in the fringe, it's far out of the mainstream in term of economics and urban planning. this will harm housing production, please oppose it.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Clark: Hi, Laura Clark, Executive Director of DMB Action and Stunted Millennial, we are in desperate need of housing. Human beings will live in the units that you would be killing by passing this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chad Pradmore: Chad Pradmore, San Francisco resident. I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jordan Bicket: Jordan Bickett, DMB Action and just a paycheck to paycheck millennial urging your opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Joseph Nagle: Thank you for having me, my name is Joseph Nagle, I represent EverCharge. EverCharge specializes in the designing and implementation and installation of intelligent EV charging solutions for multifamily housing. As an industry leader in the EV charging community we support this bill. And acting as though we'll remove the single largest hurdle in wide spread EV adoption which is access to charging stations. According to a recent study 90 percent of EV drivers prefer to charge at work or at home when one or both area available. Unfortunately for those living in MUDs this is not currently feasible or cost effective. EverCharge specializes in retrofitting in these MUD communities. For EV charging and the greatest single cost is finding available power by adopting these standards. You'll be saving EV drivers, residents, and property managers and owners thousands of dollars in future installation and install costs. Thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Immel: melissa jennifer immel on behalf of the city of santa monica here in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julee Malinowski-Ball: julee on behalf of the california electric transportation coalition. i want to thank the author's staff for working with this on the bill on refinements and look forward to additional work on the amendments. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alejandra Duran: alejandra with the ... on behalf of nextgen california in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jean Krauter: good morning, chair and members of the committee. jean, president of golden state manufactured-home owners league, gsmol. we wish to thank assemblyman stone for his willingness to help us develop and champion ab 1269 the mobilehome residents and senior protection act. california's mobilehome residency law is one of the first and best laws recognizing our rights as mobilehome residents in a greatly imbalanced power relationship with our landlords. like many laws, enforcement of what the legislature adopts is the biggest problem for those of us who's behalf you have acted. in the case of the mrl the only enforcement provided is litigation. for fixed income seniors and low income families who constitute the overwhelming majority of mobilehome residents, litigation is an illusion. unless we have something that rises to a class action. the majority of us cannot afford lawyer to help us when we face individual violations of our rights under the law. assemblywoman stone has helped us scrap the mediation proposal using an existing state agency process. mediation would be accessible when litigation is not. we understand california cannot afford to pay the cost and we accepted that reality. that's why it's paid for by us not the taxpayers. we provided each committee member with over 1,350 individuals expressing the need for this bill. i have 64 more letters that i brought with me today and we continue to receive more every day. these letters speak to individuals facing violations of their rights under the mrl. we ask you to support us. thank you.
[{'start': 50, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 151, 'end': 156, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 972, 'end': 977, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Hillary Mosier: my name is hillary. thank you for your attention. i am a fourth generation californian. i'm a 64 year old preschool teacher living like most of my park neighbors on a limited income.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sharon Leiberman: i'm leiberman, president of gsmol chapter, at brookwood in santa rosa, and i support this bill.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Jamas: i'm richard melissa jamas, president of the sonoma county mobile home owners association, we have 63 mobile home parks there. and the residents are very eager to have some help in the enforcement of the laws that already exist for mobile home residents. the corporations are violating these laws, forcing us to try to take them to court. this new bill, we very much appreciate and support. thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mallory Collins: mallory richard collins, i'm an officer in the brookwood homeowner's park in santa rosa. and i strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Myra Koovos: Myra Koovos, Chapter President of the Woods Mobile Home Club of GSMOL in Clovis, California and in support we have 260 homes in my park.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jill Fellows: My name is Jill Fellows. I'm a GSMOL member. This has been a long time coming and I'm very excited to have it here. I look forward to it being passed. I do support it, of course.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lyle Fellows: hi, i'm fellows, gsmol member. i would like to support this bill.
[]
Catherine Borg: Morning Members, Catherine Borg with the Western Manufactured Housing Communities Association. We are here in opposition today, and I appreciate the Assemblymember helping with our pointing out some of the issues that we have regarding the bill. It's not about the necessity of this, it's about the approach, and we believe that this can be done in a matter of ways that is much more beneficial to everybody. It's been told to us that this is a program that has patterned after a program that's in Washington State. Now a lot of the differences between us and Washington State is that they don't have a mobile home park maintenance program. So, they don't collect a fee that does the health and safety inspections, which they do under their program, their joint program. Washington's program covers both the homeowners and the landlords, and in fact, they actually encourage both parties to work out disputes. It says here that, their vision, we seek to foster a safe and sustainable manufactured mobile home community industry in Washington State. Through excellence in service, respected regulatory leadership, and effect of membership and stakeholder organizations. So, they encourage both homeowners and landlords to utilize their program for it ends a dispute resolution program. The other thing is that this is duplicative of what is in statute already. So one of the things that we had brought up was that we would like to see, if we're going to do this, that it go to the Department of Housing and Community Developments on Ombudsman Program. The Assemblymember said that there's no agency that covers issues with related to the Mobile Home Residency Law, except that the Mobile Home Ombudsman Program does actually do that. I will read here health and safety code 18151, acceptance provided in Subdivision C, and I will get there. The Ombudsman shall provide assistance and taking complaint and helping to resolve and coordinate the resolution of those complaints. From the public relating to the manufactured homes and mobile homes, including but not limited to problems of titling and registration, installation, warranties, financing and other financing by a supervised financial organization as defined in 1801.6 of the Civil Code. Sales, inspection, the homes and parks, mobile home accessories, improvements and problems related to the Mobile Home Residency Law. C, that's it's not supposed to do, the Ombudsman shall not arbitrate, mediate, negotiate, or provide legal advice on mobile harm park rent disputes, lease, or rental agreements or disputes arising out of lease or rental agreements. But may provide the information on these issues. So I believe that the mobile home Ombudsman currently under the Department of Housing and Community Development could probably do a better job as to actually doing the things that they are able to do under their current authority, and then this body could expand their authority to work out some of the more mediation issues that would help resolve some of these disputes. As far as duplication of the program, putting it into the Department of Fair Employment and Housing, the Mobile Home Ombudsman shall establish procedures to deal with complaints, including the publication of complaint forms and written materials which shall be made available to the public informing them of the functions of the Mobile Home Ombudsman. And providing information on manufactured homes and mobile homes. The Ombudsman shall work with and coordinate his or her efforts with other divisions and sections of the department, and with other agencies of the state and local government. So, in a time that we're already, lack of funds for affordable housing, we've passed a billion in bonds for transportation, it's probably not a good idea to ask for more money for a program that's already kind of done in another agency, but probably albeit not done that well. So we would recommend that the functions go to the Ombudsman, some funding be allowed in that respect. And I'll conclude my comments.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vanessa Marvin: All right, good morning. My name is Vanessa Marvin, I'm with the American Lung Association in California and we're in strong support of AB 62 because this bill will ensure that residents with lung disease are not exposed to unwanted secondhand smoke from their neighbors. One of the largest bulk of calls that we get at the Lung Association from the general public is from individuals who live in multi-housing and either they or one of their family members are suffering from a lung condition. Maybe they have a disease or maybe their child has something like asthma and they live next to a smoker and the smoke is drifting into their unit. And so these individuals are seeking more medical treatment due to this unwanted exposure and they can't afford to move and don't know what to do. And so policies like this protect those residents because without them, they're out of luck. As mentioned earlier, you know a number of housing authorities in the state have already adopted smoke free policies, 44 of them have some protections for their residents and we have worked together with our partners around the state with those housing authorities to ensure that residents who do smoke have access to smoking cessation services when their complexes go smoke free. And last year, we co-sponsored a bill that would really solidify the quit smoking benefits under the Medi-Cal program. And since all HUD residents also qualify for Medi-Cal, all these residents will have access to these proven methods to quit smoking. So we feel this bill will really ensure that those residents who are least able to move away from that unwanted second hand smoke exposure will be protected. For these reasons we urge your aye vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amber King: Amber King with the Association of California Healthcare Districts in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kula Koenig: Kula Koenig with the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Gibbons: Michelle Gibbons with the County Health Executives Association of California in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Daniel Brad: Daniel Brad, Breathe California in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Immel: melissa on behalf of the city of santa monica and the sonoma county board of supervisors in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brandon Roberts: Brandon Roberts representing the Health Officers Association of California, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Braz Shabrell: good morning, my name is braz mallory shabrell. i'm a housing attorney with the east bay community law center in berkeley. i represent low income tenants in alameda county who are facing eviction. my organization sees hundreds, if not thousands, of low income tenants every month who are at risk of losing their homes. many of them come from public housing. as you all know, we are in a housing crisis. we're having an incredibly difficult time keeping people housed and off the street and what we need from you is solutions to keep people housed, not more reasons to put them out which, make no mistake, this bill will definitely do. we already see tenants in public housing being threatened with eviction for any and every imaginable infraction, including hanging their laundry up in the wrong location, leaving a child's bike outside in a yard, or simply standing around on a sidewalk or a parking lot, which the housing authority considers to be loitering. we also know that an entire family can be evicted for a single act of any family member. we recently saw a family of seven people being evicted because one of their kids, a 12 year-old, pulled a fire alarm on housing authority property. very frequently, these citation are coming from housing authority police officers. oakland housing authority has its own police force that's charged with enforcing policies like this. so we're not talking about concerned caseworkers, or social workers, we're talking about police officers, who have a widespread practice of harassing and stopping tenants for any reason that you will give them. simply put, we do not need any more reasons to criminalize and put out an already increased incredibly vulnerable population. and while i don't doubt the good intentions behind this bill, i see firsthand how policies like this play out on a ground level and i can assure you that such a broad prohibition will only be setting people up to fail, that enforcement will be selective and used as a pretext to stop harass and enter people's homes, and that the most vulnerable tenants, including seniors and people with disabilities, will be the ones who suffer the most. thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Augusta: Good morning, Mr. Chairman and members. Brian Augusta, on behalf of the California Rural Legal Assistance Foundation. Just very briefly, Mr. Chairman, we too are opposed to this bill. Our concern remains that, while we are very supportive of anti-tobacco and cessation efforts in California, we've made tremendous progress through efforts to limit smoking in public places. But when we begin this policy of prohibiting smoking in multifamily housing, it presents a whole new set of complications. We're talking about a resolution that is punitive in nature. I was meeting with legal services advocates who, every day, are talking to tenants who are facing eviction because of anti-smoking policies in multi-family housing. So we've got to balance that public health risk of homelessness for those folks and their children with the public health risks of smoking and secondhand smoke, and I don't think this bill strikes that balance, regardless of what the federal policy may be. I think the policy in California should strike a better balance and I would urge this Committee to continue to work with the author without moving this bill forward to find the right balance that protects people from eviction, thank you.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tyrone Buckley: good morning, tyrone braz buckley, housing california. we actually have a concerns position. and i apologize we're a little late to this discussion. but we echo a lot of the concerns that have been voiced here today. we'd also like to point out that housing california was part of passing sb 1380 which makes california a housing first bill. and housing first is a philosophy that acknowledges that people are dealing with homelessness, drug addiction, mental health issues. that housing is key and core to making sure those folks can turn their lives around. so we have some concerns about how this bill works with that public policy goal. so with those concerns, thank you for your consideration and we'll continue to speak to the author's office.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Hamlin: Brian Hamlin, California Renters Legal Advocacy and Education Fund, and also speaking on behalf of ... action. We're opposed to the bill as currently written. We share the same concerns as the Public Advocates and other advocates for low income people. And we encourage the author to continue to work with the housing advocates to improve the bill, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Baker: Good morning, Mr. Chair and members, Kevin Baker from American Civil Liberties Union and with the respect for the author. It seems like an excessive approach at this point in the bill given the relative risks.We have joined others and ask the community to hold the bill or continue to work on it.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alfredo Pedroza: well chairman and members, thank you for the opportunity to be here. my name's pedroza from the napa county board of supervisors and i'm also here representing the entire board who supported this piece of legislation for what assembly member aguiar-curry outlined, and it's an honor to be here with you as well, assembly member. as you outlined, this is a great example of a private-public partnership, where we've tried to do everything locally to ensure that we're maximizing every dollar. and the one thing to note, we have 180 farm workers who rely on our three centers and they've provided over 53,000 bed nights. in every step of the way, and in my previous life i was a banker, so before coming to you today i made sure that we tried to look at the expense out of the equation, to make sure that we were keeping expenses down and managing our expenses to the lowest... we can to make sure that if we did come to the state, it was something that was going to be sustainable but we did everything locally. so as our assembly member outlined, we've increased the rents in terms of what the farm workers are paying. they're paying currently $13 per day, they were previously paying $10 per day. our growers, and we're very fortunate to have the industry here as well, have agreed to tax themselves and there's also legislation pending right now, where they're increasing the assessment to try to have that assessment grow. so, again, it's a great example of private-public partnerships at work. and as our assembly member outlined, these are the only centers in the state that the state has not contributed and we're here asking for that continuous support. we all know about the labor shortage that we're facing throughout the state and this is one of the reasons why we want to continue to make sure our centers are sustainable and we can continue to provide a critical need. we're talking about folks that are at the very basic side of housing. if they're not housed here, they don't have anywhere else to go. and let me tell you about the personal testimony. i come from a family, a farm worker who my dad stayed at one of the previous centers. so it goes to show you the critical need these centers have locally and we hope that we can get your support and really use napa county as a model of a great way to show that you can get those partnerships across the board from the private-public side and leverage every tax dollar that's out there. so i hope that we can earn your support today.
[{'start': 79, 'end': 86, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 242, 'end': 254, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rex Stults: Hi, I'm Rex Stults. I'm the government relations director for the Napa Valley Vintners. We're the nonprofit trade association for the wine industry in Napa. We represent 553 wineries in Napa. We might be America's great wine capital and perhaps make the best wines in the United States, but we're known for other things, such as taking care of the land and the environment with programs like Napa Green and for taking care of our neighbors and the community as a whole. And I think the farm worker housing program that we have is a perfect example of that, it's completely innovative. As the Assembly Member and supervisor just said, that's the only one of it's kind in the State of California. It's innovative, we've done it on our own now for 15 years and we're here to ask for your support in helping to sustain it. It's been responsibly run and managed for that entire time and we're pleased to support AB 317. Supervisor Pedroza explained some of the mechanics of the program, I don't want to repeat that, but Senator Bill Dodd's got SB 240 going on right now, which we also support. That'll address the operational deficit by raising the cap on our self-assessment. Essentially, SB 240 allows us to assess ourselves more, 50% more within the industry. So we're stepping up to the plate even more than we have so far. But as they described, these three centers are aging and with any property, it takes maintenance and everything else to keep them going. Last year we spent $80,000 of money we really didn't have to replace showers that were needed, just had to do it. This year we need to replace the roof on one of the places, that's $100,000, is what the bids are at now. So the money's real, and that's why we really would appreciate a small bit of support from the state. In closing, this farmworker model should indeed be the model for California, not the exception. It's industry, it's the farmworkers themselves. It's local government coming together to make it happen. Elsewhere in California, it's the state fully funding it. And by turning this in the model, it would allow the state to stretch these limited dollars much farther and encourage other local industries to step up and put skin in the game as well. So we also encourage your aye vote today and appreciate the opportunity to be here, thank you.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 926, 'end': 933, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1023, 'end': 1032, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mike Swanton: my name is mike tyrone swanton, i'm owner/operator of laura michael wines in calistoga. i'm also a member of the napa valley migrant farmworker housing committee with father john brenkle. and most importantly, i'm an napa valley farmer who is working shoulder-to-shoulder with these guys and i'm in strong support of this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 174, 'end': 186, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Erin Guerrero: good morning, mr. chair and members, erin mike guerrero on behalf of the california building industry association and the sponsors of ab 1515. the housing accountability act or haa is also known as california's anti-nimby law. it has not been effective in preventing nimbys from blocking housing projects and perpetuating california's housing crisis. according to hcd, we need to build at least 180,000 homes annually to keep pace with the demand. not accounting for the back log of 2 million homes that has accrued over the past several decades. currently we're producing about half of the estimated need. obviously, we're not on track to build an additional 3.5 million homes by 2025 to accommodate california's current and future housing needs, unless something changes. ab 1515 is intended to breathe new life into the haa. it's been far too easy for project opponents, the nimbys that the haa was originally addressing, to circumvent the haa. they put pressure on a local government, which in turn can find that a project is inconsistent with any of a variety of local plans or ordinances. once the local government makes a determination that a project is inconsistent, the project is no longer able to benefit from the protections of the haa which basically said that housing projects can only be denied for health and safety reasons which cannot be remedied. home builders are usually leery to sue over these matters. the courts show a tendency to find in favor of the local government and home builders are not in the practice of pursuing lawsuits that they feel they will lose, thats why theres not a breath of case law in this matter. ab 1515 levels the playing field, instead of nimbys having the advantage by their ability to point to a project being inconsistent, projects will now be deemed consistent if theres substantial evidence that would allow a reasonable person to conclude that the project is consistent. the reasonable person standard is a commonly applied standard in courts of law. by applying that standard to projects consistency with local plans and ordinances, more housing projects will fall under the haa and will be less likely to be rejected out of hand base on nimby pressure. with me today is paul campos a lawyer with the building industry association of the bay area, and a subject expert on the haa, and we respectfully ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2229, 'end': 2240, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Debra Carlton: debra erin carlton of the california apartment association, in support brian hammond, with the california renters fund, strong support. bob tillman, i am a developer of a 75 unit state density bonus project in san francisco, and given all the difficulties i have had getting my project approved, i greatly support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 71, 'end': 84, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 136, 'end': 147, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sandy George: Thank you. Sandy George, representing the American Planning Association. We think, unfortunately, this bill really punishes every single local jurisdiction just the way it's written. Fair argument standard is pretty much what we're talking about here with a reasonable person to conclude. And what it does allow is for basically a developer to decide whether or not their project is consistent with the zoning and general plan. This is regardless of whether there is substantial evidence to the contrary. We suggested amendments that if the bill is amended to remove the reasonable person section and just require that if you make these fine inconsistency they have to be under substantial evidence that that would be fair, to both sides. But this actually puts the applicant in the driver's seat, in determining what they think is consistent in their project with the local jurisdictions, general plan, and zoning. And we cannot agree to that. So again, we would be fine if it were just substantial evidence to make that determination, but this goes a little bit too far and makes the developer the decision maker here.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marina Wiant: thank you, chair and members. marina debra wiant with the california housing consortium, pleased to be a co-sponsor of the bill. many of you are well aware of the housing affordability crisis that we are facing in this state. in addition to significant investment in affordable housing development, we need to address the barriers and constraints development, which have exacerbated this crisis. hcd statewide housing assessment states that lack of enforcement is a barrier and constraint. and further states that the lack of enforcement of state housing laws limits the effectiveness of existing planning tools intending to promote housing development. taken together our vast body of housing laws will indicate that we are meeting the housing needs of all residents of the state. but we all know that this is not the case. ab 72 takes a significant step forward towards ensuring that local governments, not only plan for housing in their housing elements, but take actions consistent with these plans and i urge your aye vote today.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anya Lawler: good morning. lawleron behalf of the western center on law and poverty. i'll echo most of the comments of my colleague from chc and just say that my legal services colleagues enforced these housing laws to the best of our abilities, but our resources are limited. and it will be tremendously helpful for the attorney general to step in some of the most egregious cases and take those on. to ensure that every city in county in the state is actually following the letter of the law and implementing them in a meaningful way to address this housing crisis, it's critical. i think the ag is willing but it needs an investigatory body such as hdd to be able to refer cases, which is why it's structured this way and we urge your support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 22, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Johan Klehs: klehs, leading edge california, we support the bill. it's a great incentive for local governments to follow their own housing elements.
[]
Jennifer Svec: Jennifer Svec on behalf of the California Association of Realtors here in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Margo Parks: Margo Parks, on behalf of the California Council for Affordable Housing in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Emmel: melissa on behalf of mayor edwin lee in the city and county of san francisco here in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 27, 'end': 36, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Shawn Topaikin: shawn marina topaikin on behalf of the california apartment association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tyrone Buckley: Tyrone Buckley on behalf of Housing California also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Augusta: brian with california rural legal assistance foundation, pleased to sponsor this measure.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sande George: Sande George representing the American Planning Association. We actually support the increase enforcement of housing element laws. We do have suggested amendments, though, to the bill that we would need in order to go full support. We want to make sure that the laws that are being investigated by the AG are targeted. There's not going to be that much money. We want to make sure that the statutes that they are actually enforcing are clear and easy for everybody to understand. A lot of the laws are more subjective. We also think there should be adequate notice to the local jurisdiction before they take on any kind of enforcement action. The other thing with regard to HCD being allowed to decertify a housing element. That's a huge change in law, their guidelines currently are not regulations, so we want to be sure that with their limited staff and their ability to investigate that those laws are also targeted to those things that are currently in the streamline process for review for those local agencies that do a good job. And we think that with them, limited resources is plenty for them to start with at this point. We also think they should give adequate notice. So with those amendments, we would go full support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Fernando Martin: fernando with the san francisco council of community housing organization in support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Rhine: good morning mr chair and members. jason shawn rhine, league of california cities. we are opposed to this measure, we haven't opposed some last amended position. we have no qualms with the introduced version of the bill, which would've provided the edgy with additional resources to enforce existing law. we certainly want our cities to abide by the law and, knows that those certainly face those consequences. however, the bill as amended and forgive me for not getting my letter in time, i was focused on the introduced version, not the one that was recently submitted so forgive for that. i did get a chance to talk to the author's staff and sponsors of the bill and i think perhaps there's some progress and we may be able to get to a place where we can support the measure. or at least go neutral on the measure but, as currently drafted, the bill would give the department, the director, very broad, sweeping and nearly unchecked powers to review any action at the local level. and as it relates to housing element, or the myriad of other state laws, housing accountability act and city bonus law. those sort of things. we don't believe that that is an appropriate place for that remedy to occur. we think that should be handled by the courts and judicial branch. we don't think that giving that broad power without any particularly any sort of limitation to that power or evidentiary standard, or anything of that nature to admit it to a state agency just isn't appropriate, and really isn't what they're there for. one last thing, with regard to the housing element, and sandy george from the apa mentioned it. allowing them to basically de-ceritfy that housing element unilaterally is a very big departure from existing law. so with that, we hope to continue to work with the author. and we hope that we can get to a place that's a little better off, particularly the introduced version. but with that, we are opposed unless amended.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1579, 'end': 1591, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Holly Fraumeni: holly with platinum advisors again on behalf of habitat for humanity california. this is based on model legislation and a program that's worked in florida respectfully request your aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Wada: Jennifer Wada, on behalf of the California Association of Community Managers, we agree this does make important clarification, here in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sharon Rapport: Good morning, Sharon Rapport from the Corporation of Supportive Housing. One of the most disturbing trends that we see in homelessness in California is the increase in homelessness among unaccompanied children and youth. And as Assemblymember Gloria said, we have seen a 7% increase just between 2015 and 2016 and that makes California have the highest population of homeless youth in the country. We actually have almost a third of all homeless youth in the nation, 78% of whom are sleeping on the streets or in vehicles. Homeless youth are more likely to experience serious mental illness and substance use disorders. They are more likely to drop out of school. They are more socially isolated and they are far more likely to experience chronic homelessness and eventually die prematurely on our streets than their housed counterparts. 40% of young women experiencing homelessness and 56% of transgender youth experiencing homelessness are sex trafficked every year. And yet, despite this population's dramatic outcomes, they have very few resources to exit homelessness, far fewer resources than families and adults experiencing homelessness. They are typically excluded from programs that families and single adults can access. They're subject to barriers that communities have been working to eradicate for families and single adults for the last several years. Because of this, the US Interagency Council on Homelessness has urged communities to remove barriers to making housing and services available to any homeless youth who needs and wants it. They've urged communities to use a coordinated entry process to link youth to housing and services addressing their needs, to act with urgency to help youth be able to access non-time limited housing and to develop resources, plans and systems that address homelessness among youth. AB 1406 would allow California to make significant progress toward these goals. The bill would offer competitive funding to local jurisdictions to provide housing and services to young people experiencing homelessness. It would offer a flexible approach to address the specific needs of young adults, services tailored to support the youth transition to economic Independence and self-sufficiency, and support these communities to coordinate their systems and plan to ensure youth exit homelessness permanently. AB 1406 provides long-term solutions to stem the increases in youth homelessness while ensuring a more effective response to the crisis. I'd like to thank Assemblymember Gloria and the Chair for authoring this important legislation and I urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 243, 'end': 249, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2520, 'end': 2526, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Luz Hernandez: Good morning, my name is Luz Hernandez and I'm here on behalf of John Burton Advocates for Youth. I'm here to testify for AB 1406, which will reduce homelessness among youth in California. I became homeless in San Francisco at age 20 after completing a transitional housing program. I didn't have any family member in the United States and I was totally alone with no one to help me. Once homeless, I slept in a garage that was not intended for human habitation. For almost a year, I slept on a small cot next to the garbage cans where rats live. I contracted a skin disease as a result from my contact with the rats. While living in their garage, all my clothes were stolen and I was almost attacked. There was no lock on the garage, so there was no way for me to keep my things or myself safe. During this time, I was full-time student at San Francisco City College and also working full-time at Round Table Pizza. The stress of being homeless negatively affects my school performance and my grade point average dropped to 1.5. This meant that I lost most of my financial aid because I was not making satisfactory academic progress. I finally moved out of the garage and starting couch surfing with my friends. They would let me stay for a month or so and I would do my best to stay out of the house during the day, and just come to home to sleep. I had to put my things in a stored locker. After a year of being homeless, a college counselor told me about an opening for permanent supportive housing and I applied. Fortunately, I got in and since then things have gotten much better. I graduate from San Francisco City College with a 4.0 and transferred to San Francisco State University, where I am majoring in liberal studies and minoring in criminal justice. AB 1406 will help young people like myself who are working hard, but still can't find housing and become homeless. AB 1406 will require you to receive an individual assessment and then provide housing that meet the youth needs. This includes providing a range of housing options, including transitional housing, permanent housing, and... housing. It would also include supportive services. Waking up every day without being worried where to sleep the next day, it's what homeless youth need to succeed in life and I am the real proof of that. Every homeless youth deserve a safe and permanent place to live, and I believe this bill will definitely help the dreams of thousands of homeless youth to come true, thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 65, 'end': 76, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tyrone Buckley: tyrone jason buckley with housing california, we're pleased to co-sponsor this bill and urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Immel: melissa tyrone immel on behalf of the california academy of child and adolescent psychiatry, here in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Mole: Danielle Mole, California Alliance of Child and Family Services in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Lemley: Amy Lemley with John Burton Advocates for Youth. We're a co-sponsor of the bill and in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Charlotte Delgado: thank you, committee members for allowing me to speak. i'm charlotte melissa delgado, i'm the western vice president for the national alliance of good tenants and i lived in subsidized housing. i'm considered 1 of 11 housing experts that actually lives in subsidized housing. when i first became ill in 1984, i lost my home. i knew only one person that had ever lived in subsidized housing and i knew nothing about it. i went on the list and thank god, i was accepted into washington square's i and ii. i had been there one month when my disability ran out from my job and my rent was $188, and i only got $4 that month. so i went and told him i had to move and they told me how to go, and apply, and get it. so i was able to stay there and i have lived there for 29 years, 9 months and 5 days. we were the first complex that was sold in the state of california to a for-profit and they immediately wanted to evict all of that section 8 tenants which was 100%, and go full market rent. we were able to go to washington, dc and have a law written that grandfathered us in. so we were able to stay and then they tried again by raising the rent, and they raised the rent so high that the housing authority turned them down. so they sold and i was going to dc and the day before i left for dc, i got another notice that i had 30 days to vacate. so i had an appointment with hud the next day and i went to dc, and went to hud. and we made a conference call and they said, well, we're new owners, we don't want to accept this. and they said, when you bought the property, you bought the contract and they're grandfathered in. so they immediately started flipping the property and it was flipped i know at least 4 times, and it might have been 5 times in 1 year and we got another 30-day notice. but this time, the people had had died off or had moved away or had grown up were no longer there. and we went from 104 apartments down to 34 subsidized tenants and they gave all 34 of us a 30 day notice to move. well, there was nothing here that could help. i couldn't get to dc and couldn't talk to anybody long enough to get something done. so consequently, i was evicted while i was giving shots to my neighbor for diabetes and they wouldn't even let me take my purse or my walker. and if it hadn't been a shift there, i told them, i can't walk without the walker and i have no id. the sheriff actually went into the house and got those two items for me. i was locked out and no place to go. it was hard. i thought here, i came here to die. i am getting well and now then i am out on the streets, and thank god that there was an organization that took me out to a safe house, and took to me to a place that i could rent with my voucher. and i moved into hansen garden apartments and out of north in hurley avenue, and they had a very strong tenants association there which i was very thankful for. and i've been there since a year and a half, it'll be two years in august and they tell me now that they have said they've turned two people down and they said, we're no longer taking section 8 vouchers. i don't know when they're going to give us a notice, if they're going to give us a notice, or if they're going to do what our other owners did, just kick us out. because there has to be a way to notify tenants when they are struggling to keep a roof over their head. we're talking about veterans, women, children, the elderly, disabled, and the poorest of the poor. and they have no safe guards, they have no background. they don't even know it's happening to them until one neighbor says, they told they wasn't going to take my voucher, when i went to re-up. and then we're saying, what happened? our manager is only there six hours a week, and this is an elderly complex. we need this bill for protection, we have already lost, you've heard the number here in california. but across the united states, we've lost over a million and a half units of subsidized housing. california leads the united states second behind new york state, of having the most subsidized housing. we need to protect them we need your help. please see to the passage of this. thank you for allowing me to speak.
[{'start': 59, 'end': 84, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Pariset: Michelle Pariset with Public Advocates in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tiffany Fan: Tiffany Fan on behalf of Bridge Housing in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tyrone Buckley: buckley on behalf of housing california, also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marina Wiant: marina charlotte wiant with the california housing consortium, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sharon Rapport: Sharon Rapport with the Corporation for Supportive Housing, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debra Carlton: i'll just stand and be brief. debra marina carlton with the california apartment association. i apologize, we submitted our oppose unless amended late. we had hoped we would work out the language and i think we're going to be able to, so i want to clarify we're not asking for your no vote today. but just to let you know that we're working on language to clarify the issue of the forced sale of property when somebody does not wish to sale. we have no problems with elevating and heightening the notice requirements and the other issues involved. so we'll continue to work with the author as the bill moves along, thank you.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anya Lawler: good morning, mr.chair and members. anya debra lawler with the western center on law&poverty, one of the sponsors of this bill. as mr. bloom said, ab 1505, restores the ability of local governments to apply inclusionary policies on a rental context of power that they had up until 2009. it's important to note that's what not an issue in this bill is for sale inclusionary which operates in california without restriction other than the usual constitutional limits that apply to similar land use controls. inclusion policies have been in place in california since the early 70s and they've also been used successfully throughout the country to produce affordable rental homes and affordable for sale homes. unfortunately, an erroneous court ruling in 2009 cut off the ability to apply these policies in a rental context. that case, palmer versus city of la, as mr. bloom said, said that rental inclusionary policies run afowl of the costa-hawkins act, which limits rent control ordinances. when house asked, if the legislature in adopting costa-hawkins had truly intended it to impede rental inclusionary, why does the entire legislative history only mention the dozen or so cities that had rent control policies at the time costa-hawkins was adopted. and not the 70 jurisdictions that had inclusionary policies that applied to rental housing on the books at that time. why would the legislature, with absolutely no discussion whatsoever, decide somewhat arbitrarily, to cut off rental inclusionary and not for sale inclusionary? and why in the 14 years between the adoption of costa-hawkins and the palmer decision, did nobody raise this issue when over 100 more cities and counties adopted inclusionary policies that applied to rental. it just doesn't make a lot of sense. ab 1505 restores a tool that local governments can use to address our state's deep affordable housing crisis. it's one tool, it's a tool that is designed locally, it's a local choice. and it has to be designed to work for the local market. we've worked hard to address concerns of the rental and for sale building industries, who no longer oppose the bill, once the amendments today are adopted. we think it's a fair policy. we think it's a critical tool, and we urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 135, 'end': 140, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 832, 'end': 838, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 865, 'end': 870, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1578, 'end': 1583, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1600, 'end': 1606, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jason Rhine: yes, good morning, mr. chair and members. jason anya rhine, league of california cities. anya pretty much stole my thunder, so i'm not going to repeat a whole lot we do think this is, really a common sense measure. i mean, we can do this with for sale property. well over 170 jurisdictions do this. it's common sense and we have other jurisdictions that want to do it and we appreciate your support on the measure.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 89, 'end': 93, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tyrone Buckley: Good morning. Tyrone Buckley with Housing California. I'll do my best Brian Augusta impression. This has been a high priority for Housing California's membership for years now. We're very pleased at the leadership that the members taken on this. What we've seen in the local governments is a real willingness to tackle the issue of affordable housing and homelessness. This puts another tool in their toolbox, so let's make sure we get it back to them. We urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 70, 'end': 83, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kyra Ross: Good morning, Kyra Ross on behalf of the City of Glendale in support of the bill.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Helyne Meshar: helyne on behalf of the city of west hollywood in very strong support, thank you
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kirk Child: Kirk Child Disability Rights California in strong support
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Melissa Immel: Melissa Immel in behalf of the City of Santa Monica and Mayor Eric Garcetti in the City of Los Angeles in support
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 62, 'end': 75, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Marina Wiant: Marina Wiant of the California Housing Consortium pleased to co-sponsor the bill and here's your aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Paracet: Michelle Paracet with Public Advocates in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Lane: michael jason lane with the non-profit housing association northern california in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sharon Rapport: good morning, rapport with the corporation for supportive housing in strong support.
[]
Sande George: sande michael george representing the american planning association also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Hanlon: brian sande hanlon with the california renters legal advocacy and education fund in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ed Barrons: Ed Barrons on behalf of the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tiffany Phan: tiffany on behalf of bridge housing in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Lange: karen brian lange on behalf of the city and county of san francisco in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Holly Fraumeni: holly karen fraumeni on behalf of habitat for humanity california in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matt Schwartz: matt holly schwartz california housing partnership in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shawn Topaikin: Shawn Topaikin on behalf of California Apartment Association. Just wanted to say we are removing our opposition. This is an issue that we were working on for some time as you know Mr. Chair and the author sponsor. And we appreciate everyone working with us to remove the opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Justin Paddock: hi, justin matt paddock on behalf of the california association of realtors. we still are in opposition to the bill. the recent amendment does remove several concerns. we look forward to continuing to work with the author and sponsors as the bill move forward, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Johan Klehs: Johan Klehs, representing Leading Age California, an organization for about 600 senior non-profit affordable housing developers. We had requested that Assembly Member Bloom accept the amendments noted in the Committee analysis to continue to exempt senior non-profit affordable housing developments from payments in lieu of taxes. He's done that. We support the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 167, 'end': 172, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Debra Carlton: Okay. Thank you. Good morning, Mr. Chairman and Members. My name Debra Carlton with the California Apartment Association. First I want to say I appreciate the authors Willing to listen to our concerns and sponsors willing to understand our concerns. I think, of course, we continue to state that the Coastal Commission's mission as stated it's not about housing production, never has been about housing production, until there was a change in 1981 where it went back to the local government. I think in a time when we so desperately need housing, turning it over to the Commission, we don't believe is the place for it to be. They don't have a general plan, a housing element with the focus on housing. We will certainly continue to talk with the author, and look for ways in which we can ensure, because that's what it's about for us, that we do have housing production. But for those reasons and stated in our letter we continue to oppose the bill.
[{'start': 65, 'end': 78, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christine Dugger: good morning. my name is christine justin dugger with the california association of realtors. we are also in opposition to ab 663. we echo the concerns that the apartment association stated. and we, too, would like to thank the author and his staff for meeting with us and hearing our concerns. and we really appreciate their clarification too, that they're not intending to empower the coastal commission with rent control authority. we appreciate that clarification; this would only apply to new construction. however, despite those clarifications, we, regretfully, do maintain our opposition. we don't believe that adding an additional layer of approvals is going to streamline development. and probably will not result in additional housing being built in the coastal zone. so again, we really appreciate the authors working with us but we do continue to maintain our opposition.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erin Guerrero: Erin Guerrero on behalf of the California Building Industry Association, also in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Valerie Nera: valerie christine nera for the california chamber of commerce, still in opposition
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Tannehill: tannehill with aaron reed and associates on behalf of the taxi cab paratransit association of. california. chairman and members for some time now we've been working to level the playing field for taxis. taxis are regulated by cities and live under a multitude of requirements that their competitors do not. our discussions with stakeholders are progressing well, and we are in a place to bring regulatory relief to the taxi industry with ab 1069. larry silva, president of the taxicab paratransit association of, california, is with me today to testify.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 25, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 447, 'end': 458, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jim Lites: Jim Lites with the California Airports Council. We do not have a position on the bill but are working with the author and sponsors on technical amendments because as drafted it would allow multiple jurisdictions to regulate taxi access at an airport.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Marco Soto: good afternoon, marco with yellow cab of los angeles in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Tannehill: jennifer jonah tannehill with aaron reed and associates on behalf of the taxicab para transit association of california in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 30, 'end': 40, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dan Lashof: Thank you Mr. Chairman, Members of the Committee. My name is Dan Lashof, I'm the Chief Operating Officer of NextGen America and the senior policy Vice President in NextGen California. We're very pleased to be here in support of AB 1184. For California to meet its essential clean air and climate protection goals, we need to have EVs everywhere, and they need to be affordable for everyone. And, the electric vehicle revolution can't come too soon for the 35 million Californians that are still living in counties that have unhealthy air. And particularly the over 650,000 children that suffer from asthma in our state. Despite the progress that California has made over the last several decades in improving our air quality, we still have seven of the 10 most polluted cities in the country according to the American Lung Association. And when it comes to climate change, we simply can't meet our goals unless we move the transportation sector to have electricity as its prime mover. We've been making great progress in cleaning up the electricity system with more wind and solar coming on all the time. And when it's time for us to use that clean and often free electricity to power our vehicles. And make no mistake, this is sorely needed. Even though California has the largest market for electric vehicles in the country, it's still only a few percent of new light duty vehicle sales in California. So we're not on track to meet our goals. We need to do a better job. The other key point that I want to make is that it's really appropriate to have the PUC play this role to coordinate the vehicle incentives with the charging infrastructure. We don't want to have charging infrastructure with no vehicles to use it. We don't want to have vehicles with no charging infrastructure. Also, We need to make sure that we are, as was discussed when Mr. Quirk's bill was up, to make sure that we're charging vehicles in a smart way. That we're charging it when there's abundant, renewable electricity available to our system, and not when we're putting extra stress on the system.  So having the PUC play a role there is going to be really important. In fact, the ISO has reported that already this year 235 million kilowatt hours of mostly solar, some wind, has been curtailed. That what's they call it, I would call it wasted. This is clean electricity that we are not currently using because we don't have a smart,  electric vehicle fleet to use it. That's enough electricity to drive 900 million miles. That's just already this year. This problem or I would like to see it as an opportunity, only gets bigger as we add more solar to the system. That's $90 million worth of gasoline that Californians could have saved this year if we had used that electricity and electric vehicle. So we need to put that free, clean electricity to use. And that's why it makes sense to direct this California Public Utility Commission to create the California electric vehicle. Initiative, and that's why NextGen California is very proud to be supporting AB 1184, working with Mr. Ting.
[{'start': 61, 'end': 71, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1851, 'end': 1856, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3063, 'end': 3067, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Steve Chadima: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Members of the Committee, my name is Steve Chadima, I'm with Advanced Energy Economy, we're in Association with businesses that range across the technology spectrum, delivering clean secure affordable energy to the State of California. Our businesses employ over 500,000 people here in the State of California, and in every one of your districts there are several thousand people that are working in these technologies from energy efficiency, and renewable energy, to smart grid software, to electric vehicles, to charging stations, and across the range of low carbon, no-carbon technologies. We've been working for the last four years on decarbonizing the electricity, it's not that all the work is done there, but the work has only begun to decarbonize the transportation sector, and as Dan mentioned, we are not on the right trajectory. We have 225,000 electric vehicles in California, we have only a few years to get to the 1.5 million vehicle ZEV goal that Mr. Ting mentioned, and the 5 million vehicles that, there resources board estimates we need to be at in 2030, in order to meet our goals. So, I came out of the solar industry, and was part of the group that put together the California Solar Initiative, we think that, that kind of a program is ripe for application here in electric vehicles, to really boost an industry. I think many of you may know this fact, but the real success of that program is measured by the fact that since the program stopped, in the last two years, more rooftop solar has been installed in California, than during all the years of the program. It did exactly what it was intended to do, which was kick start an industry, have the incentives go to zero, and then the industry is on it's own, and that's the kind of program we're envisioning here, we're looking forward to working with the author, and of course, eventually with the Public Utilities Commission, to craft a program that allows all Californians  to participate in these program. Particularly those from low income families, and other areas that have not had a chance to take advantage of EV sales in the past, so we would very much appreciate your support for this bill.
[{'start': 62, 'end': 75, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 814, 'end': 817, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 991, 'end': 995, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lloyd Levine: thank you, mister chair and members. levine representing the sacramento electric vehicle association, also the lead negotiator on the solar initiative, when i chaired the utilities committee, we're here in strong support of the legislation. we represent businesses, nonprofits, government, and electric vehicle owners in the six county sacramento region, our focus on electric vehicle adoption, infrastructure planning, and policy changes necessarily to facilitate both electric vehicle adoption and infrastructure, are in strong support of this bill for the reasons stated.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Yuri Jimenez: Yuri Jimenez with Brightline Defense a nonprofit dedicated to environmental justice in support of the bill. And particularly its desire to help meets the state's greenhouse gas reduction goals. As well as the Governor's goals to deploy 1.5 million. Name, organization please, to remind everyone.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nick Brokaw: Mr Chair and members Nick Brokaw on behalf of SunPower in support, thank you.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cliff Costo: cliff jennifer costo on behalf of the california new car dealers association. we have not yet had an opportunity to take a position on this bill but we believe more vehicle incentives are definitely needed. so thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Darren McAllister: Darren McAllister Southern California. Have something to clarify, we are not currently in support. However, we have been working with the author and the sponsors on this bill. And appreciate the fact that they've been very respectful in reaching out to us, to be able to work together. We also do have some things that we want to work out, but we're pretty confident that we can do it. And we're here to be as constructive as we can. Thank you Chair.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Devina Flemmings: Devina Flemmings on behalf of Pacific Gas and Electric company, we also do not have a position. However, we do support the expansion of transportation electrification throughout the state. We thank the author for convening those conversations. And we look forward to continuing them as the bill moves forward throughout the process.
[]
Ignacio Hernandez: Ignacio Hernandez on behalf of the Utility Reform Network, or TURN, a consumer protection organization. We do not yet have an official position. I would like to thank the author for the conversations that we've had. We'll continue having those.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Tree: thank you, i'm michael cliff tree, i'm the executive director with the livermore amador valley transit authority. and i think, in addition to the things that have been said, i think what's most important about this project, the autonomous vehicles, is that we need to get the buses fuller. we need to have more demand for public transit so that we take care of congestion issues and move towards our climate goals. and so really the key point with the shared autonomous vehicle is that first, last mile solution into good quality public transit. such as the rapid system with lavta and the bart rail system. and so it's important because people don't have a way to get to these quality transportation resources. and by doing so, by providing the shared autonomous vehicles, will increase demand on public transportation, will increase demand for public transportation jobs, and will work towards solving those congestion and climate issues. thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barry Broad: Mr. Chairman and members, Barry Broad on behalf of the Teamsters and the Amalgamated Transit Union, as well as the Machinist Union. First of all, I understand the amendments. They, I think, improve the bill, though the DMV regulations would actually in their current form, if they're approved, would actually ban the testing of this vehicle. I just want everybody to understand that. They will not allow for the testing of this vehicle. They will actually ban all commercial vehicles. Trucks or buses can neither be deployed or tested on California roads under those regulations. There's a good reason for that, and there's problems with this proposal. Transit agencies do demonstration projects on equipment that's approved and tested by safety agencies of the United States government. They have no expertise whatsoever to do the testing as to whether new technology is safe or not. The gentleman to my right has no more expertise than you, or me, or anybody else in this room, nor does anyone at his agency. They're not safety experts on vehicles, they do not test vehicles. And in this case, what's different than the other testing beds is that they're testing whether this vehicle is safe to be on roads, on roads with the public. And I gotta tell you from my members, people walk in front of transit vehicles and get run over all the time. And what I think is being tested here is technology that they want to approve, and that they want to say is safe, and they're not going to test it at the most extreme version of testing like you test automobiles for automobile safety and impact. They're going to test it under the most favorable conditions because they've already got a relationship with this French manufacturer that produces this vehicle. It's just not the way you test vehicles to determine whether they're safe to operate on highways. They need to be tested at the most extreme conditions that they're likely really to meet. They have someone in the vehicle, I guess with an iPad, but there is no steering wheel and there is no brake. So if a kid walks in front of it, that person is going to be stopping this thing remotely somehow. And I don't know if that's appropriate or not. But we don't even know what the results of the testing of earlier versions of this vehicle in other places. As for competing with Virginia over who can test the vehicle, in our view, we don't think that it's important where it gets tested. Only that it's tested appropriately to determine whether it's really safe to use on our highways. So we would urge a no vote, thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Caitlin Vega: Mr. Chair and members, Caitlin Vega for the California Labor Federation. We have a position of concerns on this bill. And we do appreciate the work that this Committee has done with the amendments. But we think that there is a bigger issue here at stake. And that really is about the future of work. We know that automation is a reality, but we are increasingly seeing bills that look at not just automated vehicles for personal use, but really moving the use of automated vehicles into areas such as trucking and transit in a way that poses very serious threat of mass job loss. Over 5 million Americans make their living driving trucks or buses. And we are concerned about seeing the rapid displacement of workers as the growth in automated vehicles is promoted and expanded. And so we just want to urge this Legislature to take a pause. And look at kind of the bigger picture and what kind of a future we want to see in terms of what jobs are available. For us, we represent a number of unions of transit workers. They are already seeing the use of automated shuttles and other kinds of vehicles, to eliminate some of the only good middle class jobs that are left in this state. So, we do not oppose innovation or even automation. We know that's a reality. We know there are ways to use it, that increase productivity and create new jobs. But, there are other ways to use it and other ideas about how to use it. That will result in mass displacement of workers. And a really different landscape of what work looks like and what kinds of opportunities are available. So we were just urge a deeper discussion. And really the development of a plan of how we'll ensure that people in this state have the ability to make a good living and have work that is meaningful. Thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Devin Reimer: good afternoon, mister chair and the members of the committee. my name is devin michael reimer, i'm with the clean transportation group at san diego gas and electric company. i'll keep this short, i want to focus on two things, and why i support this bill. number one, used evs represent a potential to help increase ev access to low income drivers. but without the level two charter as vincent mentioned before, it's hard for these people to take advantage of the low prices of non-peak pricing. at the moment there's not many incentives for the used vehicle. so,in what ab 33 aims to provide is the necessary tool of level two charger to allow these customers to take advantage of fuel prices when electricity is at it's lowest. secondly, time variant rates that reflect grid conditions are designed to encourage off peak pricing and charging when renewables are on the grid. this is not only enables drivers to reduce their fuel costs, but it also benefits all rate pairs by optimizing the grid. grid optimization results in deferring infrastructure costs and spreading this cost over more sales reducing the average cost per kilowatt hour. san diego gas and electric has long supported the california's clean transportation goals and wants to be proactive in this. so if 1.5 million evs were on the california's grid without any concern to grid conditions, it would actually cost rate payers more, both in operating and infrastructure costs. for this reason, we urge you an aye vote on ab 33.
[{'start': 74, 'end': 94, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 387, 'end': 394, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alejandro Duran: yes, alejandro devin duran with the wydeman group on behalf of nextgen california in support.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cory Bolson: Cory Bolson on behalf of Napa Valley Clean Air Now in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: hernandez on behalf the utility reform network. we do not have an official position yet, but we've been discussing a couple of items with the author's office and look forward to our discussions going forward.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barbara Newton: good afternoon, chairman and committee members, thank you for hearing us. my name is barbara, and i'm the president and ceo of the california travel association. we're the trade organization representing travel tourism and hospitality in the state of california. and our membership is made up of destination marketing organizations, amusement parks, sports venues, transportation companies. and other organizations to whom travel and tourism is important. our goal at caltravel is to protect and enhance and champion the interests and the investments of the california travel and tourism industry. and we believe that assembly bill 25 just does that for us. it will improve the safety measures for passengers of open air buses. by ensuring that the vehicles pass safety inspections administered by the california highway patrol. and removing those buses that are unsafe. it's come to our attention that some of these open air bus tour companies are operating illegally. and they just aren't safe for the tourism industry. we've listened to the concerns. we were pleased to work with assemblymember nazarian on this bill. and we really applaud his efforts to bring common sense safety reforms to this industry. we believe that these measures are a step in the right direction. they will ensure the safety of tourists, and also taking into account local neighborhood concerns. as many of you know, travel and tourism is a huge industry for the state of california. $122 billion, over a million jobs, and $10 billion in state and local taxes. our goal is to have a thriving tourism industry, and to provide safety and a great experience for our tourism industry. and we think this bill will help improve passenger safety, and respectfully request your support on this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 85, 'end': 92, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1098, 'end': 1106, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Paul Grinea: good afternoon chair and members of the committee, my name is paul alejandro grinea, i'm the president and ceo of the inland empire economic partnership. and the partnership is focused on bettering the economy of the inland empire, a region of 4.5 million people. but our number one quality of life issue is our educational attainment level. of 4.5 million people only 20% have a baccalaureate degree. the importance of young people being able to connect to the internet is key to us being able to change that number. and that number is something that holds us back from being able to participate in the innovation economy. so this is a very important bill for, not just rural areas, but heavily populated suburban areas. so i want to thank the author, the chair, industry who've worked on this bill. thank you very much.
[{'start': 62, 'end': 83, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Kelly: chairman santiago, honorable members, i'm tim paul kelly, i'm the president and ceo of the imperial valley economic development corporation. we're the most recent recipient of the puc grant for the broadband initiative, and the youngest consortium. our consortium, southern broadband, a border coalition covers the entire counties of san diego and imperial county. our two counties have worked together on many initiatives in the past, the calibaja binational megaregion. we've had other initiatives such as project slingshot, which is a workforce initiative. our community colleges work together. our county of office of education provides the entire backbone for schools to be connected through the internet, although, our communities are not. and imperial county, as you know, has the highest unemployment in the state. although we've made great strives in economic development, both for san diego and imperial county, our rural communities, the inland portion of san diego county do not have access to the internet. and in many cases in imperial county, we're underserved, so this consortium, and this initiative will help us to bring internet to those areas, which help in economic development, e-commerce, and other activities. as you know, if you're a student that attends school, and then takes a bus home, our areas that are furthest away from our schools are also the areas that do not have access to the internet. this digital divide has not allowed those communities to benefit from the advances that we've made in economic development. i want to thank the authors of this bill and i think this is the direction we need to be moving for, in completing the gaps in the digital divide in economic development and in broadband. thank you.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 17, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 42, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carolyn McIntyre: Mr. Chairman and members, Carolyn McIntyre on behalf of the California Cable and Telecommunications Association, also here in support of the bill. And would like to join AT&T and thanking the authors and the Chair of the Committee for the many hours that were spent negotiating and discussing a policy proposal that would make sense. Something that we hope and believe will actually result in getting broadband deployed into the many communities that don't have access to it. Of particular interest, I think, to many of the rural members is the 98% by region, which really does mean that there has to be some focus into those communities. We are also very pleased and proud to be able to support an adoption program. And to ensure that that adoption program is deployed into low income communities, senior communities, communities of non-english speaking persons, as well as, our schools and libraries. So we look forward to continuing to work the Members of the Committee, and with the authors of the bill to further refine the language as we move forward, thank you. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susan Walters: thank you. walters, senior vice president with the california emerging technology fund. as sponsors of the internet for all act, we want to extend a heartfelt appreciation and thank you to all the authors, and to you, mr. chairman. for your excellent leadership and support of closing the digital divide. we also want to deeply appreciate the cooperation of industry to reach an agreement on ab 1665. and look forward to supporting. support please. yes. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Trish Kelly: Good afternoon, I'm Trish Kelly, managing director at Valley Vision. We're the civic leadership organization here that supports our broadband consortium. We are in support and thank you so much for your leadership.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Charlie Borne: thank you, this is borne with frontier communications. and we support the additional funding for the program and support the direction of the bill. we have several amendments that we had suggested, and there's one in particular that's in the analysis. we'd like to make sure it gets into the bill. so, we have several concerns. one, from the perspective of being an active participant in california-
[]
Tammy Cronin: Good afternoon, Tammy Cronin with Valley Vision in support of the bill and we appreciate the opportunity to close the opportunity gap and help improve community self-reliance. Thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Henry Contreras: contreras with the california foundation for independent living centers, we are in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Cradler: john tim cradler representing computer using educators, or cue representing over 10,000 teachers, and school administrators using technology. and we're glad that you're going to be here to address the homework gap.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Paul: John Paul, CEO, Spiral Internet, Nevada County. We are recipient of a CASF grant, and I want to thank you for continuing the program.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shelly Hance: Shelly Hance and I'm Tuolumne Community Action Agency's Central Sierra Connect Broadband Consortium in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Judy Darnell: Judy Darnell with the United Ways of California, representing all of the United Ways across California in very strong support. And we really thank you for all the hard work on part of all stakeholders for working on this bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ronald Garcia: good afternoon honorable members of the committee. my name is ronald. i live in santa paula, california, however, i work in los angeles. and i'm here on behalf of the rio hondo boys and girls club of southeast los angeles. we're strongly in support of this bill, we recognize that the internet will make a difference.
[{'start': 62, 'end': 68, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alicia Orozco: orozco with chicana latina foundation and we are strongly in support, and thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Micah Studer: Sorry, Micah Studer, Winters Joint Unified School District, Coordinator of Educational and Informational Technology Services, and also representing Q, Legislative Advocacy Council. We are in support.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Emily Rusch: thank you. so i'm emily jonah rusch, i'm the executive director of calpirg, the california public interest research group and we are pleased to be here today as a sponsor of ab 1030. our primary interest in this issue is making sure that there's a robust, affordable, consumer-sited energy storage marketplace that develops over the next few years. both to help our state achieve our clean energy goals and our renewable energy targets, but also help all consumers respond to rate changes happening. we're very excited and supportive of the leadership that california has taken to support the development of clean energy and reduce global warming pollution. we're very excited and supportive of the leadership that california has taken, to support the development of clean energy and reduce global warming pollution. the national renewable energy lab estimates the california [unknown] at least 15 gigawatts of energy storage by 2030 to support our 50% renewable energy target. storage will be essential to this transition and it can help avoid some of the uses of the dirtiest peaker plants, and most expensive peaker plants. we know the utilities have their own plans to invest in site energy storage. that's been encouraged by this legislature and other bills and we support that, but we want to see a robust complimentary energy storage marketplace that has affordable solutions not just for the utilities control and use, but also for consumers to be able to have storage on site in their own house. this will be even more urgent with a transition to time of use rates for all customers in 2019. there are many of us who can't switch the time that we need to turn the lights on at night or when we need to turn on the air conditioning on a hot day. locating storage where energy is consumed reduces the need for expensive grid infrastructure and also offers customers more choices to protect against rising energy costs. energy storage gives consumers greater flexibility, especially paired with something like pv, so that you can actually produce and store your energy on site and then use it when you need it. right now, the sgip program provides some funding for customer-sited energy storage, but it's been funded in fits and starts and it's not accompanied by the types of policies and tariffs that have been shown in other programs to actually transform the marketplace. so, policy actions taken by the cpuc could effectively bring down technology and installation costs. specifically, this bill requires the cpuc to remove current barriers that prevent energy storage from being compensated for the benefits it provides to all rate payers, including demand response, resource adequacy and grid stability among others. it requires the cpuc to create a rebate program that along with rates structure design will promote market transformation of consumer-sited energy storage technology. we're committed, i'm in this to make sure that it's available to all customers. i'm here because i want to help develop a program that is both available and accessible to everyone. and in particular, it helps under served communities along the way. much like the csi program for pv solar, a well-designed rebate program and the policy provisions in ab 1030. we believe that can ensure that rebates are no longer needed over time. and like mr ting insinuated, if the csi program is any indication, $1 of rate payer investment in this program will yield $3 in private investment. in contrast with utility programs, which, of course, are funded entirely by rate payers. and so with that, i'll urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 3339, 'end': 3343, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Juliana Mandell: Juliana Mandell with Green Charge in support, as well. Green Charge, based in Santa Clara, develops distributed energy storage systems for consumers across California. The majority of our customers are K through 12 schools and community colleges. Storage enables these schools and community colleges to save money on their utility bills. And invest those savings back into their institutions. It provides an avenue for consumer choice and consumer empowerment to determine energy use, as you were just saying. At the same time, these distributed storage systems provide grid stability, increased grid flexibility, and insist in solar integration. Distributed storage provides unique locational benefits to the grid, and also to all rate payers. What potential storage customers, and those supporting industry growth, desire, and what we currently lack, is market stability. The type of market stability and certainty that will drive massive investment into the state for market transformation. This bill will create that market signal, drive investment and innovation in the economy, and foster job creation in California. We view this bill as essential towards achieving true market transformation and a bridge to an energy storage future that is rebate free. We urge your aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alex Maurice: hi, alex emily maurice with the california energy storage alliance, in support, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeannine Cutter: Jeannine Cutter of Luminol, in support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Bennett: Laura Bennett with Techna, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Gray: laura alex gray with the california solar energy industries association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ivan Jimenez: Ivan Jimenez with Brightline Defense, an environmental justice nonprofit, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alberto Torrico: good afternoon, torrico on behalf of sunrun and alliance for solar choice, in support, thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marc Joseph: Mr. Chair and members, my name is Marc Joseph, testifying on behalf of the Coalition of California Utility Employees. We have been strong supporters of the RPS Program. And we agree that storage is one of the many possible solutions to renewable integration. But this bill is unnecessary, unfair, risky, and premature. First unnecessary, the Commission has already authorized more than 1300 megawatts of storage. It's well under way, it's the largest battery program in the world. On top of that, Commission recently approved hundreds of millions of dollars in s-chip funding for storage. The market for battery storage is already exploding. We don't need to pay for more. About 10 days ago, AES and Walmart announced that based on existing economics, without this bill. AES was going to be installing battery storage at 27 Walmart stores, based on current economics. And they will both be making money on it. Beyond that, we have time of use rates coming, where the economic incentives to do storage without this bill will increase. Second, it's unfair, these are subsidies for battery storage on the customer side of the meter. You heard the proponents testify, on the customer side of the meter. That means you have some customers, those without storage, paying to lower the rates of those with it. In effect, you've got low income customers in multi-family housing, paying for lowering the rates of people who have single-family homes. You've got Care customers subsidizing Tesla owners. The bill is risky, this puts electric system reliability in the hands of individual customers. Or large companies, like Solar City, that are leasing many systems. These are unregulated companies. They're often undercapitalized. They're beyond the control of the grid operator. And we've got many of them that are already in bankruptcy. This is not where we should place our reliability eggs. Finally, it's premature, the Commission is already working on the iper. You've heard about that already today. If we need more storage to address the duck curve, that's exactly what they'll say they'll do. And they are charged with doing it in the most cost effective way for all of the rate payers. Let's see what the actual analysis says is needed, then let's figure out the cost effective way to do it.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Scott Wetch: Mr Chairman and members, Scott Wetch on behalf of the State Association of Electrical Workers. I'm not going to repeat what my colleague said. I just wanted to talk a little bit about what this bill, in reality, means. It means that the predominantly wealthy rate payers, who are the beneficiaries of that $3.2 billion of CSI incentives. Are now going to have more incentives heaped upon them to add storage. And despite all of the goodwill towards wanting to help low income households. If you don't already have the generation on your roof, and you're not going to be able to afford to put it on your roof. You're not going to be able to take advantage of the storage program. So I don't want to see a repeat of the mistakes we made with the CSI Program. Namely, the Care customers should be exempted, which the author suggested today that he would entertain. But even if you do that, a household of four making $38,000 or more paid into the CSI Program. With really no hopes of ever taking advantage of it. So we shouldn't have working families subsidize the wealthy who are going to stand to take advantage of this program. So we need to have a means test and it has to be a real means test. So that wealthy customers can't take advantage of it. We need to exempt anybody other than small businesses. We don't need Walmart, Target, and others who did take advantage of those other programs to take advantage of this. And lastly, the group of rate payers that have been completely left behind are those that live in multi-family housing. That's also where if we're going to do storage, we can get a bigger bang for the buck by doing larger storage systems. There must be equity in this bill where at least 50% of any subsidy, any rebate program is dedicated to multifamily housing. So those tenants and those poorer rate payers can finally take advantage of these renewable energy programs. Lastly, I just want to reiterate one point is the more we invest into storage, the greater amount of reliability that we put on that side of the meter, with unregulated entities like Solar City. Who has a low credit rating, who has been downgraded twice in the last year by Barclays, and others, who carries a tremendous amount of debt. If they go away tomorrow, we need to worry about who's going to be there to protect rate payers to ensure great reliability where we've put so many eggs, as my colleague said, in the small storage bucket. We would hope that the author would entertain these amendments. We would also suggest that last year, the Legislator and the CPUC doubled the amount of money in the SCHIP program to $166 million and dedicated 85% of that money to storage. You've got the 2,000 megawatts mandated on the IOUs to go and do. You've got roughly $127 million a year now going to storage in the SCHIP program and once we get to time of use rates, people who can afford it like myself will have an incentive built into the rates. If wanted to save money on my utility bill, I'll store energy when it's cheap so I can take advantage of it when it's expensive. This bill is not needed, but if you're going to do it, let's do it responsibly, let's do it in a democratic way and let's make sure it's good legislation.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Hunter Stern: mr. chairman, members of the committee, my name is stern, i'm with ibew local 1245. we represent workers at pg&e, smud, ncpa and 22 other municipal utilities, irrigation districts, and rural electric cooperatives. our members do the work everyday, they serve electric customers 24/7. as currently written, this bill does not serve all the customers that our members serve everyday. we would like a more responsible bill. i'm not going to repeat all the points that have been made. but it's important for our membership and it's important for our opportunities, all people's opportunities, that the right people get the right incentives at the right time. we urge a no vote, unless it's amended to reflect those benefits. thank you. thank you.
[{'start': 51, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gil Topete: Then one clarification, my name is Gil Topete, I'm with the California Municipal Utilities Association. The author's representatives said that the CPC has to do a lot of this stuff. This bill applies to POUs, I've got 40 members, they're all unique and individual. They're trying to do what's best serving their local constituents with local programs. This is kind of a one size fits all, so we oppose the bill.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael O'Malley: Yeah, my name is Michael O'Malley, I'm the Assistant Business Manager of IBEW Local 465 in San Diego, and we oppose this bill.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Steve Markeye: i'm steve laura markeye with ibew local 1245, we oppose the bill, it hurts the customers we serve.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shannon Akbari: hi, akbari on behalf of ibew 1245 and we oppose the bill.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alicia Rodriguez: alicia with the ibew 1245 and we oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nilda Garcia: nilda steve garcia, ibew 1245, oppose the bill unless amended.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gerald Williams: Gerald Williams, IBEW 1245, and we oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeremy Smith: jeremy, ibew 1245, oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicole Gross: Nicole Gross, IBEW 1245, and we oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eileen Zelgy: Eileen Zelgy, IBUW 1245, I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nylan Mishera: Nylan Mishera with IBEW and we oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alyssa Fernandez: Alyssa Fernandez with IBEW 1245 and I oppose this bill unless amended.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jermaine Smith: jermaine nilda smith with ibew 1245, and i oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Walter Carmier: walter jermaine carmier with ibew 1245, we oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cynthia Lopez: cynthia walter lopez with ibew 1245, we oppose the bill unless amended.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ricardo Hernandez: Ricardo Hernandez, IBEW 1245, oppose the bill unless amended.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Georgette Correa: georgette cynthia correa ibew 1245, and i oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 29, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Vanessa Mejia: Vanessa Mejia with IBEW 1245, we oppose the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jamie Juarez: Jamie Juarez, IBEW 1245 in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barry Cinnamon: yeah, regarding the technology hi, my name is barry georgette cinnamon. i'm ceo of cinnamon solar, and i've done about 10,000 residential installations around the country over the past 15 years. regarding the technology, most of the current systems are using lithium-ion batteries. and i adventure to say that there's a lot of people in this room that got to this building with an electric vehicle that's got lithium-ion batteries. and there's plenty of production on that. the challenges at the systems that go into homes are still very expensive because the scale of that industry is tiny. and that's what this bill would help.
[{'start': 46, 'end': 70, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Scott Wetch: Mr. Chairman, Scott Wetch, on behalf of the State Association Electric Board.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Morgan Carvajal: Good afternoon. Morgan Carvajal with the Hernandez Strategy Group on behalf of the Utility Reform Network. TURN believes this is an important consumer protection bill that will provide alerts to energy customers when their usage is close to crossing into a higher price tier that exceeds a preset bill amount. Rates are based on a number of factors, including customer location, the season, or overall consumption. And most utility customers don't understand how they're billed for utility rates or for utility usage. AB 726 will help customers to better understand when they're moving up a tier. Or when they're on a track to exceed a pre-bill set limit. This helps the consumer to make born from decisions about their energy usage and enables them to manage their consumption. We commend the author on this first work in this bill and urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 41, 'end': 50, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Maria Stamas: good afternoon assmeblymember holden and committee members. i'm maria barry stamas, i'm an attorney with the natural resources defense council. nrdc strongly supports ab 1088. while california is leading the way on clean energy programs that reduce air pollution and create quality jobs, provide energy choices for working families. the state's falling short on programs that serve multi-family dwellings. and 4.3 million californian households live in multi-family households. almost half of these households make less than $32,000 for a family of two, and so could greatly benefit from efficiency programs that reduce and provide bill savings. yet, the multi-family sector and the programs available to it receive approximately less than 5% of the state's annual investment in state and customer funded efficiency programs. meanwhile of all the existing programs that are available, they're complex and fragmented. which means that property owners and low income renters are less likely to participate. so ab 1088 takes a number of steps to improve the accessibility of available programs, and to put california on a path to ensure that multi-family households are not left behind. it directs energy commission to adopt strategies to streamline and coordinate program enrollment, and to establish the statewide website and single application for easy access. creates an expert advisory committee, inclusive of owners of multi-family properties as well as tenant and resident experts to identify model programs for 2030. and it directs the energy commission to set non-binding statewide 2030 targets for this sector to foster long-term market certainty for the incentive programs. so ab 1088 ensures that multi-family buildings contribute to california's climate and energy-efficiency doubling goals for 2030. and that incentive programs are accessible for owners and tenants alike. and as a result, property improvements will increase. california can expect greater job creation, economic output, and public health benefits. so for all these reasons nrdc strongly supports ab 1088 and asks for your aye vote.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 36, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 64, 'end': 82, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bernadette Del Chiaro: del chiaro with ... in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Nimmons: Good afternoon, Chairman Holden and Members of the Committee. My name is John Nimmons. I'm an attorney and consultant for clients that are interested in sustainable energy policy, law, and regulation. This has been my work for over 30 years, beginning in 1980 when I served as Director of the energy policy group at UC Berkley's Earl Warren legal Institute. I've researched and reported on utility-shared solar programs like this around the country since 2008. I've also represented Recurrent Energy, a leading California solar developer, working with other members of the Solar Energy Industries Association before the Public Utilities Commission since 2012. Which was when San Diego Gas&Electric first proposed a program similar to the Shared Renewables program that was authorized by SB 43 in 2013. So with over five years of close engagement with the PUC's implementation efforts, I hope I can offer some historical perspective on the need to revisit the program now to help the state's large energy users meet their increasingly critical sustainability and greenhouse gas goals. Changes to SB 43 are critically needed to expand access to renewable energy for many of the state's large energy users who can't take advantage of existing programs such as net metering, or Community Choice Aggregation, RES-BCT or utility Green Tariff offerings. But who are committed to sustainability and climate change goals that mandate that they increase their renewable energy use. SB 43's intent is clearly stated in its findings and declarations, now Public Utilities Code Section 2831. That intent was and it remains, and I'm quoting now, to expand access to all renewable energy resources to all ratepayers who are currently unable to access the benefits of on-site generation. In particular in that section, the Legislature cited widespread interest from many large customers, including schools, colleges, universities, local governments, businesses, and the military for the development of renewable generation facilities to serve more of their energy needs than the utilities were then required to serve. The Legislature went on to declare in its findings and declarations, and again, I'm quoting many large energy users in California have pursued on-site electrical generation from an eligible renewable energy resources. But cannot achieve their goals due to rooftop or land space limitation or size limits on net energy metering. The enactment of this chapter will create a mechanism whereby institutional customers, such as military installations, universities, and local governments, as well as commercial customers. And groups of individuals can meet their needs with generation from eligible renewable energy resources. So stated simply, SB 43's focus was on all ratepayers and specifically on large energy users that couldn't meet their sustainability goals without better access to renewables. So with respect to AB 1573, I'd like to address a couple of misunderstandings that I think have surfaced during the course of this debate. First, it's been asserted that the originally proposed amendments would, quote, eliminate the Enhanced Community Renewables option. That is simply incorrect. What the amendments would do is to relax requirements that make that option very difficult or impossible to implement. As we've already seen in the fact that there have been no successful bids in the utilities' first auction. What the amendment would not do in any way is to prohibit or discourage utilities from continuing to support, or renewable energy developers from continuing to offer projects that can meet the community criteria that are in place now. Wherever they can show sufficient community interest and create a value Proposition attractive to community customers-
[{'start': 25, 'end': 31, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 73, 'end': 85, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amisha Rai: Thank you chair members, Amisha Rai with Advanced Energy Economy. AEE is a national business Association which represents the multitude of advanced energy and clean energy companies. Obviously a number of them which are based here in California. We represent companies that are in the energy efficiency space, renewable energy companies, storage, mass transportation, and many more. A number of our members are also corporate purchasers of renewable energy and advanced energy products and services and are looking to meet their ambitious sustainability goals. So we see this author's bill as an opportunity to expand their opportunity to achieve their sustainability goals and acquire more renewable energy to better power their operations on site, as well as throughout the state. We look forward to working with the author as well as the Committee Members as this bill moves forward. Thank you for the conversations we've had to date, and I will just conclude with that, thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erin Niemela: Mr. Chair and members, Erin Niemela, representing Large-scale Solar Association also in support of the bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrea York: Andrea York with Clean Power Campaign, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Scott Wetch: wetch, with the california coalition of utility employees, with these amendments in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
DaVina Flemings: mr. chair and committee members, davina maria flemings on behalf of pacific gas and electric company. we do have registered our opposition to the bill. however, with the amendments that are proposed in the analysis, we feel that moves the bill in a better direction and we're going to evaluate those amendments in hopes of removing our opposition.  we look forward to continuing our work with the author.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ryan Perrini: thank you members and chair, ryan davina perrini with southern california edison. actually we'd like to thank the author, his staff as well as the sponsors for bringing this in early in negotiations. we do share the same concerns as my colleagues from pg&e stated, although with the committee's amendments and then being accepted. today we're happy to remain neutral as this bill move forward, thank you.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: Thank you Mr. Chair and members, Ignacio Hernandez on behalf of TURN, we are sponsors of the bill, I want to thank the author for all of her work on this issue and on this bill. Just very briefly, as the author indicated, this bill really just integrates key consumer protections, consumer strategies that are used in other contexts to insure that consumers have critical information prior to entering into what can be very costly and long-term contracts. And really what's important here is that the information is standardized, so we ensure that every consumer is receiving the same information regardless of which solar company that they are talking to or receiving information from. And that's really what's key about this bill that it's standardized across the board. Key terms, key information, and also the development of a methodology of projected savings is also standardized across the board. Currently solar companies are relying on their own individualized projections and methodologies, so it's not necessarily the same from one company to the other. This would establish a standard methodology as well as a cooling-off period for consumers. I want to thank the author for the bill again, and ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gil Topete: Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members, Gil Topete with the California Municipal Utilities Association. We recognize that all of our customers have choices to make, and all we seek is that they have an informed choice to make. So while my member POUs also provide rebates and incentives and programs we really hope benefit each customer. There are many large products such as a cars and leasing or buying solar is a very costly endeavor. We just sincerely believe that if our customers are going to steer themselves into these choices that as much clarity and disclosure is provided to each of them. Thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sanjay Wagle: hello, sanjay with the california association of realtors. i'd like to thank the chair and the members of the committee. for allowing me to address you today. for the vast majority of californians, their home is their largest investment and their most important and significant asset. before encumbering their home, it's vital that homeowners have the information and time to make a fully informed and considered decision. this bill will help ensure that such information will be provided for solar energy systems. in particular, the bill mandates disclosures about how the financing or leasing of such systems will affect the sale of a home. this is particularly important as currently many times many homeowners, when they want to sell their homes, do not understand what their options and obligations are regarding the solar energy system. for these reasons the california association of realtors is in support of ab 1070 and respectfully asks for your aye vote.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bernadette Del Chiaro: chairman holden, my name is bernadette ryan del chiaro. i'm the executive director of the california solar industries association. we are here on an oppose unless amended position. we really want to thank the author for working with us, and her staff over the past couple of months to get us into a support position. we strongly support the idea of protecting consumers and are particularly supportive of the idea of standardized disclosure. this is something that the industry has worked together to establish nationally across the board and welcome with the cslb. we do have some significant concerns about what's mandated in that disclosure. we think it should be clear and simple and achieve the goals of consumer actually understanding what is being disclosed to them, so we have some suggested amendments on that front. we also have some concerns about the puc, essentially getting in between a consumers economic decision with the methodology and have a lot concerns about. whether the puc can handle the complexity of that decision through a methodology or calculator however that comes to be. so we also are concerned about some of the other previsions, but in the interest of moving the bill forward we continue to work with the author to get us in a support position, thank you.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 15, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 28, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Scott Wetch: Mr. Chairman, I apologize I got caught in another Committee. Scott Wetch in support on behalf of the California Coalition of Utility Employees. We think this is a really valuable and important component that's missing and would urge an aye vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 61, 'end': 72, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alex Morris: hi, my name is alex bernadette morris, and i'm the policy director with the california energy storage alliance. i wanted to speak on support of 1405 here. from our view, this bill established a new dial that our agencies, and policy leaders can use to ensure that we are tuning our fleet to meet our renewables integration needs. and i've worked on our energy market designs, on our greenhouse cap and trade structures, and our cpcs capacity planning activities for nearly 10 years. and i can assure you that occasionally our rules for our system do need tuning. and if we don't have those tools in place, this tuning is very difficult and acrimonious. and so, this bill looks far ahead to develop these tools, so that we can know that our greenhouse gas challenges are being met. while our system's increasing, ramping needs has the appropriate solutions in place. and i also want to echo that this tool is synergistic with the irp. for those who aren't familiar with the integrated resources plan, it looks ahead at future grid scenarios, and determines the expected grid needs under these scenarios. and so, in that sense, it's a forward-looking planning concept. but this clean peak concept actually directs the actual dispatch of power plants in real-time to make sure that we're using the right energy resources to meet our needs. moreover, this is a very flexible design. that allows it will meet the cases needs and give them the room they want to, on occasion, use non-preferred resources to keep the lights on. so, for all those reasons, we suggest you support 1405, thank you. chair member.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian White: Mr Chair and Members, it's Brian White on behalf of the current energy. We are in support of the bill moving along. Have the discussion continue. We think, this is an important topic that needs to continue. We appreciate your support.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrea York: andrea on behalf of the clean power campaign. we are supportive in concept. this is an important issue area, and we look forward to working with the author and the committee as it moves forward.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dan Shaw: dan alex shaw with tesla, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Scott Wetch: Mr Chairman and members, Scott Wetch on behalf of the California Coalition of Utility Employees. With these amendments, it removes our opposition. Going to continue to work with the author on the Bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amber Blixt: Good afternoon, Amber Blixt with the Independent Energy Producers Association, in opposition to AB1405. IEP represents wholesale electricity generators, both on the renewable side and natural gas, and many of our members are also engaged in energy storage technologies. So, IEPs original concerns with AB 1405 is that it codifies how California meets its peak load energy demands. And we think, that the Legislature should be very cautious about being overly prescriptive of how California is going to meet their peak energy demands in legislation. The timing of the peak. The duration during the day or the month. And any locational requirements are dynamic and change over time. And California will need that flexibility to ensure that we can meet these peak energy needs and reliability requirements. IEP appreciates the Committee amendments. And we think that this bill moves away from some of the more prescriptive numerical requirements that are in the bill, but IEP still remains opposed. The CPUC has already embarked on a highly technical, comprehensive process. The integrated resource plan that was mentioned earlier. And they're looking at some of these very issues including how to enhance the distribution system, how to enhance demand side energy management and additional issues. So in that regard, with the amendments, we actually think that AB 1405 is unnecessary, and may actually further complicate and confuse the process that's already undergoing at the PUC. So, we would respectfully urge your no vote.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alicia Priego: Alicia Priego with San Diego Gas and Electric. We do appreciate the Committee's analysis and trying to work on this bill. However, we are still opposed. And we understand that it does take out some of the prescriptive nature of the original bill. However, it's still focusing on trying to set new targets to address net load peak and this is starting to get into how we operate the grid. And it's important for the utilities to plan with the system-wide view, and then also plans applied to meet all hours of the day in the most cost-effective and lowest GHG manner. And as IEP just mentioned, this bill would still presuppose an outcome of the IRP process, which is seeking how best to integrate renewables, and for those we ask for your no vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matt Klopfenstein: Matt Klopfenstein on behalf of the Sacramento Municipal Utility District. And we align our comments with CMUA, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
DaVina Flemings: davina dan flemings on behalf of pacific gas and electric, and we are opposed and align our comments with san diego gas and electric.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ryan Pierini: Ryan Pierini with Southern California Edison. We'd like to align our comments with our colleagues from PG&E and SDG&E we're still opposed to the bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Rhine: yes. i am, i'll be very brief. jason jonah rhine, league of california cities. we are in support to this measure. the assembly is not alone. there are handful of those in the senate that are also looking at the analyses that we must complete. and so, we do look forward to that consolidation, as well. i appreciate assemblymember's effort ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anya Lawler: Thank you. Anya Lawler on behalf of the Western Center on Law and Poverty here in support. This bill should be really helpful in tracking whether or not local governments are complying with the rezoning obligations that they take on when they adopt a housing development. We don't currently have that information. And it can be hard to track, and it can be hard to know whether they ever do the re-zones that they committed to. So we appreciate the bill and we hope you'll support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Costello: brian jason costello with the california rural legal assistance foundation, just urge an aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christine Dugger: good afternoon, christine brian dugger on behalf of the california association of realtors, we are also in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Skip Daum: thank you. thank you madame chair. skip christine daum asac is an organization of union and open shop subcontractors around the state of california. we've heard it so many times today, public disclosure, transparency, accountability that is what this bill is all about. it would provide greater transparency and accountability. as proposed to be amended, it would allow state agencies to reveal their expenditures to the public. and those who are awaiting payment for services they rendered, and the materials they've provided. the public disclosures will enable, therefore, the subcontractors to verify that their money is waiting for them at their general contractor's office. this then enables i think we have 238,000 subcontractors in california. to rightfully expect and request their payment within seven days, as required by law. the problem has been that we've been unable to verify whether or not the general contractor has been paid. and this would make it real simple. two examples, one of which is on page two of your analysis, which is a good analysis. certainly shows that just in the last two months have been sizeable amounts that were late or non-paid because we couldn't find out whether or not the entity had in fact paid the general contractor. i might say that caltrans has been doing this online for i'm told 12 years, and it works well. so 1223 is a proactive remedy that helps avoid late payments, expensive litigation, and a foreseeable poisoning of the well between the relationship between general contractors and sub contractors. thank you.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eddie Bernacchi: madam chair, members of the committee, eddie skip bernacchi on behalf of the california legislative conference of the plumbing, heating, piping industry, the national electrical contractors association. northern california allied trades, the wall and ceiling alliance, and united contractors. my colleague mr. daum did an excellent job of explaining the legislature in california has done a really good job of ensuring the statues, help sub-contractors get paid promptly. unfortunately all of those laws are predicated on when the general contractor is paid. and as was mentioned, the transparency for when those subcontractors know that it happened is not there. this bill would provide for that, and ensure that those contractors get paid timely. the only remedy available to us now is a public records request. which is a very timely, it takes up a lot of time for the public agency, and it's costly for the public agency and it's costly for the sub contractor. so this bill is an efficiency as was mentioned. caltrans has done this, other agencies the city of san francisco. i believe the san diego unified school district already post immediately when they pay their contractors. this isn't a big leap but i think it's a great pilot program to start in the state. i'm going to urge aye vote. thank you.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 310, 'end': 314, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cesar Diaz: Chair, members, Cesar Diaz on behalf of the State Building and Construction Trades Council. I'll just add on that when subcontractors that employ our members have to get a loan or file a public records request and the proceed through a process of trying to get the prompt payment. They are legally bound to pay our members, which we're very supportive of. But, what happens with that, is it creates obstacles for them to continue bidding on future projects. And those future projects are the future employment opportunities for our members as well. So we believe this bill will settle a lot of issues up front by just having disclosure about when those Prop payments are made.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dorothy Jones: good afternoon dorothy eddie jones with the california state association of counties we are listed in opposition but with the fourth coming amendments to remove the inclusion of local agencies. we will look forward to removing our opposition and we thank the author for the consideration of that change, thank you. and also we have the irvine county's of california. did i introduce myself? california state association of counties for the fourth time i think. thank you so much.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amber King: amber dorothy king with the association of california healthcare districts and also on behalf of my colleague at the california special districts association. also with the upcoming amendments we'll be removing our opposition. and thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katherine Oven: Good afternoon Madame Chair and Members of the Committee. I'm Katherine Oven. I'm a Deputy Operating Officer for the Water Utility Capital Division of the Santa Clara Valley Water District. My job is to oversee the planning, design, and construction of water utility projects. For a special district charged with providing reliable and safe water supply. Using both imported and local groundwater for nearly 2 million people in Santa Clara County. The district is also responsible for protecting Silicon Valley from flooding and sea level rise. And then we also have Watershed stewardship as a third pillar of our mission. With a lot of infrastructure rehabilitation that is being required within our district, as well as districts all across California and the nation. We are always challenged to do more with less. And by using design-build as a potential alternative for project delivery, we could deliver a project more quickly, more cost effectively and with less liability for the public. As Assembly woman Caballero said, AB 851 would expand that design-build authorization. For flood protection improvements, habitat restoration or enhancement. Ground water recharge or storage facilities, water treatment facilities, and for the retrofit repair or expansion of existing surface water storage facilities. As she also said designed build contracting would enable our agency to really reduce the number of contracting processes that we have to go through. Developing RFP's, the acceptance and review of bids, negotiating contracts, etc. And then we have that extra ability of saving both time and money when you have one team responsible to design and build. It reduces change orders during construction and really then protects the rate payers who support this work as well as to tax payers who support other projects within our district. What I also want to emphasize is that we won't drop the design bid build tradition that we've been using for many, many years. This will just give ourselves, as well as numerous other cities, counties, special districts, the flexibility to choose a different alternative method if it is the appropriate method to use in order to be more cost-effective, and quicker in terms of delivering our projects. So I urge your support for this important bill so that we can provide vital public benefits more quickly at potentially lower cost. And with reduced public liability, thank you.
[{'start': 62, 'end': 76, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1013, 'end': 1022, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cesar Diaz: Madam and chairmembers, Cesar Diaz on behalf of the State Building and Construction Trades Council, proud to support this legislation. The designed bill that has been an important tool for public agencies to deliver efficient projects. As a previous witness just continued, I could not have said it better myself. Less costly, more efficiently and with less liability. Those projects are delivered under the current law with a skilled and trained work force component. That mean that the contractors that these public agencies are hiring are going to be the most trained, the most efficient, the most qualified to actually deliver these projects. Often very, very complex. As the state looks in with public agencies, look in partnership to tackle the issue is confronting us with climate change. It's very important that we're actually using the limited amounts of public dollars very wisely. But also at the same time, making sure that the labor code sections are protected and we are using very good with our, well use of our apprenticeship system. Those also ensure that there are California workers that are also going to perform those projects. With this particular district, we have a great relationship. They have a Project Labor Agreement on most of their projects. That also ensures the community members have access to that work. And it's very important to note that's in the Bay Area. A very high cost It's very, when you're having a construction worker earning a decent wage they're often able to live in those areas. In which I reside in and not have to travel large amounts of road basically to get to one place or another. For those reasons, we urge your support.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eddie Bernacci: Thank you Madam Chair and members, Eddie Bernacci on behalf of the National Electrical Contractors Association California Legislative Conference of the Plumbing, Heating, Piping Industry. I don't think there's a lot more that can be said about the benefits and design build, I would like to point out one issue that this sponsors mentioned in regards to changed orders. Change orders are primarily driven by poor design, poor plans, the increase cost on the design build model, the contractors and the architects engineers. And the design build team, work together so you don't have those disputes which cause delays and can cause litigation. So those are some ancillary benefit to this as well. That's why our contractors believe the design-build model is such a good model to use as an alternative delivery method. And for those reasons, we'd urge an aye vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Beau Biller: madame chair, member, beau amber biller with platinum advisers on behalf of orange county, the yucaipa valley water district, and the design-build institute of america, all in support.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Russell Noack: Madam Chair, Russell Noack on behalf of the Peninsula Regional Open Space District in support of the bill, thank you.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amber King: amber beau king on behalf of my colleague at the california special districts association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Wendy Ritter-Bush: Wendy Ritter-Bush with the Association of California Water Agencies or Aqua also expressing support from the Rural County Representatives of California this afternoon.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joshua Golka: madam chair and members, joshua amber golka with the american federation of state county and municipal employees. we would like to thank the chair and the committee staff, as well as the author, her staff, and the sponsors for addressing our issues with the amendments that have been committed too. we are happy to say that we have removed our opposition from the bill, thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bart Broome: Madam Chair, I'm Bart Broome with the Santa Clara Valley Water District. I'm here to assist the Committee with any questions that may come up
[{'start': 17, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dorothy Jones: Good afternoon, Madam Chair, members, Dorothy Jones with the California State Association of Counties. We do not have a position at this time. We have been working closely with the author, and we really do appreciate the opportunity to explore the complicated nature of finding these individuals who live outside of the jurisdiction comparing assessors' records to recorders' records to treasurer tax collectors' information. So we look forward to continuing this conversation. We are supportive of the other provisions that provide clarifying language to the previously enacted measure that the author also carried.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amber King: Good afternoon, Madam Chair and members. Amber King with the Association of California Healthcare Districts in strong support of this measure. As you know, we did sponsor a measure last year for healthcare districts that own or operate hospitals or clinics. We believe this is a good project for the communities of the beach cities, thank you.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cesar Diaz: Thank you. Madam Chair and members, Cesar Diaz on behalf of the State Building and Construction and Trades Council, I will be brief. We were the co-sponsors of the previous legislation, as well. We understand the Committee worked with the author to address the concerns. We're appreciative for that effort and urge your support, thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Arnold: thank you, michael here today on behalf of the city of redondo beach. redondo beach residents utilize the beach cities health district and feel that it has done a wonderful job. we're very supportive of this ability to allow them to provide additional services at what we think would be a much lower cost. so we are fully in support of the measure.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eddie Bernacchi: Madam Chair and members, Eddie Bernacchi on behalf of the California Legislative Conference of the plumbing, heating, and piping industry, and the National Electrical Contractors Association. Representing over 2,000 union electrical, mechanical, plumbing, and heating contractors. Including contractors in the State of California, as I stated earlier. Alternative delivery methods, light design build are very important for our industry. They are particularly well-suited for healthcare facilities and hospitals like this bill addresses. And we understand that the Committee worked very hard to help the author get to a place where this bill was amenable. And we really appreciate that effort as well and we urge your aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alana Robles: good afternoon, madam chairman and members of the committee. my name is alana joshua robles and it is my pleasure to be here today, and i thank you for the opportunity to address you here today. i'm here to speak in favor of creating a citizens redistricting committee for the county of san diego, ab 801. i represent the alliance of californians for community empowerment, also known as ace. ace is a statewide grassroots community organization. ace worked with thousands of community residents and 11 counties across california to develop community leadership, increase civic engagement in historically marginalized neighborhoods. and impact local and state policy to improve the lives of low income working families in california. with this being said, we would like to see the board of supervisors work for our communities. and to be quite honest, it doesn't always feel this way. we are proud to support members of the immigrant and refugee communities. however, for as long as we can remember, the board has yet to make their fundings, programs, and priorities friendly to such. when we look at the composition of the board of supervisors, where no person of color has served since the 1990s. let me repeat that, where no person of color has served since the 1990s. we feel our communities have not been represented correctly. this is an unfortunate reality, because san diego is one of the most diverse counties in california. just in city heights, in the city of san diego where our office is located, over 45 languages are spoken alone. our community across the county have different needs and perspectives, and districts need to be drawn with this in mind. this is why it is vital to do everything we can to have an inclusive redistricting process to draw the lines. if only judges are eligible to draw these lines, we worry that they won't have a full understanding. the full picture of the needs, the fears, and more importantly, the hope of our communities. to take the redistricting process out of the hands of elected officials, is a process long overdue. times have changed, our communities have grown. we believe that districts will be best drawn when those that draw the line reflect the great diversity of our county. i thank you again for your time, and for allowing me to speak. we urge you to support ab 801, thank you.
[{'start': 72, 'end': 91, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Wolfe: madam chair, members, good afternoon david alana wolfe with the howard jarvis taxpayers association. and madam chair we too are late support so i appreciate your indulgence with us here today. members it is extraordinarily rare that we oppose local bonds, we did oppose measure rr and wrote the ballot statement against it. but now that it's passed, we do want to make sure that those bond dollars are spent absolute 100% as effectively as possible. and that's why we are here today in support of the measure. 16% of operating revenue right now, is spent on maintenance and infrastructure. and we don't want that money now that this bond is passed to be diverted to other priorities. when voters approved, as they did, a $3.5 billion bond. with interest assuming level debt service, you're looking about $7 billion to pay that off over 30 years. and that is money that should 100% of the time, go to capital infrastructure development, and not be diverted to pay off other priorities. that just makes good common fiscal sense when you're dealing with bonds and tax payer dollars. so for that reason i ask for an aye vote.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barry Broad: Barry Broad, on behalf of the Amalgamated Transit Union, one of the unions at BART. First of all, BART's running at capacity. I don't know where this thing about BART is losing riders. It's at such capacity, it needs to expand, that's the whole issue. In terms of some of the testimony here, a robbery at a BART station is because there aren't enough BART police. That's an operating issue. If the emergency lights aren't working, that's not a capital issue, that's an operating issue. They're not maintaining the station now. Those are operating problems, that's not capital. This is an extraordinary intrusion into local control. I feel like I'm in an alternative universe where a Republican is carrying a bill to have the state Legislature usurp the role of local government and the will of voters. If it's illegal what they're doing under the initiative, what the BART Board is doing under Measure RR, then somebody should sue BART. I mean, how would Republicans feel if the Democrats around here said Orange County Board of Supervisors, this is how you're supposed to spend your money? We're going to tell you how you spend your money. They would say that was a violation of local control, and that's what this bill is. There's nothing in Measure RR that requires this kind of response. Now maybe some people feel aggrieved in some level by the BART Board, but the BART Board is elected. It's responsible to its voters. It isn't a situation where the state Legislature should take control of it and take control of its budget. Especially something that was voter-approved and has terms of its own. So we would urge a no vote, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 931, 'end': 935, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Terry Brennan: Madam Chair and members, Terry Brennan on behalf of SEIU California. We represent many of the BART employees and BART riders. I would just very quickly add, anybody who suggests this wasn't debated as part of the campaign was not paying attention. It was used by the opponents, the fact that some of this money might be drawn off for operating costs. It was discussed, it was part of the opposition to the bond. Yet it passed by over 70%, for that reason, we urge no vote, thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Caitlin Vega: Madam Chair and members, Caitlin Vega for the California Labor Federation, also here in opposition. We represent the unions that do both the operations and the capital. We are strongly opposed.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joshua Golca: madam chair and members, joshua david golca with the american federation of state, county and municipal employees. on behalf of our members throughout the state, we're here to support our brothers and sisters at our bart local, and we are in opposition.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cesar Diaz: Madam Chair, Cesar Diaz on behalf of the State Building&Construction Trades Council. I just want to clarify that State Building Trades are neutral on this bill.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Augusta: Brian Augusta on behalf of the California Rural Legal Assistance Foundation. In this bill what we are really just trying to do is ensure that the sites that are identified in the housing element are really available for the production of housing so we are just looking to tighten up the rules a bit. To ensure that if we're putting aside a site that says this is going to be a site where we're going to get affordable housing development the affordable housing developer really can come in and develop that site. We've seen a lot of examples where that is not the case. And I think as we look at housing policies to expand affordable housing addressing the availability of new sites for housing is really critical. So for those reasons I ask for an aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anya Lawler: anya with the western center on law and property, one of the sponsors of the bill. i just want to touch on a couple of the concerns you're going to hear. i know there's some concerns around utility language in the bill that was probably drafted a little incorrectly that we're working to address. we don't intend for other governments to serve sites but with utilities before a developer comes in we understand that that's not how a utility service is generally provided. and so we're working on language to fix that. and we also understand that, especially some of the more rural counties have concerns about the limitation on large sites and so we had a productive meeting yesterday. and we're working to address that as well and i'm pretty confident we can work out both of those issues so. a work in progress, but we'll keep working on it.
[]
Debra Carlton: Debra Carlton with the California Apartment Association, we thank the author and respectfully request your aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Abigail Ramirez: Hello, Abigail Ramirez with Leadership Council and on behalf of Saha in support of this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Rhine: Good afternoon, Madam Chair and members Jason Rhine, League, yes unfortunately, we are opposed with the bill, right now with the bill. We've had some good conversations with the sponsors, and we're hopeful that we can get to a position where that we can remove that opposition. And certainly, on the utilities piece, we greatly appreciate that. We didn't think that it was necessarily the intent of the author to make us fund that, since the developer pays for those activities, so we greatly appreciate that. The one thing though that is I think are very problematic. And we're hoping that we can address this as well. But under existing law now, when we identify a site, we identify that site as potentially being able to be developed. Under the bill now, we would not only have to identify that site. But we have to take it to another level where we have to determine if it's realistic and there's a demonstrable potential to develop that parcel. That's information that we don't have as a local government, particularly when that site is vacant. We have no way of knowing the realistic and demonstrable potential to develop a vacant site. So it's not as if we object necessarily doing that, but we just can't possibly gather that information to make that informed decision. And we're fearful that no matter what we say, we're going to be challenged in court order and we're just not going to be able to prevail. So I think that is our fundamental issue with the bill is, the realistic and demonstrable aspect of it that you would have to identify for each one of those sides with that. We oppose the bill but we're hopeful that we can get there at some point.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bernie Orozco: thank you, good afternoon madam chair and members. bernie, with the california cable and telecommunications association, representing the large cable operators here in california. this is a great bill that would help us gain some parity with our other public utility competitors. so, today, we're on the same exact pole as your at&t and verizons. it's an electric pole owned by the municipal utilities. but when they get a reimbursement, and when a community decides to force underground facilities, we unfortunately are left holding the bag. and what's most unfortunate about it, is that we actually pay to be in that right of way. california cable industry collects roughly $800 million a year for local government, you've seen the franchise fee. we also collect another $180 million, roughly, for a utility user's tax. so, we have a great partnership relationship with local government. but we look forward to working with local government on these forced relocations. and i think this bill would create a very efficient and thorough process to do that. thank you.
[{'start': 51, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Lee: Good afternoon Chair and members, Chris Lee from the California State Association of Counties. Today I'm also representing the urban counties of California and the rural counties representatives of California in opposition to AB 1145. First I'd like to thank the author for taking the amendments to remove section one of the bill that alleviates a lot of our concerns with this issue. But unfortunately, we're still opposed to the bill as written today. So for sections two through six, I think I understand the policy argument that the proponents of the bill are making in terms of providing parity. What I think the analysis does a good job of pointing out is that for the existing Rule 28 program for the undergrounding of the utilities that are regulated by the Public Utilities Commission. There's a process and there's oversight that sets up the parameters of what cost the rate payers and the utilities are going to pay for and what costs the local governments who are forcing the undergrounding. Based on a finding that it's in the public benefit, pay for. So I think that simply just adding them to those provisions doesn't go far enough to ensure that there's going to be an equitable sharing of those costs. But I appreciate that if the bill gets out of Committee today, I'm more open to having a discussion about how that process should look and look forward to working with the sponsor on that.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ray Wolfe: good afternoon, madame chair members of the committee. ray, the executive director of the san bernardino county transportation authority. before you left on spring recess, you voted on a very monumental transportation infrastructure investment. and i want to point out that bridges are an integral component of that. just recently the federal highway administration has identified of the 25,318 bridges in california alone, 8% or 2,009 are considered structurally deficient. and another 17% of our inventory is considered functionally obsolete. this is important because this bridge, the mount vernon viaduct, in 1997 was identified as in both categories. and this bridge, in 2005 after state inspectors performed an inspection, is now sitting on temporary timber supports. that is, 12 years now on temporary timber supports. in 2008, the bridge was reduced to non-commercial vehicles. the bridge remains operational, for non-commercial vehicles anyway. it's a major connection between the northern part of the city of san bernardino and the southern part of the city, in an economically distressed area. the bridge bisects the bnsf intermodal yard in the city of san bernardino. and it's imperative that this bridge gets replaced as soon as possible. so this legislation, as the author has noted, will give us that opportunity. you did receive a letter of opposition from the professional engineers in california government. i'm happy to report that we met with them this morning. and recognizing that the bill as amended is different than what they were concerned about, they are not here at committee to oppose it today. they are going to take a look at the amended language, but they will not oppose it here today. and lastly, i just want to comment that san bernardino county has had experience with design-build. we've partnered with caltrans in one of the most successful pilot projects that they've had. the devore interchange, it was a $365 million investment. came in $50 million savings, and was delivered 17 months early. and so i respectfully ask for your support on this bill as well, thank you.
[{'start': 55, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Keith Dunn: Thank you Madame Chairman, Keith Dunn from the Self Help Counties Coalition. And I would just add that empowering our local experts who really are on the ground building these projects. With the ability to procure and deliver these projects in the most timely, efficient way possible, saves precious resources. We just passed legislation that's going to put funding out there, but the need is still great. So empowering them to use the experts who know how to build these and get them done in the most effective way possible is good policy. And I'd ask for your support.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Beau Biller: Yes, Madam Chair. Beau Biller on behalf of the County of San Bernardino and the Design-Build Institute of America, and if I could add one item. Design-Build Institute of America worked on Wolk's bill last year. It was a two year effort, to bring all these different code sections together. And we also would support the bill, thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 188, 'end': 192, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Eddie Bernacchi: madam chair, members, bernacchi on behalf of united contractors. representing over 500 civil engineering contractors throughout the state. design-build procurement method is a important part of delivery for projects like this. and we urge your support for this, thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joshua Golka: good afternoon, madame chair and members. joshua joshua golka with the american federation of state, county, and municipal employees. happy to report that with the amendments, we are now at a neutral position on the measure. and can also confirm that the professional engineers in california government will be neutral on this bill.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mauricio Guardado: Welcome. Yes, thank you, good afternoon Madame Chair, Members of the Committee. My name is Mauricio Guardado, General Manager of the United Water Conservation District. And yes, this bill essentially gives us a tool in our toolbox. We currently are very limited in our enforcement remedies. And this would give us an opportunity to actually go after those that aren't complying, that others are having to subsidize the burden for. So we appreciate your consideration and ask for your support.
[{'start': 91, 'end': 108, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debra Carlton: debra joshua carlton, again with the california apartment of association. the author has said it all, so we respectfully request your aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debra Carlton: thank you, good afternoon, madam chairman and members. my name is debra debra carlton with the california apartment association. i think our author said it very well. i won't prolong the support, but i will tell you that it's so incredibly important as we promote jobs and economic growth, we have to bring along the housing along with it. or of course we end up with the long commutes and the challenges we're currently facing in many of our cities. so with that we strongly would ask for your aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 66, 'end': 85, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Beth Capell: Beth Capell, on behalf of Health Access California. I'm just going to sit at this table until costs comes down, quality improves, and disparities are reduced.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sara Flocks: Madam Chair and Members, Sara Flocks, California Labor Federation, in support. I'll be sitting with Beth.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 100, 'end': 104, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark Mendoza: mark, on behalf of seiu california, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 19, 'end': 23, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Melissa Emmel: Melissa Emmel, on behalf of Mayor Edwin Lee and the City and County of San Francisco, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 34, 'end': 43, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Alley : I'm Jennifer Alley with the California Association of Health Plans. We didn't get a letter in, but we're supportive of the bill and concept. And be looking forward to working with the author and their staff on different areas that we can improve it, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 18, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Erica Murray: good evening, thank you for the opportunity to voice our strong support for sb 171 and thank the chairman for his authorship and leadership on the issue of medical managed care. my name is erica. i'm the president and ceo of the california association of public hospitals and health systems. we represent the county public health care systems in the five university of california medical centers and we are particularly supportive of provisions in this bill that are related to what are known as supplemental payments which are payments that help bridge the gap between the cost of care for serving medi-cal patients and the very low medi-cal based payments that public healthcare system receives. because those base rates are so low that gap, or uncompensated care costs is quite large and public healthcare systems have created ways to put up funds that are then matched with federal dollars to help close that gap. it's actually over $1 billion in supplemental payments and even with those supplemental payments, that gap is not closed. sb 171 would restructure those payments in order to comply with the federal medicaid managed care role that was finalized last spring. these funds now have to be prospective, which means that we must now estimate enrollment and utilization and the legislation proposes that some of these payments be tied to aggressive performance measures and improvements in care which adds to risk for public healthcare systems but a structure that we embrace as a challenge to encourage further improvements in our services. the restructuring needed to ensure these payments continue does require dialogue between public healthcare systems, managed care plans, the state and the legislature, a dialogue that has already begun in earnest and has been very productive and i want to thank the chairman again and his staff for helping to move those conversations forward and we are fully committed to resolving any issues. without this bill, more than $1 billion would be at stake for public health care systems. and for that reason, we urge your aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 189, 'end': 194, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Nguy: linda jonah nguy with western center on law and poverty, we support this bill, specifically the provision requiring the department, along with the department of managed healthcare to develop regulations related to network adequacy. we have some suggested amendments that we are working with the author and the departments on. and look forward to continue working with them on network adequacy, grievance and appeals, including establishing an independent medical review process, and reporting and monitoring, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : good linda evening, linda madam linda chair linda and linda members, linda i'm linda tam linda mao linda with linda health linda access linda california. linda we linda have linda a linda support linda if linda amended linda position linda on linda this linda bill linda and linda look linda forward linda to linda working linda with linda the linda author linda on linda the linda provision linda around linda time linda and linda distance linda standards. linda which linda will linda ensure linda that linda consumers linda don't linda have linda to linda travel linda too linda far linda or linda too linda long linda to linda see linda providers.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 10, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 20, 'end': 25, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 32, 'end': 37, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 44, 'end': 49, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 54, 'end': 59, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 69, 'end': 74, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 79, 'end': 88, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 89, 'end': 98, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 99, 'end': 104, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 110, 'end': 122, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 123, 'end': 128, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 136, 'end': 141, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 154, 'end': 159, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 163, 'end': 168, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 174, 'end': 179, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 182, 'end': 187, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 196, 'end': 201, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 205, 'end': 210, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 219, 'end': 224, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 234, 'end': 239, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 243, 'end': 248, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 254, 'end': 259, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 260, 'end': 264, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 265, 'end': 270, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 275, 'end': 280, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 286, 'end': 291, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 300, 'end': 305, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 309, 'end': 314, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 323, 'end': 328, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 334, 'end': 339, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 344, 'end': 349, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 357, 'end': 362, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 366, 'end': 371, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 376, 'end': 381, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 392, 'end': 397, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 405, 'end': 410, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 416, 'end': 421, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 426, 'end': 431, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 441, 'end': 446, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 458, 'end': 463, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 470, 'end': 475, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 481, 'end': 486, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 494, 'end': 499, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 505, 'end': 510, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 521, 'end': 526, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 533, 'end': 538, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 544, 'end': 549, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 553, 'end': 558, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 566, 'end': 571, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 576, 'end': 581, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 586, 'end': 591, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 595, 'end': 600, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 605, 'end': 610, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 616, 'end': 621, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 625, 'end': 630, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 635, 'end': 640, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Barbara Glaser: Madam Chair and members, Barbara Glaser with the California Hospital Association in strong support, particularly those provisions relating to supplemental payments to the public hospitals. Thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Caballero: Michelle Caballero with SEIU California. We also support the public hospital provisions of the bill and would like to align ourselves with the comments of CPEN and Health Access on the remainder of the bill, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Ally: I'm Jennifer Ally with the California Association and Health Plans. And I'd like to align my comments with those of local health plans of California. We are working very hard at beating, fairly almost daily, to try to determine some protections for Medi-Cal managed care plans. It's a lot of money and it's a lot of risk, and so we just need to acknowledge that it's a work in progress and continue those conversations. Thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marc Winger: Good afternoon, my name is Marc Winger, I'm the former Superintendent of the Newhall School District in Santa Clarita, California. I'm here to speak in support of 808. Newhall experienced a charter opening a brick and mortar school inside its district but it had been approved by a district 20 miles away from us. In 2010, we denied the petition for the Albert Einstein Academy because we found serious flaws in the instructional and fiscal plan. They were also denied by LAUSD, Ventura Unified, Moorpark Unified, Saugus School District, and the LA County Office of Education on appeal from Saugus, all for reasons similar to Newhall's. Instead of appealing the Newhall denial, this charter found a serial approver in the Acton-Agua Dulce Unified School District, a small district of 1,300 kids, as I said, 20 miles away from us. They were open for business in a charter school scheme that was designed to rescue them from fiscal insolvency. And here's a PowerPoint that they used with their board where they described their ability to approve schools that would represent 30,000 students. And on the next page generate $1.2 million in income for their district. So they went ahead and they've approved 15 charter schools. Obviously not for operation in their own small district. They exploited a loophole in the current law that was meant to allow a single charter to operate outside the district for the district students in case there was truly no space for the charter inside the district. And instead, by approving this many charters, they created the no space rationale. This abuse has happened in other parts of the state with a very common theme. A small, isolated, oftentimes fiscally distressed district approved charters for operation outside the district claiming no space, but really just to generate funds. Exploiting a loophole that allows the out of district charter placement makes a mockery of the jurisdictional sovereignty of elected school boards. In our case, a far removed district approved the school, making decisions for a community over which they had no jurisdiction, no knowledge of student and community needs in direct contradiction to Newhall's own board to reject this charter. Let me tell you that today, the Einstein Charter operating in our district underperforms academically in comparison to Newhall's schools, has significant and serious fiscal problems, and yet, Newhall has no ability to intervene. This situation is just an affront to the idea of local control and local governance, and clearly, a legislative solution is needed. I thank you and there's a lot more to this story, lawsuits, legislative history, I can answer any of those questions if you have any later. Thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
George McKenna: Thank you. I'll just push the button. I am here in support of SB 808, and first I want to compliment the Senator for his courage and initiative and foresight in introducing this legislation. And I also speak to the opponents, so that they're clear about what my support of this is. This legislation requires that all charter school petitions must be approved by the school board, the local school board that houses the charter school and the applicant. Because of a significant investment in time and resources reviewing charter school proposals, we believe that the local district is most able to make those decisions to either approve or reject a petition, best equipped because those decisions are in this jurisdiction. Local school districts must have the authority to authorize, otherwise it's a contradiction of terms. You have the authority, you should be able to authorize locally controlled charter schools and hold them accountable in the same standards that the state has. We don't have different standards that the state has assigned. The state accepts the standards and identifies the standards by which all school districts must determine whether a charter school is acceptable or not acceptable. It is not an individual school district. Next, the appeal process of a charter school requires a denial for reasons and rationale. When we deny a charter school and there are specific reasons why a charter school applies. Interestingly enough, when another entity approves it, there's no rationale why they approved it. It's almost like when you're in a criminal trial and the jury says you're guilty, but if they say you're not, they don't tell you why you're not guilty. When they set you free, they don't tell you why. They just didn't believe the testimony. In this case, we sent our petition for denial forward. The petitioner says whether they think we made the wrong decision and we don't agree with that but believe that in reviewing the petition, the County Board of Education may remand the petition to the school district for reconsideration. That is what the 808 is saying, send it back to the local district for approval. By the way, I am the Vice President of the Los Angeles Unified School District. I forgot to say that when I started talking, you don't know who I am I guess, but my name is George McKenna for the record.
[{'start': 2319, 'end': 2333, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Hilda Rodriguez-Guzman: Thank you for the opportunity to speak to your committee today. I'm here to support SB 808. My name is Hilda Rodriguez-Guzman. I am here today as a parent and a member of the community organization ACE and Reclaim Our Schools Los Angeles. I have three children that have attended schools within the Los Angeles Unified School District. My youngest is now in the 12th grade. My children have all attended charter schools in South Los Angeles. We have lived in south Los Angeles for more than 40 years. I, myself, am a proud student of the Los Angeles Unified and attended Manual Arts High School. In addition, I work at the Accelerated Schools, a charter school in south Los Angeles as a health services coordinator since 2007. I feel like I truly can speak from experience. LAUSD, like many school districts, has become a marketplace. Not only are we, as parents, encouraged to shop for the best school for our children, but people come around selling their schools like products. They even come door to door. It's kind of like when the realtors and mortgage brokers came door to door convincing us to take out loans. We, as parents, do the best that we can to investigate our options, visit the schools, talk to people who know about them. We try to make the best decisions for our children, but I tell you it's truly scary. It's really hard to know for sure which schools are strong, supportive, and effective places of learning, not for all children. I have attended several LAUSD Board of Education meetings. I know who the school board members are, and I know how to reach them. These school board members know our communities and visit our schools and voters in the district put them into office to represent our interests. And if they don't act right, we can vote them out.
[{'start': 103, 'end': 125, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alex Caputo-Pearl: Thank you for having us here. My name is Alex Caputo-Pearl. I'm the President of United Teachers Los Angeles, a 22 year teacher in the Compton Unified and Los Angeles Unified School Districts, and also active in the Reclaim Our Schools LA Community Coalition. You're going to hear today quite a bit about this bill, SB 808, which we support, which UTLA supports and Reclaim Our Schools LA supports. You're going to hear a lot about how this is out to kill charters. It's not out to kill charters, it's about something very simple, local control, which is a value-based thing that has been, throughout the history of the United States, valued by many different communities. In Los Angeles, we've experienced, in less than 10 years, a 287% growth in charter schools and even our school board members who have been the most friendly to charter school growth, even those board members have said publicly that they feel like they're over a barrel when they are asked to authorize a charter school because they feel like if they reject it, it's just going to get approved somewhere else, and they've given some of their leverage away, and oversight away. And if they adopt it, then they adopt something that they're not sure about. Even our most supportive board members of charter schools have said that. SB 808 is about some very simple things. Number one, that the local school board is democratically elected and is able to be responsive to communities. The county and state appointees are not democratically elected and are not in a position to be responsive. SB 808 is about local knowledge. How is someone appointed from the County Board of Supervisors or in Sacramento, going to know about the neighborhood around Crenshaw and 52nd street? It's going to be the board member that knows about that, that is connected to communities, etc. And SB 808 is, frankly, about giving districts the local control, and the ability, to plan and invest wisely. We want our school systems to be systems, to be planned out, to have regulations, to have guard rails, to have standards, and taking away authorization from the local school board is a way to promote anti-planning and, ultimately, some serious problems. You're going to hear opposition today, you're going to hear opposition from groups that are funded by Eli Broad. Go to Eli Broad's website and he says very clearly in the Broad Foundation that democratically elected school boards are a barrier to improving schools. We fundamentally disagree with that. Democratically elected school boards are ways that communities get responses and are able to be involved. You're going to hear opposition today from folks who, frankly, are philosophically aligned with Trump, DeVos. Betsy DeVos, in her website and all of her work-
[{'start': 41, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2321, 'end': 2332, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2707, 'end': 2712, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2714, 'end': 2719, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2721, 'end': 2732, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tristan Brown: Thank you, Mr. Chair and Members, Tristan Brown with the California Federation of Teachers. We are a principal co-sponsor of this bill and are huge supporters of local control and we think this is vital in how we grow this industry in the future, protect public education. Thank you for allowing this hearing, we appreciate your time.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Seth Bramble : mr. chair and senators, seth jonah bramble here on behalf of of 325,000 members of the california teachers association, we're proud to co-sponsor this important legislation, thank the author.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 42, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Larry Hopper: hi, i'm hopper, i'm a charter school parent and i urge you to support this bill.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dana Johnson: my name is johnson, i'm a science teacher in south san jose and i urge you to support this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chantaine Fauntleroy: my name is fauntleroy. i teach physical education at bret harte middle school in hayward california and i ask for your support for this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dominic Di Mare: Mr. Chairman and members, good afternoon. My name is Dominic Di Mare, and I'm here on behalf of the California Charter Schools Association, here in opposition to SB 808. And as previously stated, yes, we do believe that this bill represents a fundamental threat to charter schools and their ability to continue providing high quality education to students here in California. You heard the previous testimony talk about the issues of local control. And while we support local control, in fact, what can be more local than a group of parents banding together to try and establish a high quality school for their children. This is about sometimes the school boards and the authorizers get it wrong. We all do, and we don't think it's an unreasonable policy to have a disinterested third party arbitrate us between two sides of an issue. Because sometimes there, conflicts exist and conflict can between a school board and a charter, or between some members of the school board and some parents of a charter. That conflict shouldn't be allowed to intervene and deny students and parents the ability to have a high quality education and have a choice in how they educate their children. So we are opposed to this bill, we do believe that it represents an attack on the due process associated with getting an authorization for a charter school. And we also are concerned about the policy that it establishes relative to the fiscal considerations becoming part of the criteria by which a school district may determine whether or not they want to approve a charter school. It's our belief that the funding follows the student and isn't necessarily property or the possession of the school district. It is to follow the student. One thing that struck me in the testimony earlier was from the representative from UTLA, and I believe he said that he wants our school systems to be systems. And certainly, we want to see a cogent and operative system that does the best to educate children, but sometimes systems get away from us and the systems take precedent over the individuals. And what we're saying is that charter schools allow for parents and students to have a choice when the system lets them down or the system is inconsistent with their thoughts and how they want to educate their children. We think that it is a reasonable policy to allow that choice when the system is either antithetical or lets the students and the parents down. And so for those reasons and several more, we're opposed to this bill. We look forward to having the dialogue, we really appreciate your willingness and that of Senator Mendoza to engage in a dialogue on authorization. We're happy to be there, we will be at the table with you and the proponents and supporters of this bill and we look forward to having that very, very solid policy debate. With me here today is Ari Mosley, who is a student from Oakland, California, a charter school student, and she's here to help share and paint a picture and provide the narrative from a student's perspective about what charter schools mean to students.
[{'start': 53, 'end': 68, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2604, 'end': 2611, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2848, 'end': 2858, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Julie Momberg: Thank you, Chair. Again Julie Momberg, I'm a parent volunteer, stay at home mom of a charter school kid and I cannot support a bill that would literally close my daughter's school at her time of renewal because her school technically lies outside of the school district boundaries, from which it's chartered. So I please request you oppose this bill, thank you very much.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Norma Santiago: mi nombre es norma seth santiago. tengo tres hijos, dos graduados de las charters, uno que es especial, y primero dios, con los maestros que tenemos, el tambien se va a graduar de esa escuela. estoy en contra de la sb 808. gracias.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 32, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 34, 'end': 50, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 104, 'end': 118, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 120, 'end': 148, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 223, 'end': 230, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Gloria Rodriguez: hello, my name is gloria norma rodriguez, and i oppose sb 808. i have two young women and one young man, and my oldest daughter went to a lausd school and ended up graduating from a charter school. my middle child currently goes to la unified school district linda marquez high school with lots of pride. but i also have a 13-year-old who goes to aspire pacific academy. and i can freely say that i represent thousands of parents who have exercised our right to choose where our children go to school and so we kindly ask that you oppose this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maria Lopez: My name is Maria Lopez and I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jorge Corona: my name is jorge gloria corona. i oppose sb 808.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kirsten Yates: hi, my name is yates and i am a parent of two children at a charter school in west sacramento and i also am a parent of two children with developmental disabilities and individual education plans who were not being adequately served by my local public school, which is why i helped start up my local charter school. and i urge you to vote no on sb 808, which i believe would get rid of the due process that is necessary to allow a decent relationship between our charter schools and our authorizing local boards. i appreciate the sentiment of local control, but sometimes it puts politics and funding from unions ahead of the best interests of education outcomes for our children, thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Billingford: my name is david and i'm superintendent of ingenium schools in los angeles and compton. i just wanted to point out that two of our schools would not be in existence today had this bill been in place. prior to coming to california, i lived in montana and i wanted to point out that montana, the state of montana has this exact same legislation and today, they've used it successfully and there are zero charter schools in the state of montana.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jenny Martinez: Hi, my name is Jenny Martinez. I am a student from a charter high school and I oppose 808.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Luz Iris: hi, my name is luz jorge iris. i am a parent from a charter school and i oppose to 808.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gloria Godoy: Hola, mi nombre es Gloria Godoy y no apoyo a la SB 808. No Mendoza. No McKenna.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 59, 'end': 66, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 71, 'end': 78, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jessie Casosa: mi nombre es jessie and i oppose for sb 808.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Crystal Gutierrez: crystal luz gutierrez, parent of a student at kipp comienza, i oppose to sb 808.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maria Castillo: My name is Maria Castillo and I oppose SB 808.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Micaela Aguilar: hello, micaela crystal aguilar. i oppose sb 808.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Son Qualtzin: hello this is qualtzin. i'm a former lausd teacher. i'm a former utla member. i went from the traditional public school setting, lausd, and opened up several charter schools in the los angeles area. i've been a teacher in the charter school movement, also an administrator. now, i'm a parent director for parent empowerment and sb 808 would only leave the battle, the struggle, the tension between the different needs that are larger conversations, increasing how much money we get per pupil. that way, our teachers in utla are not fearful of losing their jobs. or how can we improve our traditional public schools so that they're able to meet the needs of our parents that have the local power to choose the education that they want. they're choosing. that is the local control. and we, being a former lausd, product of lausd, utla, we ask that you do not support, that we remove sb 808 from the table, period. let's talk about other ways of uniting instead of dividing us this way. thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pam Magee: hi, magee from palisades charter high school, executive director and principal, representing five elementary schools and a middle school, as well, in our palisades area. please vote no on 808, give our parents choice. we fully support more dialogue, but do not support 808 as it is now, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Victor Valtierra: buenas tardes, mi nombre es victor micaela valtierra. soy un padre de familia y quiero agradecer al senor mendoza por haber escrito esto. tambien, quiero agradecer a utla y todas las personas que lo apoyan, porque muy claro escuche y vi que lo unico que esto preocupan es por el dinero, por las finanzas. hablaron de todo, lo que podian protegerse ellos mismos y sus organizaciones y no hablaron nada de los ninos. nosotros somos padres que estamos aqui representando los ninos y lo que nosotros nos importa es la educacion de los ninos, no su dinero, no todo lo que ustedes estan protegiendo. gracias.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 28, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 118, 'end': 136, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 138, 'end': 145, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 147, 'end': 163, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 207, 'end': 231, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 305, 'end': 321, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 323, 'end': 336, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 415, 'end': 436, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 538, 'end': 550, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 552, 'end': 592, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Maria Del Carmen: Buenas tardes, mi nombre es Maria del Carmen a la vez y es lo mismo que estoy mirando. Los estan mas preocupando por el dinero, nada por la ninez, que es el futuro del mundo.
[{'start': 87, 'end': 96, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dawn Rodriguez: My name is Dawn Rodriguez, I'm the parent ambassador for Visions in Education, chartered under San Juan Unified with an enrollment of over 4,500 students that serves nine counties. This bill could devastate many families. I appreciate your time.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Campbell: Michelle Campbell, I'm a parent at Golden Valley Charter School, and I oppose SB 808.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alexandria Martinez: My name is Alexandria Martinez, I am from San Jose. I'm a parent at Rocketship Fuerza Community Prep, and I strongly oppose SB 808. Also I'd like to add, we were authorized by the county and have more oversight than Alum Rock Union School District, which is our local school district.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Beth Shapiro: beth victor shapiro, parent of two children at john adams academy charter school in roseville in strong opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maria Malagon: hi, my name is malagon and i'm from san jose and i oppose to the sb 808.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Garcia: Hello, Sarah Garcia, San Jose. I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Arthur Henry: hi, arthur beth henry, oakland, california and i oppose 808.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Meesha Fago: meesha arthur fago from oakland, california, and i oppose 808.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carlota Seven: Good afternoon, my name is Carlota Seven, and I'm opposed to SB 808.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Elise Palacios: Buenas tardes, mi nombre Elise Palacios y me opongo a esta posicion.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 25, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Velena Vara: good afternoon again, my name is velena meesha vara, i come from oakland, and i oppose 808.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susana Carrillo: mi nombre es susana velena carrillo y me opongo a la sb 808.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 35, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Francisca Jara: mi nombre francisca y me opongo 100% la 808.
[]
Lorena Tabuela: my name is lorena, and i oppose 808.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Yolanda Gonzalez: My name is Yolanda Gonzalez. I'm opposed of SB 808. One thing, last time I check I have three kids. I'm the parent, the district is not the parent. I'm the parent, I raised those kids. One is in Saint Jones University, Minnesota, and also my other daughter is going to UCLA this fall and my last one is in a charter school. And I'm here representing all of the students and all the families in charter schools. And like I told you, Mr. Mendoza, when I met you at your office in Cerritos, we're not animals, we're humans. And we, the parent, should have the right to choose the best education for our children so they can compete with other students that are applying to get in a university here in United States. So please help us, and vote no against this law, yes.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 436, 'end': 443, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Paul Keefer: paul susana keefer in an opposition of sb 808 with pacific charter institute. it will truly make concrete the fox guarding the hen house.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeff Rice: jeff paul rice with the aplus+ personalized learning network association. this bill supports the best interest of systems ahead of what is in the best interest of individual parents and students. we stand on the side of what's best for students and what's best for parent choice. and, therefore, we strongly oppose this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Patricia Covarugas: Patricia Covarugas, and I strongly oppose SB 808.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Scororubias: my name is mark jeff scororubias, i strongly oppose this bill, sb 808. i heard many californians are voting against, and i strongly support them.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maria Dellano: mi nombre es maria mark dellano y me opongo a la proposicion 808.
[]
Nora Rodriguez: Buenas tardes, mi nombre es Nora Rodriguez y me opongo a la  ley SB 808.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Julia Calomas: hello, my name is julia maria calomas, and i oppose sb 808.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rosa Vazquez: Mi nombre Rosa Vazquez y me oponga a la 808.
[]
Luz Valles: Mi nombre es Luz Valles, si me oponga la SB 808.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 25, 'end': 37, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Marisa Vejarano: Mi nombre es Marisa Vejarano y me opongo la 808
[]
Sara Viegas: mi nombre es sara, una fuerte oponente del senor mendoza.
[]
Maria Trujillo: Mi nombre es Maria Trujillo y opongo la 808. Gracias.
[{'start': 45, 'end': 52, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Yukiko Hegi: hello, my name is yukiko julia hegi. i'm a parent of a charter school, i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Casey Taylor: taylor, executive director of achieve charter school, a k-8. we just submitted a 9-12 charter on behalf of 400 families in our community. it was denied by my school district. we're re-submitting it, we're expecting another denial. it will keep on happening unless we're able to appeal to the county and give our community choice.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alison Yokopitska: hello, my name is alison yukiko yokopitska. i have children that are english language learners as well as foster children and i'm here asking you to kill 808. i have elected my school board member, my county school board members, and i feel that they could actually speak to the local account control and they have an understanding of the people within their county, thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marie Swenson: thank you. hi my name's marie alison swenson. i'm a parent at lighthouse charter school, west sacramento, and i oppose sb 808.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eldon Rosnell: Dr. Eldon Rosnell, Great Valley Academy, opposing 808.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Escara Imari: my name is escara marie imari and i oppose sb 808.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Catalina Mendez: Buenas tardes, mi nombre es Catalina Mendez y me opongo el 808. Gracias.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 64, 'end': 71, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nahar Martinez: my name's nahar escara martinez, i'm the mother of a charter school child, sorry, and i come from downey unified school district, where i did not like their education, so i moved my son to a charter school and he has done so much better than the community district that i have lived in for over 25 years. so for this i say stop sb 808.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Josie Vargas: Hi, my name is Josie Vargas. I'm a charter school parent in Los Angeles, and I strongly oppose SB 808.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Lillis: Good afternoon, Sarah Lillis with Edvoice in opposition.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicole Rice: good afternoon mr. chair and members. nicole nahar rice, california manufacturer's and technologies association. and we're actually a support if amended position on this bill. we actually appreciate and support the bill in concept. we also think that some of the changes that have been made will help support individuals who are looking to go into the teaching professional. and we also recognize that there is a shortage in career technical education, teachers and professionals as well. so for those reasons, we have submitted language to the author, continue to work with the author, and the committee going forward. that would include teachers who are in career technical education courses and programs. and also wanting to add industry recognized certificates and credentials in the language related to the conditions of employment. and as i've said we've suggested this language to the author. we look forward to working with him in the future. we do request your aye vote so the bill can continue to move forward and we can continue our conversations. thank you.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Liz Guillen: Good morning Mr. Chair and members, Liz Guillen with Public Advocates. We're a civil rights legal organization, and together with the ACLU, Mexican American Legal Defence and Education Fund, in 2000 we filed a lawsuit against California California claiming that thousands of students were deprived of properly prepared and credentialed teachers. The settlement that we negotiated with the state became known as the Williams settlement. And those minimum standards are now enshrined in state priority one in which all districts must address in their local control accountability plans. We believe that 533 would undermine these minimum standards and for the students who need the best prepared teachers the most. Would hurt them the most because we know that the shortage disproportionately affects low income students, students of color, English learners. We don't think that 535 addresses the teacher retention issues that are so central to our shortage. And in the past there have been policies introduced by members here related to things like student debt, Teacher residency, quality teaching environments, work conditions, and we have supported consistently those types of recommendations that were also lifted up by the Learning Policy Institute. We urge this Committee and the leadership of the Legislature to come together to work on a unified package that can be adopted and funded so that the shortage can be addressed soon, this year. Thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 415, 'end': 423, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ron Rapp: Mr. Chair, Members of the Committee, Ron Rapp, on behalf of the California Federation of Teachers, what we believe is that every child deserves a high quality teacher. We are going to recommend an opposed position to our state counsel in the next few days on this bill. We understand the significance of the teacher shortage, we've sponsored legislation to address it. We support legislation that's sound legislation to address it, to ensure that we have high quality teachers in every classroom. You know the number of teachers with substandard permits and credentials continues to increase, the LPI report has pointed that out pretty consistently. There's been an increase of 63% in those substandard credentials, and teachers in the classroom using those credentials. This means that California's classrooms are increasingly stop by under prepared teachers, and teachers teaching out of their field. We believe that this bill will, in fact, increase the number of unqualified teachers in a classroom, and for those reasons, we would oppose this legislation, thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joshua Speaks: mr. chair, i'm speaks with the commission on teacher credentialing, and we don't have an official position on the bill. we've expressed some concerns to the author's office, and they've been very gracious in working with us on those, so we'd like to thank them for that, and we'll continue to do so. and i'd also like to make myself available if the committee has any questions, thank you.
[]
John Wenger: Thank you, Mr. Chair and members. John Wenger on behalf of the California Charter Schools Association, happy to be the sponsor of this legislation. First, we would like to thank you and your Committee for all your hard work on this bill, and working with us on the amendments. We really do appreciate it. One of the biggest challenges facing charter schools is acquiring property to develop educationally appropriate facilities to serve their students Unlike school districts, as the Senator stated, charter schools cannot exercise powers of eminent domain, cannot exempt themselves from local zoning and land use regulations, and cannot seek voter approval for the issuance of general obligation bonds. As a result, properties that might otherwise be suitable for charter school use are not accessible because of regulatory and financial obstacles. Charter public schools were allowed the first right of refusal to acquire district surplus property for years under Education Code 17457.5. However, this law had a sunset date of July 1st, 2016. This proposal would seek to reinstate charter schools' right of first refusal for a property deemed surplus by a school district, ensuring that public school buildings are used for public school students. The bill would also allow first right of refusal to charter schools before a district can enter into a joint use agreement that is not intended for instructional purposes. We are committed to continuing our conversations with you and Committee staff to ensure that the bill provides districts the ability to enter into a lease agreement for a private entity for joint use of district property only when the property would appropriately be used for instructional purposes for district students. We do recognize the various cost pressures currently facing school districts. This is why we added a financial incentive that was not in the original trailer bill language that sunsetted last year. This provision would allow a school district that sells or leases surplus property to a charter school to use those proceeds for any one time general fund purpose. We were also sensitive to the teacher housing crisis in California. And this bill recognizes this need and provides that districts may use district property under the teacher housing act of 2016 by Senator Leno before surplusing property and offering it to charter schools. For these reasons, we are happy to support this bill. And I have with me today Liz Block who is on the West Contra Costa Unified School District Board of Education.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2312, 'end': 2316, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2459, 'end': 2468, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sarah Lillis: Good morning, Sarah Lillis with Edvoice in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nancy Cajara: Nancy Cajara, and I support 765. I'm from Eugenio Charter.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maricela Santiago: My name is Maricela Santiago, I support 765.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jenny Martinez: i'm martinez, a student from charter high school, and i support 765.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Adriana Hernandez: Good afternoon. Adriana Hernandez, and this bill will change schools and will stop having charter kids sitting down in the floor and gyms. And it will give them a seat and a place just like any other children. I strongly support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Patricia Corrubas: Hi, Patricia Corrubas, and I support SB 765.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ariana Mosley: Hi, my name is Ariana Mosley. I attend an Oakland charter school called Envision Academy, and I strongly support SB 765.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Estrada: hi, i'm jennifer nicole estrada, and i strongly support sb 765.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nahara Martinez: Hi, my name's Nahara Martinez. I'm from Los Angeles Leadership Academy, and I strongly support SB 765.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Josie Vargas: hi, my name's josie jennifer vargas. i'm here in support of sb 765 as a charter school parent.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jeff Rice: Good afternoon, Jeff Rice with the APLUS+ Personalized Learning Network Association representing 60 charter schools and 60,000 students. We're in support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Beth Shapiro: Beth Shapiro, the parent of two children at John Adams Academy in Roseville, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vena Lavora: good afternoon, my name is lavora, i come from oakland. i have my children in the charter school, and i support sb 765.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Casey Taylor: hello, casey, executive director of achieve charter school in paradise, and i also support this bill.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Kiefer: Paul Kiefer, Executive Director of Pacific Charter Institute, in support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Misha Fogel: misha josie fogel from oakland, california, my children attend kipp bridge public charter, and i support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Arthur Henry: Hi, Arthur Henry from Oakland, California, and I, too, support SB 765.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pam McGee: Pam McGee from Palisades Charter High School, Executive Director, representing more than 3,000 students from 100 zip codes throughout LA, and we strongly support SB 765.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carlos Machado: Good morning, chair and members. My name is Carlos Machado, I'm with the California School Boards Association. We must respectfully oppose this bill. We have concerns that a one size fits all policy for the multitude of school districts in the state, nearly a thousand isn't the best policy. The local school boards, they're best in the position to determine how this property should be used. They are accountable to their communities. We think that by specifying how these surplus properties should be used makes it harder for them to serve the students and the communities that they're elected to serve. The one thing I would like to bring to the community's attention is that this bill may interfere with the ability of counties office of education to serve high need, high risk students in vocational ed programs. The policy in the bill would require that the property be provided to charters or for housing as its, and it goes recently amended before it can be offered for sale at least to a County Office of Education for vocational program or high risk student population served by the county. For those reasons, we would be opposed and ask the Committee to reject the bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Seth Bramble : mr. chair and senators, good morning. seth misha bramble here on behalf of the california teachers association, respectfully in opposition to senate bill 765. all the momentum in the state right now is moving towards local control when it comes to education funding whether it be local control funding formula, local control accountability plan. we see this as a proposal that really compromises local control. let's let those who are elected to do what's best for the children in their school district do their work. if a school board member is not representing the needs of their community, then we should elect someone who is, that's the core of our democracy. a number of proposals sponsored by the charter schools association, this session including a couple of bills being heard later today in assembly education committee seem to seek to circumvent the authority of our locally elected school board members and this proposal really ties their hands. because of the significant investment in time and resources in how best to serve the children and their school district, the local school board is best equip to make decisions regarding education programs and needs within it's jurisdiction including how to best use surplus less property. school districts, some of whom are in declining enrollment and have no need for an additional school. they develop priorities and plans with input from all stakeholders, including parents, students, teachers and community members. certainly, if i'm losing children, i don't need more schools. the state should not compromise local control by implementing the flawed policy in this proposal and we would urge your no vote.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 56, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alex Caputo-Pearl: Alex Caputo-Pearl, President of the United Teachers Los Angeles and 22-year teacher in the Compton Unified and Los Angeles Unified School Districts. Three reasons that we oppose this. Number one, local control. As Seth said, we're moving in the direction of local control. What this does is it actually requires school districts to give property to charter schools when there may very well be other uses that the school district wants to use that for whether it be selling, whether it be moving towards some sort of community school model or partnership model that we see around the country. This actually undermines local control. Second, financially. UCLA was part of putting together an Economic Impact Report and we commissioned MGT of America to put together an Economic Impact Report of the cost of unregulated charter school growth financially on the school district. And the number was $591 million per year which, of course is around ADA, but it's also around a system that is set up to have districts continue to have oversight costs. The costs of educating often the most expensive students to educate. The cost of infrastructure sitting with the district when revenue is leaving the district. This is not a formula to have a healthy civic institution of public education. This bill would add to that problem of actually giving school districts less options financially and in terms of developing creative plans, academically. Finally, the third reason that we oppose this is that just two weeks ago, the University of Oregon and in the public interest came out with a study called Spending Blind. That's about the hundreds of millions of dollars that already goes to charter schools to build, buy and lease facilities. And that has been done in an entirely unplanned way where you now have public money that has gone to unregulated charter schools that may have equity and access issues like a lot do. May have financial transparency issues like a lot do. And yet, they are at the trough getting public money for facilities. This bill would take that even further without even looking at some of the recent research that comes out of this spending blind study. So we urge you to actually, the flip side of this coin is that many districts around the country, Cincinnati, Austin, Milwaukee, Baltimore, increasingly LA is working with them around looking at what a community school model would look like. A proactive vision of public education that serves all students and that does have partnerships that will require more space on campuses. This cuts against that. School districts should be able to have local control to make those sort of long-term plans and this bill cuts against that. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 214, 'end': 218, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cordell Thomas: Hi, my name is Cordell Thomas, I'm with the United Way of the Inland Valleys in Riverside County, California. I'm glad to be here. I want to start out with a specific statistic. I want to thank you, number one, for being here and listening to what we're doing. 25% of families making over $100,000 a year cannot come up with $400 for an emergency expense without going into debt or borrowing the money. That's reality. We've been in approximately 16 schools, high schools around the Temecula-Murrieta area. We've also worked with college level youth in called a FIT academy, Financial Independence Training. When we talk to our young people that have gone through our curriculum and our classes, they tell us that their home lives, they don't understand financial literacy, they may be a part of predatory lending. There are a lot a vast wealth of challenges within family networks that have to do with financial literacy misunderstandings. And it's when you get a chance to talk with these young people one on one, you get an understanding of what families are dealing with on an ongoing basis. We have been in 16 cumulative high schools in the Temecula-Murrieta area. We've also worked with 60 foster young people over the past two years who have graduated our program. Those 45 that have finished and saved, cumulative have saved $53,000, 52 to $53,000 in a six month savings practicum. They can do it with a knowledge of how money flows and how money works. I will end with these two stories. Semoria joined our program. She is a single mom that graduated the program. She ran into an expense that came up from a medical standpoint that their insurance didn't cover, but because she had saved and put money aside in a emergency account, she said at her graduation that she didn't have to go into collections. She had the funds necessary to pay off that sudden debt. I have a secondary story of a trafficked young lady. She was trafficked. She's a second generation trafficking victim, but she's gone through our program. She took two years to finish but when she finished, she succeeded on a level you wouldn't believe. She not only finished, she saved the highest amount of money for that practicum. $6,800 in six months. Not only saved, but she finished with passing her state exam to become a CNA. She's now passed that. She got her driver's license. She bought her first car following the practicum requirements for buying a two-year old used would already be better and now has a full time job and is succeeding in a powerful way. Those are two stories of how financial literacy as a part of our curriculum would be able to change lives. I thank you for your time and I hope that I can answer any questions that you may have. Thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1497, 'end': 1504, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cathy Washer: thank you. senator and committee, my name is cathy seth washer. i'm superintendent in lodi unified school district and also a board member for california jump start, a nonprofit foundation that seeks to educate teachers and students on financial literacy. i'm here to give my support for literacy requirement of high school level for two reasons. one, our children tell us they need it. we are engaged in the lcap process for the past few years and every time that we meet with a group of high school students, they always tell us the same thing. we can pass any advanced placement test you put in front of us, but we don't know how to handle a checking account and that speaks volumes to the hole and the gaps that are in our curriculum. the children see the need and they want us to do something about it. an elective course at this point isn't covering it, because not all students are able to take that. we find that children are looking to buy cars in the future. they're worried about paying for school. they're worried about how to get a job and what to do with their paychecks. those are issues that they see in their immediate future. the second reason why i feel that this is important is what i hear from the business community. in working with our local business folks, what they say is that their new employees that are graduates of high school come to them not knowing anything about retirement plans, not knowing anything about how to choose a health plan benefit, not knowing how to manage their money. they see young people losing their home, their apartments, not being able to make the rent, because they can't budget appropriately. so the students and our business community, the employers who are working with these young folks when they get a job are all telling us that financial literacy is an important component of our educational program. and we do have a principal, high school principal, mr. sandstrom, also, who can speak to that.
[{'start': 45, 'end': 62, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1921, 'end': 1930, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jay Alburez-Sevilla: mr. chair and members, jay cathy alburez-sevilla with the california credit union league, in support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lisa Wright: Lisa Wright, President and CEO of United Way, the Inland Valleys, and we're supportive of financial literacy for all high schoolers in California.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erika Hoffman: Erika Hoffman on behalf of the California School Boards Association. We do appreciate the amendments that the author accepted today. I do need to wait to see the language before we remove our opposition, but I would raise kind of one issue. There are an impotent number of bills this year, last year, expect to see a few more, that talk about adding courses, adding coursework for students as graduation requirements. Ultimately, the question becomes what is actually needed for students to graduate from high school? Which courses should they have? And frankly, CSBA, we do believe let's have that conversation. It's been since 1983 since we changed graduation requirements in this state for students. Maybe it's time to relook at that. That will be an outstanding issue that my association, though, does remain concern with the number of these bills, but thank you very much.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 563, 'end': 567, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rachel Minnick: thank you. members of the committee, i'm minnick, executive director of reading partners sacramento. we're very proud today to sponsor sb 494 and we're very grateful to senator hueso for authoring this legislation for continuing to be a champion of literacy in california. reading partners is a national nonprofit organization, headquartered and founded here in california. our program empowers students to succeed at reading and in life by recruiting, and training community volunteers to provide one to one literacy tutoring. currently in california, we serve more than 4,000 children in over 70 schools across the state and we're proud to have 3,500 youth and adult tutors that support these children. nationally, we serve more than 10,000 students in 10 states and the district of columbia. and just to reiterate, sb 494 addresses a critical issue, the importance of early literacy. i won't go through and repeat the statistics that the senator shared, but they are extremely, extremely troubling. why is third grade literacy so important? at reading partners, we say that kindergarten through third grade is when you learn to read. and in fourth grade, you're expected to read to learn. a student's performance in fourth grade is a critical benchmark, because it lays the foundation for future learning and impacts how students grasp all their subjects. a child who could read on grade level by fourth grade is four times more likely to graduate from high school, more likely to obtain a college degree. and for our low income students, the evidence shows that this is one of the most significant steps in breaking the cycle of poverty. but the reason i'm here today and what keeps me up at night, we have to have a sense of urgency around this issue and here's why. this school year, there are 2.7 million children in kindergarten through fourth grade. 2.7 million of those children, half a million, 500,000 kids are in fourth grade. and of those fourth graders, a quarter of million, 250,000 are going to leave fourth grade this year not able to read on grade level. so, what does that look like year after year after year? every year that we wait is a year that we put another quarter of million kids at risk. this is unacceptable to me. and if that weren't reason enough for us to act, consider that we put the future of california at risk when we leave these students behind. improving literacy outcomes as the senator so clearly explained is one of the strongest steps that we can take to ensure our economic strength. this legislation supports better training and utilization of the diagnostic tools that we have available. provides grant funds to school districts who want to prioritize grade level reading. and i would also encourage all of you to consider this. i'd like to see the lao conduct a study of reading intervention practices across public school districts in california. to identify successful practices and strategies that could be implemented statewide. i think there are districts that are doing this better than others. they know things, and i think we need to find more about what that looks like. sb 494 provides a sensible approach, using many of the resources we already have. by supporting under-resourced school districts who want to implement intervention strategies, and by bringing to light the best practices. i respectively ask for your support of sb 494. it is critical for the support of our children's future.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 177, 'end': 182, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brad Strong: chairman and members, brad jay strong with childrennow. i'll cut about half of my testimony, but certainly applaud senator hueso for introducing sb 494. and to address the critical early literacy skills and struggling students. we opposed efforts to eliminate second grade testing, which helped to ensure that students were identified earlier. but at the time, we are also assured that diagnostic assessments would replace the second grade assessments years ago. years later, the state is finally just beginning to build the infrastructure to support the use of early diagnostic and formative assessments. and yet countless students fail to get identified for early supports they need when interventions are most effective. bottom line, formative and diagnostic assessments along with early identification and individualized intervention plans. we need to ensure that every student is successfully progressing through the educational continuum. therefore, we support a systemic effort to ensure that this is so, and are pleased to support sb 494. thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 30, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 123, 'end': 128, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Seth Litt: Good morning, Seth Litt, Executive Director of Parent Revolution. We are a Los Angeles based nonprofit that works with public school families, most of whom live in historically underserved communities. The majority, if not all of the families we work with has-
[{'start': 14, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Teresa Robinson: my name is robinson, and i am in support of bill 494. very important, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ron Rapp: mr. chair, members, rapp on behalf of the california federation of teachers. like my colleague from cta, we're removing our opposition to the bill. we want to thank the author for his leadership on this very important issue, we recognize it. and we think that the amendments he's accepting will help to move this forward. i'd also like to thank your staff for recommending those amendments. we certainly support professional development for our teachers. it's sorely needed and we'd love to work with the author to get to a support position on this bill as well, so thank you.
[]
Anjanette Pelletier: Anjanette Pelletier with the SELPA Administrators of California. We echo some of the thoughts from the educational associations, we're removing our opposition at this time based on the amendments as submitted.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 29, 'end': 34, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jordan Thierry: thierry on behalf of the alliance for boys and men of color, we have two concerns with this bill, be very brief. one is that it assumes that the parent will be able to help and participate in a plan and it says it will the parent's participation will be available, will be a component if possible, but i actually think that a lot of students struggle with reading. part of the reason is that they're parents can't participate and help. so we'd like to see something built in as support that parents' participation in helping a student read. and we also think that this bill should apply to all schools, not just schools where only half of the students are not at grade reading level, because if a student is failing grade level reading, they should have support no matter what kind of school they're in.
[]
Christopher Sanchez : christopher brad sanchez with chirla, the coalition for humane immigrant rights, in strong support. i just want to briefly share a story that we've experienced through one of our membership. there was a mother and a father who had two children. the mother had an order of deportation and was asked to leave the country. she voluntarily deported, and she took her two children with her. they attended schools in mexico at the time. however, education was a priority for the family. later on, they did bring back the daughters, after several years, to attend schools in the united states, here in california. but we know that this isn't a story that's brand-new, this has been happening for years. we do like to say that because of the family's commitment to education, the children are doing excellent right now. one of the daughters, who's in junior high, actually has the fourth-highest gpa of her junior high class. so with those comments, we'd just like to urge your aye vote on this measure.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Liz Guillen: thank you, mr. chair and members, liz with public advocates, in strong support.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Enrique Ruacho: enrique christopher ruacho, on behalf of the los angeles unified school district, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carina Gonzales: Carina Gonzales, from the Los Angeles ... supporting the SB 257
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gloria Rodriguez: Good morning, my name is Gloria Rodriguez. I have two children, one 15-year-old in LA Unified School District and one 13-year-old in a charter school, and I'm in full support.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Norma Santiago: my name is norma enrique santiago. [foreign]
[{'start': 11, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maria Lopez: Maria Lopez, and I support SB 257, I'm a parent.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lucy Reese: Good morning, Lucy Reese, and I support SB 257.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julie Carrillo: Hi, my name is Julie Carrillo, and I support SB 257.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Albert Rojas: Hi, my name is Albert Rojas, and I support SB 257.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maria Castillo: Hi, my name is Maria Castillo, in strong support of 257.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Wanner: linda norma wanner with the california catholic conference, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eduardo de Leon: eduardo linda de leon, academic director of the language academy of sacramento, two-way spanish immersion charter school, in full support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Adriana Hernandez: adriana, from ingenium charter schools. i strongly support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ryan Spencer: Ryan Spencer with the California Charter School Association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Harms: Jennifer Harms of the National Association of Social Work California Chapter, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jorge Corona: My name is Jorge Corona, I support SB 257.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Guillermia Salas: Good morning. Guillermia Salas, and I support 257.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tessy Garcia: good morning, my name is tessy eduardo garcia, a mother of two students of charter schools. i strongly support. the bill 257, thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Rubiez: Yes, my name is Mark Rubiez, and I'm from the City of Cudahy and I strongly support SB 257. Thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Francine Kahara: i'm francine tessy kahara and i support 257.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Estrada: hi everyone, my name is jennifer francine estrada and i am a youth organizer at the california charter school association, and i support this bill.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kim Engel: kim from the youth justice coalition in full support, especially for all our members who are undocumented and are in this situation. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jordan Thierry: jordan jennifer thierry, alliance for boys and men of color. we urge your aye vote on this measure. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erika Hoffman: Erika Hoffman on behalf of the California's School Boards Association, we do have an oppose unless amended and part of that was for the issue of who's going to be funding this. So we greatly appreciate the amendment that the author has taken today, to provide that clarity that these students will claim ADA. So thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sara Bachez: Good morning, Mr Chair and members, Sara Bachez with California Association of School Business Officials in support of Senator Moorlach's bill SB 590. We understand the genesis of the Reserve cap was intended to ensure public funds are maximized on educational service, but it's important to recognize that during the Great Recession, after the state revenues plummeted. And the state deferred $10.4 billion in funding, school districts had to mitigate difficult decisions away from the classroom. Unfortunately, the new restriction on budget reserves could hinder school district's ability to spare services, and our staff from future economic downturns. Please consider the need, and fiscal responsibility of the school districts to have a healthy fiscal Reserve to weather economic storms, ensuring that the impact is away from our students. Thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 127, 'end': 135, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Martha Alvarez: Good morning, Martha Alvarez on behalf of ACSA, the Association of California School Administrators. I'll echo the comments made by the previous speakers. One additional comment I would like to make is that the current Reserve cap placed on school districts is inconsistent with California policy. California, the Legislature itself has its own rainy day fund, so we believe that SB 590 is moving in the right direction to be more consistent with what we're doing at the State, ensuring that we have fiscal, being solvent in California, so we strongly support SB 590. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle McCan: Good Morning, Michelle McCan I'm on behalf of Schools for Sound Finance, the Statewide Association of Community Funded, or Basic Aid School Districts, in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sheldon Smith: Yes, I'm Sheldon Smith, I'm the Assistant Superintendent at the San Luis Obispo County Office of Education, and we are in clear support
[{'start': 9, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Legan: Mr. Chairman, members, Mike Legan on behalf of the California Teachers Association. The Reserve for economic uncertainty has existed for decades for school district budgets. And many districts have had reserves in excess, some far in excess. During the Great Recession, educators and students in California. Had the bitter experience of cuts in program, layoffs, increased class sizes. And while some districts were good actors, and spent down their reserves to mitigate and ameliorate these cuts, more were not. And in fact, made additions to the reserves along with these cuts. Following the work of educators and others, the passage of Prop 30 by the voters. In the beginning of the economic recovery, creation of additional state budget and education budget reserves. School districts are required to publicly explain reserves in excess of the REU. And spend down to a ... REU. When times were good, and contributions were made in the public school stabilization account. Previously we had observed districts shifting funds between accounts, underestimating revenues. Over exaggerating expenses in budgets in various efforts to hide the peanut. More often than not, these distortions magically disappeared by the end of the year. Currently, in the environment of subsidiary and local responsibility and accountability, transparency and integrity are paramount. SB 590 would return us to a past we don't want to revisit. We respectfully ask for your no vote.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jai Sookprasert: thank you. mr chairman and members, jai jordan sookprasert with the california school employees association, also in opposition. i would only note that this occurs when the state is adding more to their reserve. it doesn't make sense to us that at the local level, they would want to increase their reserve. and these reserves would cut into services for students and to keep staff on board. and so we would ask that you think about this carefully, as pointed out in the committee analysis even. it says that if this is problem, there is a safety valve here that the counties can waive. so we really don't see the need to repeal this provision at all, thank you. thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ron Rapp: Good morning, Mr. Chair, Members of the Committee. Ron Rapp on behalf of the California Federation of Teachers. During the recent economic downturn, large district reserves did little to mitigate the impact on budget cuts on our students. In fact, rather than spend down the reserves during the fiscal crisis. Many school districts increased them further exacerbating what were already dramatic cuts to the classroom. CFT believes that this is unconscionable, considering the significant number of program cuts that impacted students. Such as large class sizes and shortening the school year. Which equate to less instructional time for our students. Many educators were laid off. Large reserves didn't help us weather the economic storm, students and educators bore that burden. It's for these reasons that CFT respectfully requests your no vote, thank you.
[{'start': 51, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Perry: Mr. Chair and members, Randy Perry with Aaron Reed and Associates on behalf of PORAC, we're sponsoring the bill. The original intent was to completely take away the discretion of the Superintendent or principal when there's an injury to a staff person. However, we're willing to amend the bill to change that to a serious injury or great bodily injury to a staff person. So it really limits who would be mandatorily expelled. Again, our school police officers, who are throughout California, and I'll let Jesus discuss it. But they work with students, they work with teachers and the administration to give students fresh starts. To work with students to change behavior before any type of suspension or expulsion is even discussed. What we are talking about here, as amended, would be those students who have caused serious bodily injury to someone, like the peace officers. There are at least two cases that I think Jesus will briefly mention, or any other staff. I mean, somebody who causes that type of injury where it's hospitalization and the like, if you look at the definition of great bodily injury, serious, serious injury here. Then that student returns to that school, it's not just that person they battered. That person may not even come back to the school, like the example we have. We're talking about intimidation and fear by the other staff, by even classical staff who maybe have broken up a fight and were battered in the cafeteria. The fear that the teachers have, and the other students, who when that person comes back. And those students and those staff know that person seriously injured either a peace officer or a teacher or somebody else, there's a fear there. And that is when it becomes unfair to the rest of the school, and could potentially interfere with those students' right to have a fair education. So that's what we're talking about. We're willing to take that amendment to really limit this. And we ask for your support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 40, 'end': 50, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 505, 'end': 510, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 918, 'end': 923, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jesus Montana: Good morning, and I will keep it short due to the length of your agenda. I am Jesus Montana. For identification purposes, though I am a director with PORAC, I am also a sergeant with the San Diego Unified School District Police Department. And I've been working with our youth for over 20 years. We did bring this forward, as the one example given on the officer who was injured and had to be medically retired due to his injuries caused by a student, actually it was a group of students. The second example that Mr. Perry was referring to was a student who poured a chemical into her drink, essentially poisoning her. And that student was returned back to that same school. That teacher felt so unsafe, she had to transfer out of her employment to a different school site due to fear of this student. Our intent isn't to harm students, our intent is to help them get a fresh start. Returning them back to the same school that they committed this offense does not help them. It actually hurts them, because they're not going to get the same services every other student does. When they're transferred to a new school, there's a very small, limited number of people who know that student's history. And that's required by law. The rest of the staff and the students don't know the history. And they will treat him as any other student, knowing that he will get a fresh start. So they do become a productive member of society, that's our intent. And also to make sure that the rest of the staff feels safe at their place of employment. There are many times that I as a police officer have gone to administrators and talked them down from the suspensions they were looking at giving. because they're working on emotion versus looking at the totality of the circumstances. In this case, this isn't emotion, this is the intent to help that student, but make sure that our staff feel safe. And I'll be happy to answer any questions with regards to my experiences in working and reducing the number of suspensions and expulsions in our district and throughout California. Since I work with various school departments as well as municipals.
[{'start': 78, 'end': 91, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 517, 'end': 522, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Maurice Gomez: I'm Maurice Gomez, Fathers and Families of San Joaquin and Alliance of Boys and Men of Color. We vehemently oppose SB 805 due to the eradication that basically taken away the power of an administrator to exercise a discretion and not consider the surrounding circumstances in any given event or situation. We got to understand that it comes down to common sense and I've heard, was sitting there, I was listening to the support, but this cookie cutter type thing further pushes the school-to-prison pipeline by causing scholastic damage, self-esteem, emotional, and I've heard just a minute ago that if they keep the child at the same school, then that takes away the teacher being impartial to the child. This is mind boggling to me. It's just common sense. Give the administrator the discretion to each situation is different. We're dealing with young people. We're dealing with people who are still trying to figure out who they are in life and they make mistakes. We've all made mistakes at one time, but to be expelled and have that on your record, which follows you around. I mean, that unbelievable. So we oppose SB 805, Fathers and Families and Alliance of Boys and Men of Color.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathy Sher: Good morning, Kathy Sher on behalf of the ACLU of California. There's a good reason why schools have moved away from zero tolerance policies and that reason is that suspensions and expulsions simply do not work as a means of discipline for either the students or the school. Research shows that alternatives such as restorative practices, tiered interventions and social, emotional learning, reduced suspensions, improved behavior and lead to better academic outcomes. Suspension and expulsion should only be used in the most extreme of cases when there is no other alternative that will ensure school safety. I think the existing law reflects this as to the kinds of behavior covered in this bill. It gives the discretion to the principal or the superintendent, but it does require that the student be suspended with a recommendation for expulsion, unless there is a finding that another means of correction is appropriate and will work made by that person who is in the best position to make the decision. School principals and superintendents should be able to determine whether suspension or expulsion is the right course of action in a particular instance and they should retain that discretion. Students need to be in school to receive an education. We ask for your no vote on SB 805.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Liz Guillen: good morning, chair and members. i'm liz jai guillen with public advocates. i align myself with all the comments made in opposition. this really takes us back to the zero tolerance days, something that is really antithetical to the local control approach that the state is trying. i appreciate the sponsor's interest in helping students and i recommend that they work closely with the coalition of students and communities across the state that have been using, to good effect, the local control state priorities to begin instituting more effective programs like restorative practice and i think that a better result would come. for these reasons, we oppose. we think that the discretion should stay local and the decision should be made by the people on the ground who are best able to do that. thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Perry: perry with porac. the staff recommended amendment, committee recommended amendment was to simply expand to contracted employees under that discretion section. we agreed with that, but we would also like to add the narrowing language to this. so, we agree with expanding the section to contracted employees, but we would like to add to that a narrowing language that says, the only incidents that require immediate expulsion are those that cause great bodily injury or serious injury.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 11, 'end': 16, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Magee: good morning, members of the committee. i'm michael liz magee with the california community college chancellor's office. we do support the extension, and i'm also here if there are questions.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Constance Carroll: I'll start. I'm Constance Carroll, I'm Chancellor of the San Diego Community College District, and a very strong supporter first of Senate Bill 850. Which initiated the pilot program for the Community College Baccalaureate. I'm active nationally with the Community College Baccalaureate Association, and I'm here today to support Senate Bill 769. I want to underscore just a few points, and thank you so much for hearing us today. First of all, this bill is about workforce preparation, workforce preparation and jobs, that's all it's about, and providing the requirements for them. And we're grateful to Senator Hill for his leadership and vision. California really needs to move forward with its community colleges in workforce preparation. This type of program addresses specific job needs. In the pilot program every program adopted has specific jobs at the outcome. This is the type of work community colleges do well.  However, some of our associate degrees are becoming obsolete as the workforce and employers require bachelor's degrees, particularly in fields like dental hygiene, a lot of the health professions, and the like. So California needs institutions to step up to provide this training. At the same time the public universities do not provide this type of education. Now underscore that, no public University in California provides this, nor do they have plans to do so. The community college baccalaureate is low cost. It requires no additional funding from the state. And for the students it only requires $10,560 for all four years, very, very low cost. Also high quality because many of the community colleges already offer associate degrees in these same fields. In San Diego, San Diego Mesa college offers a bachelor's degree now in Health Information Technology. With 55,000 job vacancies nationally starting salaries between 88,000 and 144, so that's a real pathway to the middle class and high quality. And above all, these degrees are accessible. Our students are place bound, they're working, they cannot afford to leave their communities to seek education elsewhere.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 613, 'end': 617, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Judy Miner: Thank you so much, I'm Judy Miner the chancellor of the Foothill DeAnza and community college district, and I'm here to support SB 769 today. From my perspective as a trustee for the Bay Area Council Economic Institute. The Bay Area Council in November of 2015 published a road map for economic resilience as a Bay Area regional economic strategy. Among as proposed actions for building world class workforce locally is to allow community colleges the option of offering multiple four year degree programs. The impact of increasing Baccalaureate degrees includes addressing three interrelated problems in California. Workforce shortages, education inequality, and income inequality. The Public Policy Institute of California has projected that our state's workforce skills gap will be about 1.1 million college graduates short of economic demand if current trends persist to 2030. The 2016 Silicon Valley Index reports that in 2014, Hispanic and Latino residents in Silicon Valley and California had the lowest levels of education attainment, 26% versus with a Bachelor's Degree or higher versus 48% of Silicon Valley's residents with a Bachelor's Degree or higher. The 2017 index reports that 30% of all Silicon Valley households live in poverty, and for Latino households it's 59%. Expansion of the community colleges Baccalaureate program in our community colleges is an important strategy. To those who say we ought not expand I hope that our response will be we ought not turn our backs on families and communities who need our help to escape poverty, thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Louise Jaffy: Okay, I'm Louise Jaffy, I'm a trustee at Santa Monica College. We too are in support, RBA pilot program is an interaction design also known as user experience. The median salary for these professionals in Southern California is $115,000. Our program gives under represented student populations the opportunity to pursue a lucrative career in design and tech industries, and it will help diversify those fields. But we're finding that the sunset is a poison pill and we ask you to remove it, it's a huge deterrent for students. Currently we have to notify students when they apply that the program will end in 2023. The Sunset breeds fear and uncertainty. Students are anxious about what will happen if they have any kind of personal situation that would require a temporary leave. We have just 19 students in Cohort 1. Ending the program in 2023 means colleges will have to stop outreach to freshman in 2019. And we would stop at admitting junior level students in 2021. This is such an inefficient use of the tremendous investment of time, effort, and funds that have gone into creating these programs. Please remove the It handicaps the programs and intimidates the students lastly as an elected trustee I ask that you respect locally elected boards knowledge of their communities and commitment to their students not all colleges district have expressed an interest in providing this opportunity. But please know that the colleges that would like to offer a BA, have come to that position based on local need, resources, and expertise. The expansion would be permissive, please respect and empower local boards, thank you.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Larry Lizeo: Thank you Chair Allen, Vice Chair Wilk. Larry Lizeo, the CEO of the Community College League of California, here representing the 137 chancellors and presidents, and the 442 locally elected trustees. And just on your point, Chair Allen, on the sunset, in addition to what Trustee Jaffy just said, it's really a confounding variable in a social science experiment. Methodologically, you have to make compromises in bills but what the sunset does, it creates an artificial variable when you try to do an analysis students are worried that I might not be able to get through the program in time. If i get through it, but the program goes away, I point to my resume, they call the college, what? We don't have that anymore, or we used to have it, so I feel, what we've heard from our CEOs and trustees is that, that is really a confounding variable that maybe, for political reasons, was necessary. We thank Senator Hill, ideally there would be no sunset. The other thing to point out is-
[{'start': 16, 'end': 21, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 34, 'end': 38, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 40, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 230, 'end': 235, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 280, 'end': 285, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 912, 'end': 916, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Steve Crawford: Okay, yeah, my name is Steve Crawford, as Senator Hill essentially spoke the details of my story. What it comes down to is, the first question I was asked in my interview process was whether or not I had a bachelors degree. And I was able to explain to them that since I was accepted into this program, I will have my Bachelor's degree in mortuary science and it's that opportunity that was given to me that I feel needs to be expanded and given to many other students in California. That's why I support this bill.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 50, 'end': 54, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Fred Johnson: My name is Fred Johnson, I'm a student at the De Anza College automotive technology program, and I strongly support SB 769. The reasons for that is-
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Phan: hello, my name is kyle. i am also part of the de anza automotive technology program, and i also support sb 769.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melody Kanazaro: Hello, I am Melody Kanazaro, I am also a student from De Anzo's automotive technology program, and I very strongly support SB 769.
[{'start': 12, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Bryant: i'm randy michael bryant, i'm acting dean of business computer science and applied technologies at de anza college and i support sb 769.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ashley Walker: ashley randy walker on behalf of north orange county community college district and i support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian King: Brian King, I'm chancellor of Alturas District here in Sacramento and also chair of the statewide CEO board, also here to support SB 769.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark McDonald: Thank you Mark Mcdonald, McGowan Group on behalf of some local community college districts including the Kern, Los Angles, Peralta, Redwood, South Orange County and Yucca community college districts all in support.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Casey Elliott: Casey Elliott on behalf of Coast Community College District and Rancho Santiago Community College District, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Underwood: Michelle Underwood on behalf of the Association of California Community College Administrators, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Connie Renda: I am Connie Renda. I am the program director and lead faculty for the Health Information Management program at San Diego Mesa College and very much in support of this having worked very hard to bring this to our school, and to our community and our state. Thank you.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Viviana Watson: good morning, my name is viviana. i am coming as a student as well as a worker in health information in support of this bill. i'm currently at san diego mesa college getting my bachelor's degree in health information management, thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Manny Diaz: good morning, manny, representing the san jose evergreen community college district, very much in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ky Jackson: jackson, san diego unified school district, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joyce Karack: Good morning, I'm Joyce Karack, I've been working with the 15 pilot colleges for the last year and a half. I'm very much in support of 769. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ray Hernandez: Ray Hernandez, Dean of Science, Math and Technology at Skyline College and in support from the San Mateo Community College District.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Baker: good morning, i'm jennifer ashley baker with the california teacher's association and appreciate the opportunity to testify unfortunately in opposition to the measure. as we had noted previously when you had heard senator dodd's bills, cta was actually very involved with the development of sb 850. we were initial primary opposition and ultimately then took a support position on the final version of the bill. but the study and the analysis of the fiscal impact, and who ultimately sb 850 would serve, was one of the fundamental principles that we wanted to make sure that we saw move forward. we are not diametrically opposed to community colleges offering ba programs. but we do believe it's extremely important to make sure if this is going to be the ultimate policy perspective that this institution is going to put forward, we need to make sure that we do it in a right way from a policy perspective. and even more importantly from a fiscal perspective. what we are concerned about is that at the end of the day, community college students who have often been under-served and disproportionately are students of color that they ultimately may have to supplement these programs. the counseling services, the intervention services. all of the other services that are offered in addition to the classroom time. who's ultimately paying for those services? we want to have facts. we believe facts are important. and until we see those facts and we can verify that the rest of the community college student population is not going to have to supplement these programs, then we don't believe that it's prudent to change the dates or to expand the number of programs. when we have that data and we can verify, we think it's absolutely appropriate to move forward with that direction. but until we know that our community college students are not going to have to supplement any programs, we don't feel that it's prudent to move forward.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 222, 'end': 226, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bryan Ha: mr. chair and members, ha with california federation of teachers. we applaud senator hill for this effort, there's a lot of potential here, but what we're saying is when 850 was signed into law two years ago, there was a specific reporting requirement due. so all we're saying is let's slow down, let's go ahead and review both sides, and consider all matters. and we just don't want something that will do us more harm than good. so i don't want to repeat what my colleague to my right said. but for that reason, we have to respectfully oppose the bill. thank you.
[{'start': 85, 'end': 89, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mary Moyle: mary with the csu. respectfully the csu must also oppose sb 769. out of the 15 pilots which sb 850 authorized, 10 were just begun last fall, and the additional 5 will begin in the fall of this year and interim study will be released in july of next year. this was a critical element of sb 850 in order to ensure that any improvements could be made to it before it grew. sb 850 was the result of a lengthy, and thoughtful collaboration between the segments of higher education, and the csu ultimately supported the bill. however, as the analysis notes it's just too, too early to expand sb 850 before it has developed a real track record. we would welcome the chance to work with the author and the other systems once the interim study is finished. however in its current form we must urge your no vote. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erica Romero: Good morning, Erica Romero on behalf of the Association of Independent California Colleges and Universities representing the WASC accredited private not for profit institutions, respectfully opposed.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nadia Leacarillo: Nadia Leacarillo with the University of California. We're also in opposition and specifically we're deeply concerned with the duplication provisions that were negotiated and agreed upon with the higher education institutions and the bill moves away from those agreements. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christine Miller: good morning, christine jennifer miller, i'm chair of the academic senate of the csu. we're respectfully opposed, we think it's too permissive. thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Austin Webster: good morning chair and members, austin on behalf of the faculty association of community colleges. unfortunately we haven't been able to take a position on this, but we do have serious concerns. i'll echo the comments of my colleagues at the dias and then i'll also add that there could be some unforeseen impacts to the current accreditation system for the colleges. so with that we would like you to keep that in mind.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Justin Malan: Thank you so much Mr. Chair, Members. Justin Malan for three groups, the California Climate and Ag Network, the Community Alliance with Family Farmers and also the American Farmland Trust. We've been working on this issue for a number of years. Preserving farmland is critical for all sorts of reasons. Won't go into them now. We worked with Assemblymember Eggman on the same issue for a number of years. We're thrilled to have this new Senator tackling this issue. And we urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 357, 'end': 363, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Erin Guerrero: Just very briefly, this is Erin Guerrero on behalf of the California Building Industry Association. We're in conversations with the Senator about some of our concerns. Again, very briefly, our concern is the definition of agriculture being a bit too broad. The prohibition on development within one mile of ag lands and we're seeking just a little more clarification that the program is indeed voluntary. So, we are talking to the Senator. We appreciate his willingness to talk with us and look forward to conversing more.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jesus Roman: Mr. Chair, if I may. My name's Jesus Roman, I'm an assistant general counsel with Verizon. And I wanted to focus my comments on why a fee that is connected to cost is important and reasonable. And currently, the bill has it connected to a cost base rate. Telecommunications companies currently, along with electric utilities, currently are required to provided access at regulated rates to their poles. Cable companies access those poles, and so do wireless carriers. The PUC has a formula That is based upon Public Utilities Code Section 767.5. It essentially is the percentage of the annual cost of ownership of the space occupied and it's a per foot cost. That cost establishes rates of $3 for Frontier, $7 for AT&T, and between 15 and $30 for the electric utilities. Everyone currently is attaching to utility poles in the right of way at those rates. This principle of a cost-based rate was extended to municipal, publicly-owned utilities in the Buchanan Bill, and you can currently find that same formula in Public Utilities Code Section 9512. And that one is also a percentage of the volume of the capacity of the pole rendered unusable. Now, it's important to talk about how the rate impacts the ability of wireless carriers to actually deploy the wireless facilities. Currently, a macro tower has about a 10-mile radius of coverage. A small cell has approximately a 1,500-foot radius of coverage. A 5G antenna will have a coverage of 300 feet, only 300 feet, and it's a line of sight coverage. Now, this is because new spectrum has been licensed out by the FCC, that spectrum is called millimeter wave and it has a very short propagation trait, the propagation trait also degrades very quickly. So you're going to need a bunch more, a lot more 5G antennas in the right of way and probably 5 to 10 times the amount of small cells. So in order for us, the wireless carriers, to be able to economically deploy 5G, we need to have a rate that is based upon a cost structure. And if we don't have that rate, it'll be very difficult to actually deploy and get the benefits of 5G that Chairman Hueso talked about. Thank you.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2096, 'end': 2101, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Steve Carlson: thank you, sir, mr. chairman, members, carlson, for the ctia, we're the wireless trade association. i wanted to really thank you and your staff for the incredible amount of time that you have spent over the last couple of weeks, particularly in the last couple of days, including last night and this morning in working on this issue, which is not uncomplicated. i wanted to run down for the members just a little bit an idea of the amendments that have been taken since the bill was presented in the eu&c committee. we've tried to address issues of the chair, committee staff, members of the eu&c committee, issues raised by local government, issues raised by cable. among others, and i know we are going to go over the final set of amendments we talked about last night, we have looked at issues making sure that cities understood that encroachment permits were things that they could do under this process. obviously, we wanted to move to a more streamlined process. that those permits were subject to feasible design and co-location standards. the issue of what they look like, we understand, is very, very important to local government, and we agree, and those are in the bill in numerous places. there were issues raised in the eu&c on squatting, going on a pole and not using it in time, not providing service. those issues have been dealt with. making sure that the building structural requirements under building codes are covered, making sure that carriers pay their electric costs. other issues in making sure that cities and counties could reserve spaces on their poles if they wanted to use those poles. that was an issue that came up in eu&c. we thought that was absolutely a right issue and we agreed to do that. we've put several amendments in to try to address some of the issues that are raised by the cable industry. we may not have hit that on a 100%. but we're looking at making sure this is technology neutral, making sure the issue with the franchise agreements are not turned over by this. we're continuing to work with them. and we've reduced the size of the maximum size of the small sales that can go on a pole in response to some issues raised by csac. we've taken out the issue of putting it on signage. we've dealt with the issue of the fact that they don't own or control all the poles and only pertains to those poles where they have some licensing agreements. we also have agreed to grandfathering existing agreements. those are a number of things, there's some other things that obviously came about, just more recently. but i wanted to give the committee members an idea of how much we have worked on this issue, how many amendments we have taken. i'm guessing there'll probably be few more as we go down the pipe, but we really wanted to, again, appreciate the committee and the staff for their patience and hard work on this, thank you.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roxanne Gould: Mr. Chairman, members, Roxanne Gould representing both the Wireless Infrastructure Association, as well as National Association of Women Business Owners, Sacramento Valley.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gary McDonald: Gary McDonald, Executive Director of Lighthouse Counseling and Family Resource Center in Placer County, we're in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dennis Albiani: Dennis Albiani on behalf of Tracfone Wireless, we support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nathan Alonzo: nathan jonah alonzo, vice president of the fresno chamber of commerce, we are here in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Darcy Varnell: Darcy Varnell, Sacramento Urban League, we support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nancy Chance: Nancy Chance, California Person Centered Advocacy Partnership and Choice's Person Center Services, Executive Director, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Marty Omoto: marty nathan omoto, cdcan, california disability community action network in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brenda Palomino: good afternoon, brenda marty palomino with sprint in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Charlie Boring: charlie brenda boring with frontier communications. we're not opposed, but we have some amendments that we want to continue working with the author on. and we feel like we can get to that point, and so with that we support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Ng: linda charlie ng, oca sacramento chapter, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kim Rhinehelder: good afternoon, kim linda rhinehelder, eskaton foundation, we support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lucille Bag: Good afternoon, my name is Lucille Bag, representing APAPA, and we support.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 53, 'end': 58, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Chris Smith: Chris Smith with the Sacramento Metropolitan Chamber of Commerce. We are here in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Donna Davis: good afternoon, donna kim davis with weave, and we support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Phil McDougal: Hello, Phil McDougal with St. Johns Program for World Change, we strongly support.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Naomi Teo: hello, naomi donna teo with hacker lab coworking and makerspaces and we strongly support.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicholas Rothman: nicholas, california state naacp, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lester Poliski: Lester Poliski with Impact Venture Capital, very strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kris Rosa: kris on behalf of silicon valley leadership group in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Manny Tillio: i'll be here all day. tillio with national association of realtors professionals. we strongly support, we definitely need this, thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Omar Masry: thank you, chair, omar naomi masry on behalf of american planning association. we recognize that wireless communication services are an important part of our communities. but we also recognize the duty we have to our communities to plan appropriately for the physical infrastructure. it is possible for california citizen counties to work with cellular or other providers on well-designed broadband, including small cells. i know this because in prior rolls, i've worked on hundreds of these approvals in both northern california and so cal. while small cell infrastructure isn't exactly the same as macro towers, we must all point out that they're uniquely challenging because they vary in size and require additional equipment not included in the definition. while we preach the language limiting the size, 21 cubic feet is still large, about the size of a refrigerator. the size limits also completely ignore the ability to pursue a major expansion of new cabinets on the sidewalk or pole height extensions of, say, 10 feet, or antenna width expansions under a separate federal rule known as 6409. the minute a side is built, if it doesn't include any safeguards initially, as this bill would do. as planners, we've seen carriers propose small cells of bulky equipment and noisy cooling fans, literally 5 feet from bedroom windows, on wooden poles. we've seen carriers propose small cells that feature 120-foot-tall poles that may require aircraft warning lights in front yards or on downtown sidewalks. the language as proposed could allow this. we've seen carriers propose 14-inch-wide cable trays serving small cells, running over apartment building windows, including rent controlled windows and small cell cabinets, or deal generators, in areas reserved for a small business or a resident roof deck. whether on poles or a few feet from a bedroom window, or right in front of a small business, or on top of a historic residential building, in a commercial zone, but outside of a district, it's an important that we review issues of design, aesthetics, equipment noise, neighbored compatibility, and historic preservation review. that review, coupled with local discretion, are what allow staff to work with carriers to find placement and equipment and solutions that do work. as written, the language is not clear as to whether a city would retain any discretion, including for poles that the city owns. apa california continues to propose the bill be well suited to require that the office of planning and research develop a model ordinance. looking at best practices from cities that have successfully deployed hundreds, if not thousands, of small cells already, to give carriers a certainty they have said they're looking for. but also provide best practices, lease templates and applications that speed deployment of well-designed broadband sighting. we're coming off the heels of ab 57 last year. that bill was intended to speed up permitting and was touted to be the fix that would guarantee rapid deployment. now we're here again, asking jurisdictions to go even faster and have ultimately little say. we continue to question the need to rush this bill forward without meaningful review and collaborative processes that build upon existing successful relationships involving carriers and local government statewide. for these reasons, apa california respectively urges a no vote. thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jolena Voorhis: Sure, Mr. Chair and Members, Jolena Voorhis on behalf of the Urban Counties of California. I'm also here representing CSAC and RCRC, the Rural Counties.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carolyn McIntyre: good afternoon, thank you, mr chairman and members, carolyn omar mcintyre on behalf of the cable and telecommunications association, we are here with a position of oppose unless amended. i do want to take the opportunity to thank the wireless industry for the efforts they have made to this point in drafts that we have seen that do attempt to address a few of the issues that we have raised. however, they do not completely cover the issues that we're concerned about, we still believe that the bill needs to be clarified, that it does not apply to deployment of backhaul facilities. and as i have previously mentioned to some of you, that is in fact, the facilities that ultimately, these network's needs to connect to get to the internet. we want to make sure that there is specific language that will exclude that from the bill and we do not believe that that is clear. also, we were asking for language initially, to ensure that there would not be any effort to impose a franchise fee on an entity that was already paying a franchise fee for purposes of providing a particular service, in our case, a cable service. we continue to seek that amendment, however, we are somewhat concerned that the language that has been discussed here today, with regards to the fee charged to attach to poles. could ultimately result in a situation where we, the cable industry, we're paying a franchise fee in order to be in the right of way to provide our cable service. and because we choose to potentially provide it through another technology, our micro wireless cells that we also want to attach to poles. that now we're going to be doubly billed, having to pay 5% of our gross revenues to provide service in the local government right away and the cost associated with being on the poles. this would not be a problem for the wireless industry because the franchising law specifically excludes the wireless industry from having to pay the franchise fee. so we do want to make sure that as this language is actually developed, dealing with the fees, that we don't end up in a situation where we're going to have to pay significant amounts of money twice to provide the same type of service that we're already providing.
[{'start': 52, 'end': 73, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Greg Cook: Mr Chair and members, Greg Cook representing Northern California Power Agency and we are in opposition to the bill. With your indulgence, Mr Chair, I would like to raise an issue that has not been discussed at all today, that issue specifically has to do with the role of the publicly owned electric utility. The Northern California Power Agency represents each of the cities of Northern California, which provides, owns and operates the electric system in these communities. We suggest an amendment to this legislation that would include as part of the permitting process, the engagement of the electric utility in that permitting process, why would we want to do this? Because number one, we want to be sure that we ensure the reliability of our systems, number two, we guarantee the integrity of our infrastructure, those poles. And most important, the safety of the public in general and any individual who may be accessing those poles for service, we'd be happy to answer any questions, thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Jones: Mr Chairman, David Jones, on behalf of the cities of Burbank, Glendale, Marin County cities, Murrieta, Pasadena and San Marcos in opposition.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carol Lang: good afternoon again, mr. chair, carol on behalf of the city and county of san francisco which does already have 100s of small cell sites. small cell sites, yes. you know what i mean. yes. san francisco, kern, stanislaus, and san luis obispo all in opposition today, thank you.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matt Klopfenstein: Good afternoon, Chair and members, Matt Klopfenstein, on behalf of the Association of Environmental Professionals, the County of San Mateo and the County of Sacramento all in opposition.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Harry Lehman: nice to see you, mr chair, senators, my name is lehman from novato, california, i come here today to speak within one minute in opposition to this bill on several reasons. there are good reasons put forth with regard to the information density, i'm sure senator hertzberg has been on that issue, i'm sure you all are, there is a lot to think through here. but, in addition to that, there's an underlying 14th amendment issue here, a due process issue, and that has to do with the notice upon which this process was noticed. it was imperfect notice because two state agencies put out different information on the 21st, one saying that this was still on hold, the other saying, but not publicised, that it was going forward. the internet version of a state agency said that it was still on hold, therefore people were impaired in their ability to come forward, so i think that there is an underlying legal issue that you want to take a look at here. i think it's important that you take a look at the results of the national institutes of health's study released on may 27th, 2016, which definitely established that the cancers of glioma and the cancer that causes acoustic neuroma. the first causing glioblastoma, which is brain cancer, is clearly caused by these wavelengths, it's no longer a matter of some fringe believing this hippy shit. this is real, definite, well documented, check it out, so i oppose this, i think mcgavin here's got a lot of good technical stuff. but frankly, on the basis of scientific position and without zealotry or emotion, you could call this the california genocide bill. and be right in tune with what you're actually doing in terms of what the science from the national institutes of health has now shown, may 27th 2016, and you've got a serious notice problem here, thank you.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 262, 'end': 271, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1423, 'end': 1430, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jordan Ellison: Jordan Ellison, with Ellison Wilson Advocacy, on behalf of the cities of Englewood,La CaÃ±ada Flintridge, El Centro, and Santee in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gil Topete: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Gil Topete, with the California Municipal Utilities Association, for the reasons of reliability, liability, and the health and safety issue components, we are in opposition. Thank you, Gil.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 210, 'end': 213, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Andrew Antwih: thank you mr. chairman and members, antwih with shaw yoder and antwih. we will take a look at the amendments that have been discussed today, but for today's purposes, i'm here to express opposition from the cities of santa monica and beverly hills. thank you so much. good afternoon, mr. chairman, members of the committee.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 48, 'end': 58, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 63, 'end': 69, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Paul Gonzalez: paul carolyn gonzalez representing the cities of roseville, thousand oaks, indian wells, camarillo, claremont, laguna hills, diamond bar, torrence, rancho cucamonga, eastvale, palmdale, lakewood, and la quinta. we too will take a look at the amendments. appreciate the senator and his work. but as of now, we are still opposed. thank you.>>thank you, sir.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Parra: good afternoon. laura paul parra on behalf of the city of long beach. we currently have an oppose unless amended position, and we will be reviewing those amendments and get back to the author.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: Ignacio Hernandez on behalf of The Utility Reform Network, or TURN, and we are opposed and we will be reviewing the amendments as well.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anthony Sampson: Thank you, Sharon.>>Good afternoon Mr. Chair, Members, Anthony Sampson on behalf of the Southern California Public Power Authority in opposition. Thank you.>>Thank you, sir.
[{'start': 55, 'end': 70, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Elizabeth Espinoza: Good afternoon Mr. Chair and members. Elizabeth Espinoza here today on behalf of the Board of Supervisors in the County of Santa Clara in opposition to the bill in print. Thank you.>>Thank you so much.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
James Jack: Mr. Chairman and members, James Jack on behalf of Cal Tel. We don't have an oppose position but I wasn't sure if it's going to be appropriate for us to testify with the group that is assembled for the third category. I just wanted to state that we've been working and appreciate the author made a commitment in energy Committee to address concerns we have about the bill being technologically neutral. That is, favoring wireless technology over wire line technology. We continue to work in good faith, and appreciate the author's continued work in that. Thank you so much.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Reinette Senum: Hello, Honorable Chair Mcguire, my name is Reinette Senum and I'm a current City Council member, former mayor of Nevada City, California. I generally don't come down here, but I've never seen a bill scare me so much, so I spent the whole day here. And this is why, this is not about a streamlining process, I'm sorry, it's not. This is nothing short of the telecommunications industry, basically hijacking and a hustle take over of a local government of city and counties. As a City Council member, I have never seen such legislation that will remove local authority and also risk property rights as well as hacking right over Internet, and important systems. We're also be losing self determination and this is the most extraordinary, dangerous, precedent setting legislation I have ever seen. Because you're basically taking the control out of our hands. We can no longer self determine our future. The last thing I'd like to speak of is I keep being told, that this is what the customers want. This is what the customers want. The customers want faster download. They don't want 5G, they don't know what 5G is. They don't know what the Internet of Things is. So I implore you, slow down this train. Please, for the sake of your grandchildren, slow it down. Thank you.>>Thank you Reinette
[{'start': 23, 'end': 30, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 43, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1282, 'end': 1290, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Barbara Daily: my name is daily, i'm from the public. and i couldn't say it any better than this lady, or the lady on behalf of mother nature. this bill scares me, that's why i've been here all day and i have to speak up for your mothers, your fathers, your children and everybody in this room who has a great job. but this isn't going to help their health. and i know there's some people here that are going to testify about the problems with the health. and it's going to kill our bees, we won't have oxygen from our trees. i don't know that you want this on your hands. please, don't do this. use fiber optics, it's a better way. thank you.
[]
Mark Graham: good afternoon, senators. my name is mark laura graham and i represent scientists for wired technology. i only drove 45 minutes to get here but i have been waiting here since 8:30. thank you so much. certainly, and the science marches across the country this past weekend one sign read at the start of every disaster movie is a scientist being ignored. sb 649 is a disaster movie. it would bring cell tower antennas from where they are currently placed to 100 feet in the air, and thousands of feet from homes, to only 20 feet in the air, and 20 feet from homes. this will create a public health nightmare, with a wide range of short-term and long-term health impacts. please don't ignore our best scientists. small cell radiation is pulsed modulated radio frequency microwave radiation, i'll call it rfr for short. in december 2014, a california medical association resolution stated that peer reviewed scientific evidence demonstrates adverse biological effects of rfr. including immune system dysfunction, altered brain development, sleep and memory disturbances, sperm dysfunction, heart damage and brain tumors. in may 2016, dr. ronald melnick, the lead designer of the national toxicology programs 16 year, $25 million study on the cancer causing properties of cellphone rfr said that, the hypothesis that rfr causes health effects has now been proved. we saw increases of gliomas, brain cancers and schwannomas of the heart. the same cells that became cancerous in rats are the cells that have been reported to develop into tumors in humans. in other words, the united states government says cell phone radiation causes heart cancer and brain cancer. the committee should reject this bill because rfr is hazardous to human health. it penetrates the brain, the heart and the reproductive organs, causing injury to all of them. it also causes early dementia for people in their 40s and 50s. this bill will create chronic health problems for millions of californians every day. imagine if you cannot sleep in your home. you have a pounding migraine headache, and ringing in your ears because of radiation from the small cell. you can't function at work or at school the next day. the committee should require the bill's author, to my right, to prove that, as they will be installed and operated, these small cells will not create a public health hazard. californians need that assurance before you vote on this bill today. ddt, the pesticide, vioxx and tobacco are all products that were once claimed to be safe but were known by industry at the time to be hazardous. here we go again. the best reason a local government could have for saying no to small cells, is to protect the health and safety of their residents. the bill would violate article one section one of the california constitution. which guarantees our inalienable right to pursuing safety happiness and privacy federal rfr guidelines do not protect against health hazards, as the flyer i delivered to your office on friday proves. please don't ignore the scientists. don't create a public health disaster. thank you senators.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1134, 'end': 1148, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rylan Gervase: all right, good afternoon, mr. chair and members, my name is rylan mark gervase. i'm with the california special districts association. we are regrettably opposed unless amended to this measure. however, i would like to thank the author for his recent amendments on the 18th which removed the conflicting audit requirements which were proposed in an earlier version, as well as the amendment he accepted in committee today. i just wanted to start off by saying that our members, without a doubt, support a streamlined process to dissolve districts that are no longer serving their intended purpose. however, we do wish to ensure that this bill does so in a fair and feasible manner. we do agree with many of the issues raised in the committee's analysis. for instance, the bill requires lafcos to dissolve districts classified as inactive after one public hearing. our proposed amendments suggest that lafco be required to verify that the district is truly inactive. and conduct a two-hearing process to allow for public engagement before considering dissolution. as written, a paperwork mistake could result in the cutting off of public services with little warning. also, the bill requires districts that have not submitted their audits or other financial information to the controller's office to be classified as idle. and requires lafco to consider their dissolution after two years. we find that sb 488 is unnecessarily hasty by dictating the conclusion of the lafco review. when the issue may simply be one of governance or improper paperwork filing procedures, which would not be best solved by dissolving the district in question. we request that lafco be allowed to consider other options besides dissolution in order to remedy the problem. this bill further prohibits districts from objecting to their own dissolution. we don't find any benefit from prohibiting those who have the best knowledge of the district, as well as the services that they offer, from speaking on the issue. and we respectfully request that this be removed from the bill. furthermore, the bill requires every district, regardless of status, to file a statement of purpose with their financial paperwork. we suggest limiting this to the districts that have been classified as idle under the bill. as the information provided in the statement is unlikely to be useful for districts who are operating at a high efficiency. we also suggest that districts who are required to submit a statement simply provide their most recent municipal service review, in order to ensure the information is accurate. we are supportive of the bill's efforts to provide a list of services funded by property taxes. however, we would like to see that this list includes the amount of property tax diverted from the educational revenue augmentation fund, which backfills the state general fund. as well as the amount of property taxes diverted to former redevelopment agencies, in order to provide a complete picture of where our property taxes are going. we have submitted amendments to the bill that address all of the concerns i mentioned. and they would improve the due process afforded to districts by the bill. we have submitted those amendments to the author and committee staff, and we respectfully urge the committee to consider them. thank you, and i'm open to any questions.
[{'start': 61, 'end': 79, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pamela Miller: i'll talk fast. good afternoon again, chair mcguire, members of the committee. i'm pamela rylan miller representing the california association of lafcos. i want to first start by thanking senator wieckowski and his staff for working with us. we've been in conversations for quite a while now on this bill. we've suggested a number of amendments, which you have been agreeable to, and we thank you very much for that. we currently do have an oppose unless amended position, and i want to talk a little bit about that. we agree with a number of the concepts in the bill, and really appreciate the senator wanting to create a streamlined process for lafcos to use to dissolve inactive districts with one hearing. and the idea of the increased communication with lafco by allowing lafco to receive the financial reports directly from the district at the time they are filed with the sco. but conceptually and procedurally, there's still a number of things that concern us that we feel need to be worked through. i heard the senator say that he's willing to take the amendment that the committee recommended to clarify which kinds of districts this deals with. that was one of our concerns. i would add that in the committee analysis, it quotes section 56044. but that only addresses independent special districts, and lafcos have authority over more than just independent special districts. and so i would suggest that we consider 56036.6 instead, for a more inclusive look at those districts for which lafco has authority. there's a lack of clarity on the process for dissolving inactive districts. and we would like to see a mechanism for the lafco to be notified of the district's status. and like my colleague at csda indicated, it's appropriate for lafco to have a short staff report. for the lafco to verify the information that the subject district has actually met all of the sco's requirements of being inactive as defined in the statue. and they should be providing that for the public hearing. i agree with my csda colleague that the process does not allow for the subject district to voice their objection, if they have any, to the proceedings. and we believe that's their right as part of the due process. we have a concern over the new category of idle district, and feel there is still some work that needs to be done pertaining to that. in it, there's an inherent presumption that an idle district meets the criteria for being an inactive district after two years, and therefore, should automatically be dissolved.well, i'm going to talk faster. so just want to say that we are going to be providing some suggestions that would clean that up a little bit. that it is a little more streamlined to have lafco initiate that dissolution is a very costly thing for us. the author acknowledges cost of reporting reporting requirements. we have small budgets. a lafco that has an annual budget for $10,000, this kind of thing could cost as much as $50,000. so again, we're going to be proposing some amendments for the author to consider. appreciate all of the work that you've done with us so far, and look forward to continuing to work with you.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 51, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 83, 'end': 102, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 196, 'end': 206, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jean Hurst: Good afternoon, Mr Chair, members. Jean Hurst here today on behalf of the Association of California Healthcare Districts. We allign our position with the folks from CALAFCO and the CSDA. We think the process needs to be practically implementable at the local level and would urge your consideration of those amendments.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dorothy Johnson : good afternoon, dorothy pamela johnson with the california state association of counties. i'll align my comments with those of ms lange and also the comments captured under comment six in the variable done analysis. thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 38, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 130, 'end': 135, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ed Morrissey: Good afternoon Mr. Chair and Members, my name is Ed Morrissey. And I'm with Los Angeles County Council. I represent the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors. Los Angeles County is strongly opposed to SB 792, which would create a Measure B Oversight Committee in Los Angeles County. First, let me be clear, Los Angeles County continues to follow the language and original intent of the Measure B ballot measure. I must stress that Measure B not only funds trauma care, but also emergency medical services and bio-terrorism. Los Angeles County's hospital system has always been the backbone of the trauma system county wide. There are 15 public and private trauma centers in the county, and nearly 30,000 trauma patients were treated in fiscal year 2015-16. LA County's two owned and operated trauma centers treated over 10,000, or over one-third, of those trauma patients. It should be noted, just to correct the record, as far as the trauma volume for Antelope Valley, they are actually third from the last in terms of overall trauma volume. Moreover, county operated trauma centers treated 74% of indigent trauma patients countywide. Given the statistic, the county's Department of Health Services must rely on Measure B funding to continue to provide critical trauma care and emergency room care services. Los Angeles County already has advisory committees relating to the allocation of Measure B funds, including the Trauma Hospital Advisory Committee and the Emergency Medical Services Commission. These committees include representatives from private hospitals, physicians. Including a trauma surgeon, fire departments and including an individual from the American College of Emergency Physicians. And five members from the public, appointed by each board member. Our Board of Supervisors have been proactive in increasing the number of trauma centers within the county to help ensure access to life-saving trauma services. Since the passage of Measure B, the Board of Supervisors have expanded Measure B funds and voted to approve annual affiliate hospital. California Hospital, and soon to be up and running Paloma Valley Hospital's new trauma centers and thereby eliminating any underserved areas within the county. The board has also Allocated Measure B funds among the non-county hospitals in proportion to the value of trauma related care for the uninsured patients those hospitals serve. And for the additional cost to maintain readiness, such as on-call physicians, surgeons and operating room staff. SB 792 is unnecessary because the Board of Supervisors recognizes the importance of revisiting the Measure B allocation methodology. The County Department of Health Services continues to work with the non-county hospitals to develop a new allocation methodology. SB 792 would statutorily rewrite the language of a locally approved ballot initiative. And would needlessly impose new and resource intensive requirements on a county by creating a new bureaucracy to duplicate oversight. This violates the will of the voters. In addition, SB 792 sets a bad precedent to allow an outside Commission and the state to control or to participate in the distribution of not only measure B funds but potentially any and all locally approved taxes and revenues. One note as well. There has been discussion back in 2002, when the county implemented measure B, that there was an oversight Commission. This was referenced in the state Audit Committee. That oversight Commission, and I was personally involved in that Commission, was an implementation oversight Commission, whose sole purpose was to implement measure B. So that's the reason why the Commission did its job and then no longer had to meet. And one other issue as well. There has been discussion about the state Audit Committee. So the state audit came in a few years back, and there were 10 recommendations provided by the State Auditor. Four of the 10 related to an assessment to be performed by the American College of Surgeons, and really recommended that the county an ACS survey to look at four things. Those four were really one recommendation. So in total, there were seven recommendations by the state Audit Committee. The county fully implemented five of seven. The only two it didn't implement were the ACS survey and of course the oversight Committee. Based on the forgoing, I urge a no vote on SB 792, and I'm happy to answer any questions.
[{'start': 49, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dorothy Johnson : Yes, good afternoon Mr. Chair and members, Dorothy Johnson with the California State Association of Counties. We are concerned about the precedent-setting nature, potentially, of this measure. And while we appreciate the Committee's recommendations and analysis, we do remain opposed for many of the reasons again that Los Angeles County stated. But more largely, because of the possible impact on future voter approved taxes.
[{'start': 43, 'end': 58, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Maria Gutzeit: thank you. again, my name is maria dorothy gutzeit. i'm board president for newhall county water district. 10 years ago, i attended a brief meeting with a few directors from castaic lake water agency. and i shocked my fellow board member by walking out of that meeting. they told us they had all the answers, and that our district was doing it all wrong. this time, we had new faces involved, we had a mediator, two years of talks for a legal settlement. and still, many meetings we thought that would be our last. however, we have a common goal, which is better water management in our valley. we conducted extensive outreach, more than 30 meetings, 5 public workshops, 2 polls, direct mail, email, and social media. and the decision was down to the wire. days before our december 16th decision, we had 14 of our 15 board members supporting. this is a good deal for newhall county water district customers and our valley. it's the best deal we ever expected, and we don't think, we'll get here again. there are over 1200 public water agencies in california. they are asked to implement regional programs. they are asked to share, and grant funding and use them efficiently, and they're asked to plan on a watershed basis, yet time and again we see turf battles and infighting. we want to change that. we look forward to a fresh start, and we ask for your support. on sb 634.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gary Martin: thank you, mr chairman and members of the committee. i'm gary maria martin, i'm now the vice president of the castaic lake water agency board of directors. when we voted, we voted in favor of the settlement agreement, which called for the consolidation of the castaic lake water agency and the newhall county water district for the simple reason that it's in the best interest of the people that we serve, and it's the right thing to do. looking at the map of our collective service areas, it's clear that we can do better. i believe, that the most effective way to manage water in a manner that is most beneficial to the people in the santa clarita valley is through a collaborative, and cooperative approach under a single unified and publicly elected government structure. this unified approach would help promote sensible, and sustainable water management and this bill would create such a structure. the overall cost of production, importation, and distribution of water in the santa clarita valley currently includes redundant operation, management, and governance costs that could be reduced by consolidation under a single unified water district. incorporation of best management practices of all agencies would also benefit, and would improve the overall service quality and efficiency. and lastly, there's an obvious need to eliminate the needless, and costly disputes between our districts. thank you.
[{'start': 57, 'end': 74, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Wendy Ridderbusch: Thank you, Mr Chair and members. Wendy Ridderbusch with the Association of California Water Agencies. While this has been complex, it's taken quite awhile, I think, it really will, to Senator Wilk's point, become a model for other entities throughout the state that are looking to find efficiencies and come together. Thank you, I support it.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 192, 'end': 196, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Pamela Miller: Good morning, Chair Mcguire, Members of the Committee. My name is Pamela Miller, and I'm here representing the California Association of LAFCOs. Thank you. I want to start by thanking Senator Wilk, his staff, the sponsors of the bill and your Committee staff, a lot of hard work. As you've already said, has gone into working up the amendments on this bill. And CALAFCO really appreciates the amendments that have been taken so far. Our biggest concern which was to preserve LAFCO authority for the most part has been addressed in the current version. The reality is that by statute, LAFCO cannot deny the reorganization when both of the district boards approve the action. So this is really a unique situation. The bill as currently written requires the district to submit an application for conditions that would be binding. And so, that's virtually the conceptual equivalent. So we appreciate them taking that amendment. Mr. Novak, who is the executive officer for Los Angeles LAFCO, will be addressing a few minor technical things that still need to be addressed. So we look forward to working with the authors and sponsors on those amendments and ultimately the removal of our opposition. Thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 66, 'end': 79, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 192, 'end': 196, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 928, 'end': 933, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Paul Novak: good morning, my name is paul, executive officer of the local agency formation commission for the county of los angeles. first of all, i want to thank the committee for the opportunity to testify today, i want to sincerely thank senator wilk for his leadership on the issue, for meeting with us and being so open to the input that we have offered about some of our concerns about the bill. i also appreciate the staff of your committee that has been great to work with. i would like to commend both districts for being open to the input that we've provided to them concerning some of the issues that we have with sb 634. we are grateful that our input was considered and a good chunk of that input was incorporated into the recent amendments. i would also add that the amendments are going in the right direction. we are of the belief that there's more work to be done, and two issues in particular. one is the clarification and determination of active powers versus latent powers. and secondly, the issue of who can, which agency can or cannot provide retail water service within the boundaries of county water district 36. but again, we will continue working with senator wilk with his staff with the two districts and their representatives, as well as legislators and staff as the bill moves forward. and thank you again for the opportunity.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 237, 'end': 241, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1174, 'end': 1178, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Stacy Fortner: Anyway, my name is Stacy Fortner and I am a Valencia Water Company customer. And I was thrust into this world of water in February of 2014, when I received a letter from the CPUC stating that my water company was no longer regulated. Having dealt with the CPUC in my profession for many years, I was immediately concerned. I contacted Valencia Water Company and was told that they were recently purchased by CLWA in that they are no longer a public utility. I started asking a lot of questions. I sent Public Records Act requests and they were rejected and denied. I was told that they don't respond to PRA requests. I know that wells have been polluted with ammonium perchlorate and TCEs. Some have closed, water levels have dropped and I am not able to get any answers to my questions, and this is disturbing. I read the bill, it was immediately struck that Valencia Water Company in District 36 was not included in what was originally hailed as one valley, one water. It has since morphed into one valley, three waters, and no one is really sure what to call it. Even with the amendments, more questions are unanswered than before they were introduced. Why isn't Valencia Water Company subject to LAFCO law and this picking and choosing of the sections of LAFCO law's confusing and appears to show favor to one district over all others. Water districts should not be allowed to come to the Legislature to arbitrarily be moved from certain obligations. This sets a terrible precedence. Why isn't it included in the bill immediately? What does the process look like to get Valencia Water Company included in the new agency? And who's going to enforce the issue when they don't comply with the six month time frame? What happens if they don't ever comply? If the board decides not to follow the laws, they have previously done inviting litigation that they saw innocently claimed victim too today and make Valencia public. Who will enforce this part of the law? How does this affect the GSA currently information? This bill insidiously and covertly builds a wall of protection around a private interest instead of protecting the public transparency of water use in data in our valley. Public protections were removed and based on the lineout versions that I read, it appears to be deliberate. These include public protections such as the Brown act, LAFCO annexation processes, the absence of elections for many years. I ran for this board in the last election cycle, and garnered nearly 48% of the vote. The cornerstone of my campaign was opposing this takeover. Furthermore, the simple issue is the districts in SB 634 were not designed to concentrate on any protected class minorities in any of the districts this bill creates. So that a minority person has a greater chance to get elected. The districts that were created to protect existing board members, this does not comply with the California Voters' Rights Act. This is a governance issue that was not addressed in the staff report at all in its opposition, but it is in opposition letters. The Committee should reject 634 and direct the issue return at a later date with voting districts that are in compliance with CVRA. This is the norm for CLWA. If you can't get what you want, you rewrite the law in your favor and take it. It happened in 1999, it happened in 2013, and now again with this bill, SB 634. This bill is not the way that laws are supposed to be written and our legislators are supposed to write laws to protect us and not strip us of our voting rights. Or access to our water information or protect the interest of one over many. This bill is not written well enough to be considered a new law. And there are too many issues created by this bill, and few are solved. You're rewriting water law here, and I know that it can be better. And while I'm not expecting perfection, I am expecting more from our legislators. This bill makes bad law, this is my last sentence. This bill makes bad law. Public and private .. of Valencia Water Company is not sanctioned anywhere in California law. And it should not codify it here. As it will create the basis for other private companies to take advantage of the lack of transparency. Thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ed Dunn: Yes, and I drove the six hours also, and my wife did, and-  It's our second trip, because we came up to Mr. Hertzberg's Committee.  We hope this could get resolved. Most of the information- Do you mind just introducing yourself, just for the record? My name is Ed Dunn. I was elected director on both the Newhall County and the CLWA. But I will serve the people and then make sure I never got re-elected. And so, that happens. But, anyway, it seems like the bill is a good batch of creative right primarily by the water company. I'm not blaming legislative for that because you people have to go by the information that you're given. But so much of it was without the public input. And when they had the dog and pony public input shows which seems like it was a year or a year and a half later. They were basically telling us what they were going to do but there was a lot of public opposition and that information didn't get out there. And so, finally when this lady ran for the Cal State Lake Water Agency three other ladies did to. And the purpose was to sample the public and see how the public felt about this merger. So they ran on the basis they were opposing the merger with the Cal State Lake Water Agency. They got 34,000 opposition votes. To this merger. Now compare that to the 300 samples that the polling company did for Castaic Lake and that case Castaic Lake's using that for part of their justification. The other part of their justification was to settle a lawsuit because Newhall County Water District was suing them. And they said in public meetings they held, they said there were many, many, many discussions and opposing views and problems between CLWA and Calstic Lake Water Agency. Well, I got a public record from the Newell County water district. There was three, three lawsuits Three Newhall County water lawsuits in over 20 years. And then the records of the genders and the minutes showed none of this that they're putting out there to public that this is settling lawsuit. Their information is mostly falsehoods. And it's rush, rush, rush nobody knows it better than you legislators how they're rushing it. This type of thing should never be rushed, probably should be done over a period of time with lots of input etc. But there's no workshop where the public can talk to them and they ignore everything that the public brings even the 34,000. So I think that the and when they turn around and say the territories are all fragmented, well why not? And New Hall County Water is the only supplier back in 1926. The others didn't come on until almost 70. And so they said we were paralleling the water pipes. Well who was paralleling who? Who was the ... So it's a lot of this-
[{'start': 107, 'end': 116, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 259, 'end': 266, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Joan Dunn: Good afternoon, first of all, I am Joan Dunn. I have been a director on the Newhall County Water District and vice-president on that same board. I have followed both of these agencies for over 20 years. I'm oftentimes one of the only people there at their public meetings. We have tapes, we have all sorts of things, some of them have been submitted to the court, because they said, they didn't know the records were. Anyway, they're very deceitful, I am very distressful of Castaic Lake Water Agency. And what I would like to say, I would like to talk to your hearts That's for the community of Santa Clarita. Because there so many people that are against this and that isn't coming out. A lot of them work, I have walked and walked and walked and talked to these people. And so I know how they're feeling. And you don't see the other side doing that. They're telling us what they're going to do. But I am very disturbed about the very last part of this bill, which will make them so like a kingdom where they cannot be dissolved. And I think that is not even democratic. Thank you.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kate Berniae: My name is Kate Berniae and I can do crunch. I would like to support the community and the right to have a voice in this matter. Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : Pamela's probably the best person or Paul to answer those initial questions.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 37, 'end': 41, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Shaw: Thank you, Mr. Chairman and member of the Committee. Michael Shaw of the California Manufacturers and Technology Association. And I also want to thank the Chair and staff consultant for working on this with the Senator and CMTA and Cal Tax. Because it is an important issue for us. I also want to thank Senator Galgiani, who is certainly a friend to manufacturing in California, for her commitment to following through on the bill from a few years back. To fix that, address some issues, and to make it a more powerful incentive to bring manufacturing back to California. She's already talked about the value of manufacturing jobs, with an average wage of $86,000 a year. It's important to draw a distinction between that and the average wage of the state, which is $62,000 a year. So there's a significant increase in that as compared to the average wage of the state. So more manufacturing jobs provides more opportunities for California families to improve their quality of life, to provide more opportunity for their children. And to take care of their loved ones. So we would like to see more of that come back to the state. There is a great opportunity that California is currently missing out on. There is a re-shoring of manufacturing jobs taking place coming back from overseas. For a variety of concerns, increased costs of operations in other parts of the world. In addition to concerns about intellectual property protection. And so we have an opportunity to do something here in California that will help attract more manufacturing to the state. Currently, or I should say, between 2010 and 2015, about 130,000 manufacturing jobs were reshored from overseas. California got 1,500 of those jobs. There's a lot of opportunity that we have there to grow. One of the important aspects of this bill for us is the certainly that it provides. By extending the sunset date on this exemption, we give manufacturers a little more confidence that it'll be in place for them in the future. Any many of them are making business plans 10 plus years out. So if they don't have confidence, they make decisions to do things elsewhere and that is important. We hope that this bill move forward with the amendments and the Chair's support because it will help bring more manufacturing job back to California. Create more opportunity for California citizens and our residents who are living here, working hard providing for their families.
[{'start': 53, 'end': 65, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 311, 'end': 319, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dennis Albiani: dennis gary albiani, the family business association of california, i also represent several processors, home alliance, the california warehouse association, the california grain and feed. by doing this, we can further integrate more processing, bring more higher value jobs into california. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tom Scott: Tom Scott, National Federation of Independent Business. We have 22,000 members, of those 22,000, 1,200 are manufacturers. Anything this state can be doing to help the manufacturing community is a positive, so I commend the Senator, the sponsors, this is good stuff. Thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Jenkins: yes, mr. chair and members, amy, on behalf of the california cannabis industry association, in strong support.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Murphy: appreciate that, sorry to be late, jason on behalf of the university of california, we are in strong support, thank you, senator.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Meuel: Mary Meuel with the CSU, we're also in support of the bill, would like to thank the author, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ian Padilla: mr chair and members, padilla with the coalition for adequate school housing and we do respectfully oppose the bill. basically, we think the bill would encourage voters to vote no on the belief that the only reason they're being told of their ability to challenge is that shouldn't vote on the measure. we do think that this makes it more difficult for local communities to raise needed education funds and so we respectfully oppose. thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Juliet Christian-Smith: great, thank you. my name is juliet. i'm with the union of concerned scientists. we're a non-profit with a half million members, and our members support science based policy solutions. we're here to support sb 252 as sound policy based on science. i myself am a scientist. and i wrote a report in collaboration with a group of groundwater managers called measuring w hat matters. which provides practical guidance on implementing the sustainable ground water management act. the department of water resources has since adopted several of the approaches in the report. but i can just give you the brief summary here. which is that the report can be summed up with the adage, you can't manage what you don't measure. and without this bill, i am afraid that is exactly what we are doing. ground water is at its core a shared resource. and as such, many people have compared ground water to a shared savings account. essentially what is happening right now is that land owners all have checkbooks to the same account. water managers and land owners don't know who is saving, who is spending, or how much they might be spending. even after the passage of the sustainable ground water management act. we saw over a thousand new well permits granted in the most critically over drafted basins in the state. these are areas that are in crisis. they are withdrawing groundwater at rates only seen in two other places in the world. and it can be detected from outer space. if you live in one of these basins, or if you are in charge of achieving sustainable ground water. you have no idea how new groundwater pumping might affect your ability to achieve sustainability which is now required by law. in other words groundwater managers and users in critically over drafted basins are set up for failure. and under the current system it's not just one person who will fail. it is potentially the entire basin that will come under state intervention. so this bill really addresses the dysfunctional state of affairs simply by creating transparency around new well permit applications. this is an exceedingly modest bill. it provides necessary information to achieve sustainable ground water management. legally ground water is a shared and limited resource. and all this bill does is ay that if someone wants to create a new right, tap a new well to use this shared and limited resource. they should let their neighbors know who also have a financial and legal stake in its use. it does not change existing law, it does not trigger additional review. it simply requires transparency around writing checks from the shared account. and it only applies in these critically overdrafted conditions. great. so, sb 252 is a simple and data-driven measure. that ensures sgma, sustainable groundwater management act is successfully enacted. i'd just like to summarize my statements with the chair's insightful words. public input is the foundation of strong communities. we couldn't agree more, and we urge your aye vote.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debbie Orrs: thank you, my name is debbie dennis orrs i'm staff attorney with the community water center. community water center is a non profit based in the central valley. we we work on ensuring all californians have access to safe clean and affordable drinking water. in tulare county there are currently over 1600 reported well failures. and since january 1st, 2014 they have issued over 6400 well permits. community water center's been working with county for over two and a half years now. just to get a well construction ordinance passed. this is something that they're required by law to update. and we still do not have a new ordinance. so getting a groundwater ordinance often seems unobtainable, even though we've been working with staff on drafting such an ordinance. this is not just in tulare county. in fresno county a year and a half ago they voted to move forward on our ground water ordinance. applied and received funding from the department of water resources to develop the ordinance. and eventually decided not to move forward. this is why we're supporting sb 252. sb 252 implements commonsense protection for people dependent on wells. while opponents may state that any sort of restriction upon well drilling harms their ... rights. which is your right as a property owner above a groundwater basin to pump groundwater. counties already have the authority to implement restrictions. furthermore, the california constitution requires that our water is put to reasonable and beneficial use. furthermore, case law states that, under the correlative rights doctrine, reasonableness is determined in relation to others. therefore, you do not have a protected right to ground water, if your use is harming other correlative rights holders. so sometimes all you need to prevent impact is better well spacing or a slight reduction in use. if we can make these changes before well drilling even occurs, we could prevent well interference lawsuits. which is something that people are afraid that this bill will result in. and finally, this is worth repeating. sgma reserves the right for land use decisions, including well permitting, to the counties, not the gsas. thus, this bill does not impact or impede the implementation of sgma. in fact, this bill requires collection of valuable data. that will help the gsas develop and implement, an effective and successful groundwater sustainability plan. thank you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rosanna Carvacho: Mr. Chair and Senator, Rosanna Carvacho here on behalf of the California Groundwater Coalition. In strong support of this very narrow measure. Thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: Kyle Jones of Sierra Club California and also on behalf of Audubon California.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Genevieve Abedon: genevieve debbie abedon on behalf of community alliance of family farmers, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Shobe: Brian Shobe with California Climate and Agriculture Network, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Abby Necarigo: abby genevieve necarigo with california league of conservation voters and environmental defense fund, in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Clary: jennifer abby clary on behalf of clean water action and leadership council for justice and accountability.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary-Ann Warmerdam: I'm happy to do so Mr Chair, members. My name is Mary-Ann Warmerdam. Good to see you Mr. Chair. I'm with the Rural County Representatives of California. We represent 35 counties in the state, 35 of the 58. A number of who are in local government in the impacted areas. I want to start by acknowledging that. Senator has been very cooperative and sitting with us and understanding our situation, but at this point unfortunately we continue to be opposed. I think i'd like to start out just by acknowledging that Local government, particularly local governments in the affected areas is not unaware of the danger to the ground water resource and in fact are putting all of their efforts in implementing sigma. As the primary ground water policy initiative in the State of California, there's a bit of a band width issue as it relates to local government being able to take on multiple tasks. In many of our counties there is not one individual who only does water issues. It is usually half a person or maybe not even a person. So that's a bit of a bandwidth issue that we would just like to bring to the Committee to acknowledge that this is another task upon which the counties may not have the resources to fulfill. I'd also like to To point out that we continue to work with the Senator on the CEQA concerns that this measure raises. As noted, well permits are ministerial actions. We continue to be concerned that this looks at a discretionary approach and requires a public hearing. And a level of transparency that while local government certainly wants transparency, moves us into an environment that we do not believe is appropriate. The other area that we continue to work, although we haven't quite gotten there yet, is integration into Sigma. We and we believe the Senator is committed to having this information be part of this Sigma package. But we are still a bit of a 18 month or so away from having those groundwater sustainability plans in place. So we think it's key that this information be included in that. I'd also like to talk a bit about some of the conflicting data about may come about. And what that means or does not mean in terms of a local agencies ability to adjudicate data about maybe presented by competing users within the based in itself. And with respect to a local land use decision. This does not impede that of course, but it does create an environment in which, the local government may not have the tools to adjudicate conflicting or competing information. And that leaves the pleasant conversation or what do we do with that information other then except it and provide it to the GSA. With that Mr. Chair I'd be happy to answer any further questions.
[{'start': 49, 'end': 67, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cara Martinson: good morning mr. chair, members of the committee. martinson on behalf of the california state association of counties. the association that represents all 58 counties in california would just like to echo the comments of my colleague ms. warmerdam from the rural county association. we do have an oppose unless amended position on the bill and would really like to thank the author and staff for working with us to continue to address some of our concerns. counties worked very hard on this sustainable groundwater management act sigma. we have a vested interest in seeing that it is implemented to its full capacity. we have looming deadlines coming forward and we're very concerned about how this bill might interplay with that process. and just like to echo the comments of my colleague, thank you.
[{'start': 50, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 238, 'end': 247, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dennis Albiani: Dennis Albiani on behalf of the Almond Alliance. The Association of California Egg Farmers. I'll be brief, pears,wheat, some other farm commodities, I won't go through Lauren's list. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 168, 'end': 174, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tricia Geringer: Mr. Chair and members Tricia Geringer Agricultural Council of California respectfully in opposition as well.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Valerie Nera: Good morning, Mr. Chair and members. Valerie Nera for the California Chamber of Commerce we're still opposed.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tyler Blackney: Tyler Blackney with the Wine Institute and with the permission of the California Family Winemakers, we're opposed. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert Gore: Robert Gore from The Gualco Group on behalf of Kings River Conservation District, respectfully opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Parra: laura jennifer parra on behalf of northern california water association in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jean Hurst: thank you mr. chair, jean laura hurst here today on behalf of the board of supervisors of santa clara county in support.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Justin Oldfield: mr. chair, members, justin jean oldfield with the california cattlemen's association, i want to support the efforts to bring back some pension payments. appreciate the author bringing the bill forward.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tyler Blackney: tyler justin blackney with the wine institute we also appreciate the senator's efforts and we are supportive of the bill, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Augusta: Good morning chair members. Brian Augusta on behalf of the California Rural Legal Assistance Foundation were the co-sponsors, just briefly because Mister Skinner has done a fine job explaining the bill but In the debate that we're all having this year around increasing supply. We think one of the most important policy choices we could make to address the lack of housing both affordable and market rate housing is a lack of land at the right densities in the right places. And this bill helps to address that. When a city adopts its housing element It's a point in time view of the land supply and its availability to meet the need. But we want to make the housing element a living document, so that as development occurs, we are continually sort of having a check-in as to whether or not that city continues to have enough land to meet its unmet need and so that's what this bill does. If a site is developed for a use other than the one identified in the housing element, do we still have remaining sites on which that need can be accommodated? If not, we need to steps not eight years from now in the next housing element, but now to identify a site and open up the market so that affordable developer can come in and build affordable housing, or as is often the case, a market rate developer comes in and develops a site. But in either instance, we need to continue to have that supply, so hat there is an opportunity for us to address the affordable housing needs. That identified an in housing element. That bill does this and for that reason we urge an aye vote.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 154, 'end': 161, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Anya Lawler: anya tyler lawler, on behalf of the western center on law and poverty. i know you're in a crunch for time so i will just echo the comments of my colleague and ask for your support of the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Paracet: michelle anya paracet with public advocates, we are cosponsors of this bill, and in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erin Niemela: Thank you Mr. Chair and members of Committee. Erin Niemela representing Bridge Housing. Bridge is one of the, if not the, largest nonprofit affordable housing developer in the state. We currently have about 2,000 units under construction. About 1,700 of those are in, pardon me, 1,400 of those are in Los Angeles. 700 of those units actually right in Watts, are reserved for very, very low income populations. If you don't mind, I'd like to take just a few seconds to throw some data points at you. For starters at Bridge Housing our average project takes about four to five years to get complete entitlements. About 56.5 people are waiting in line for each unit of housing that we build. In a project that we recently did in San Leandro, a project which was only 98 units. After four years of entitlements we had 10,000 people waiting in line for each of those units. That gives you a small snapshot of the housing crisis we face in this state. I think the analysis tees up some really meaningful issues. Especially as they relate to local control and discretion and the quality of life impacts on communities when decision making processes are streamlined and public input is streamlined. But I just want to point out that those local processes reflect primarily the viewpoints of those who already have people who are in housing in those communities. And I think that is why this discussion has been elevated to the level of the Legislature. Because as is so often the case, the Legislature is in the position of being the advocate for those who have no voice. And so those who aren't living in those communities yet, the societal impacts of those people not having homes. The lack of voice they have in this process. The no project alternative and the implications of that for society is the entire reason I think we are having this discussion. Because it can't be reflected in those local decision making processes. So we want to thank the Senator for introducing this bill. We want to praise him for finding that balance between limiting the scope of projects and raising a very high bar for the kinds of projects that would receive streamlining. But really doing meaningful streamlining in an effort to move this discussion further about how we reflect the needs of those who don't have a voice.
[{'start': 46, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kris Rosa: kris michelle rosa on behalf of the silicon valley leadership group. on an annual basis sblg surveys, its member companies at the ceo level to find out which issues are most important to them in terms of determining what it takes to have a healthy economy in the silicon valley. and for the past 10 year the answer to the survey has always been the same. housing attainability and affordability is really selected as the top impediments to employ recruitment in the silicon valley, the cause of our housing crunch is clear. demand constantly outpaces supply. silicon valley leadership group is encouraged by sb 35's direct approach to addressing planning shortfalls. for california to retain its role as the international innovation economy, we must ensure that our cities provide this necessary housing. sb 35 thoughtfully identifies a new way to make certain that cities across the state are investing appropriately in the housing development that we need to end our current crisis and retain our industries. last month, we released our silicon valley competitiveness and innovation project. and this was a multi-year effort to assess the overall economic health of our region. and among its findings, it was reported that between the years of 2010 and 2015, the economy added about 367,000 new jobs to our region. however, during that same time, only 57,000 new housing units were created. that's a huge problem. sb 35 is sorely needed as housing is one of the state's chief inhibitors to ongrowing prosperity. we ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Lane: Michael Lane with the Nonprofit Housing Association Northern California, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Genevieve Abedon: genevieve kris abedon on behalf of us green building council, in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tony Rice: Tony Rice representing the Los Angeles area Chamber of Commerce, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sonya Trouse: sonya genevieve trouse san francisco bay area renters federation, strong support.
[]
Chad Pradmore: Chad Pradmore, California resident, strong support San Francisco YIMBY organization.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jordan Bicket: Jordan Bickett, San Francisco YIMBY Party in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Laura Clark: hi, clark, executive director of yimby action, very strong support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Margo Parks: Thank you so much. Margo Parks on behalf of the California Council for Affordable Housing in support.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Colon: Tim Colon, San Francisco Housing Action Coalition, strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Pariset: hi i'm michelle with public advocates, we have not taken a position on this bill yet, but the author's office has been working with us and our coalition. and we look forward to the opportunity to continue that work, thank you.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jena Price: Mr Chair and members, Jena Price on behalf of the California League of Conservation Voters and the Natural Resources Defense Council. We appreciate all the work that the Senator's been doing with us. We do find that the environmental provisions within this bill are wonderful. We are working as part of a broader coalition and we are working to satisfy some of the remaining issues. Thank you.>>Thanks Jenna, good to see you.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 402, 'end': 407, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brian Augusta: Good morning Chair and members, Brian Augusta on behalf of the California Rural Legal Assistance Foundation and my colleagues at Western Center. We too have been working very carefully with the author and I echo his own comments about the amount of work he's put into the bill. It's trending in the right direction and we hope to be there soon as we continue to work with the author to make it the perfect bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Scott Wetch: mr. chairman and members, scott sonya wetch on behalf of the california state pipe trades council, the western states council of sheet metal workers, the state association of electrical workers, california coalition of utility employees, and the elevator constructors union in opposition to this bill. i'd like to preface my statements by saying, mr. chair, that i recognize i think that this bill's going to move out today for the purposes of negotiation. but we are sadly, sadly disappointed that this bill, despite the statements made earlier don't reflect major changes on the major issues from when it was heard in senator beall's transportation committee. my client's would suggest to this committee that this is the most radical and dramatic change in governance that you or any of the members will vote on in their careers in the legislature. this bill is not about incentives, as stated by the author. this bill is about punitive actions against local governments who had their only arrow in the quiver that allowed them to actually produce affordable housing, which was redevelopment, taken away from them several years ago. and now we seek to strip them of their complete control over local projects if they don't produce affordable housing. and i wish this bill was about affordable housing. but i think what the committee needs to understand is this bill, as it is written before you today, would allow a project of unlimited size. unlimited size that is 99% market rate housing, commercial and retail development. not affordable housing, commercial, retail and market rate housing to be approved in your local community without a single planning commission meeting or vote. without a single meeting or vote of the city council. the bill itself doesn't even provide for the most de minimis transparency provisions such as a public notice that a project is going to qualify for this ministerial permit or even one public hearing for the public to be able to have their concerns heard. because the issuance of a ministerial permit is the basis of this bill, it circumvents ceqa completely. so there's no mechanism for a city council, for instance, to address issues of traffic congestion, high concentrations of air pollutants such as nitrous oxides and ozone that exceed local air district thresholds. carcinogenic exhaust from diesel engines, or chemicals in soil and groundwater. there's no way for a local government to address issues of storm water runoff, sewage capacity, availability of transit, availability of retail, public safety issues. none of that is allowed because if you qualify as a developer for checking these boxes, you get a complete pass on ceqa and any local approval process. there's no place for a voice for working people and labor unions to raise issues of wages, hours, safety of the project, working conditions issues, qualifications of the developer and the contracts that are performing the work locally. because the definition of objective standards in the bill does not cover many things that local governments contain as general policies in their general plan, there would be no ability to enforce those things. things such as open space, public space provisions, conservation creek set back provisions, energy conservation provisions, police and fire service types of provisions, seismic and erosion, such as slope requirements and requiring of geo technical field review. there's just literally no way for a local government to raise the most basic of concerns about a project if it qualifies for this ministerial permit. to suggest, with all due respect to the folks who have worked on this bill, that this bill is ready for prime time, is a complete understatement. the bill that's drafted today, i would suggest, isn't ready for barstow public access television on a sunday morning. this bill needs a ton of work just to allow for the most basic rights of citizens, labor unions, community groups, to talk and help form projects so they fit a community. so we hope to continue to work with this committee to see some of those provisions incorporated.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 628, 'end': 633, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cesar Diaz: mr. chair and members, cesar on behalf of the state building and construction trades council. we've been working on this issue for quite a while now, since last year's budget. working with the administration, working with the legislature, and of course with senator senator wiener has invited us to various meetings. he asked for our concerns. he understands where we are on the framework of buy right and the administerial approvals. for the same reasons that scott wetch mentioned, there are many issues regarding that framework that don't strike the balance that was talked about before. we're talking about communities having a voice. well, the process that allows local governments to approve a project and condition what types of developments go into that project and the mitigation factors of how those projects impact the surrounding infrastructure like schools. it's something that we should look at here completely. we have been working with everyone, we'll continue to work with everyone. we understand this bill is going to move forward i do want to just stress one fact and in terms of our affordable housing often times we mistake that the people that are also building that housing qualify for medical. in fact four out of 10 construction workers are completely underpaid and are in poverty wages. three. out of 10 actually are receiving medi-cal, so that's a burden as well. so, when we're looking at these streamlining factors when labor does not have a voice and on how to condition these projects is problematic for us, and for our brothers and sisters who want to train people in the apprenticeship programs and give an opportunity to actually have that quality of life, to live in a good community, to buy a home and so forth, and to continue moving forward. so we ask that these members look at this bill and continue to work with us on the framework, because it is going to be a significant change, but we trust that labor will be protected as well the community voices. thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 274, 'end': 280, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 461, 'end': 472, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
David Jones: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. David Jones, on behalf of the cities of Burbank, Glendale, Marin cities, Murrieta, Pasadena, Sacramento, San Marcos, and Santa Rosa, in opposition.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alex Gibbs: Alex Gibbs, on behalf of the cities of Fullerton, Hayward, Tulare and Pismo Beach, in opposition. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: kyle, sierra club california, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Scott Wiener: Scott Wiener. Scott Wetch.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 14, 'end': 25, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Casey: Thank you, Senator. My name is Michael Casey. I'm a member of the CSD board at Fallen Leaf Lake. First of all, to confirm that this bill is one that we have no knowledge of any opposition about. Indeed, the community has been overwhelmingly in favor of finding a solution to the problem. And this specific solution that has now found itself before you. Fallen Leaf Lake is indeed a somewhat unique place. There are 291 cabins, and while they're well occupied during summer months, they are virtually snowed in and inaccessible in the winter time. There are two roads that lead into Fallen Leaf Lake. There are two lane road roads that time only one lane with turn outs, those are heavily congested in the summer time. But they're not plowed in the winter time, and so they're not accessible in the winter time. The community, there are no schools, there are no libraries, there are no other services. And so it's difficult for people to live there. We know of only three people for sure who live there full time. Two of them are surveillance officers, one for the east side cabins, and one for the west side cabins. And the other one is Barbara Craven who's in her 80s, lost her husband last month. The two of them had been residents for over 40 years, but that's it. There are also seven positions at Stanford Camp, which has a Sierra Camp at the lake. There's seven positions that call for full time people. Those people who fill those positions, as far as we know, they're not long term. Those positions turn over. So there are three people that we know of and we have a board that has, it's a five member board in accordance with the laws that prevail for CSD districts. We can't even reach a quorum with just the three full time people until 2011. It was understood by residents up there that if you wanted to be involved in Fallen Leaf politics, you registered at Fallen Leaf and that was absolutely fine. The El Dorado county elections office accepted that. Accepted that knowing the ballots would be mailed out to people in other addresses.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1137, 'end': 1151, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
David Anderson: good morning. my name is david. i'm a sometime resident, fallen leaf lake during the summertime. welcome. and i simply wanted to emphasize a couple of things. number one, the situation at fallen leaf is unusual. there are very, very few people who could legally qualify to vote under the district attorney's interpretation of domicile. secondly, the solution that we proposed in this bill was based on one the legislature had previously passed for the sierra lakes water district which is located on top of donner summit. and was then challenged as being unconstitutional, but was found to be constitutional for exactly the same reasons that we believe the bill for fallen leaf should be. that is that the statute was found to have a rational basis as a means to address a voting issue at sierra lakes. sierra lakes, the court found, was largely a summer community in an area of heavy snowfall in which had few voters who could qualify as resident voters. those are exactly the conditions that obtain at fallen leaf. and as a result of that, should the legislature choose to enact this, i believe it would be found to have a rational basis and be found to be constitutional. and i would also like to emphasize that we did poll the community up there a couple of times to determine whether or not this solution had the support of the community. it does. that includes the support of those members, who would qualify as resident voters. all have submitted letters in support of it. they are not concerned about their status as resident voters being diluted by a large number of land owner, or property owner voters, coming on board. and again, i thank the committee, and i thank our sponsors for their efforts. it's a small problem, but it does need a solution.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michele Pielsticker: yes, pielsticker, state board of equalization. the boe is in support of sb 13 as introduced. and, we believe that it will remove significant barriers to usage of the exemption and improve participation in the program. as to the amendments, we are still looking at the amendments. and, the amendments would have to go back to the board for further consideration as they significantly change the bill itself. specifically, we're looking at the useful life definition to determine, if it provides sufficient bright line test for us to administer the exemption.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Therese Twomey: good morning mr.chair and members. therese scott twomey with the california taxpayers association in support of the bill as amended. if i may clarify the useful life, cal tax as sponsors of a bill that you will hear later on in the committee. the useful life is a provision that we've been working with the board of equalization for the last several years and as amended, what the intent of the bill would do. along with the language that's being proposed by the committee would resolve the issue where the tax payers that are either expensing their equipment or depreciating their equipment are treated disparately. what the committee amendments would do, is would set a bright line clear test, that if a piece of equipment meets all of the criteria for qualifying for the tax exemption, then the useful life would come in and provide eligibility regardless of whether the piece of equipment is depreciated or whether it is expensed in a single year. and so, cal tax supports the bill as amended, thank you.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Shaw: chair and members of the committee, michael therese shaw of california manufacturers and technology association in support of the bill as amended. we think this is an important step forward in terms of making the manufacturing exemption more powerful in the state of california. and the question isn't going to be where companies are investing. or the question is going to be, are companies investing. in new technologies, more efficient, potentially more automated. but it's going to be where are they doing it and so there will still will be the need for skilled workers to address issues with the equipment to install, to operate. we'd like to se that done in california versus elsewhere around the country where there are sales tax exemptions on equipment already. we have an opportunity as more equipment comes and investments come back from overseas with the reshoring of manufacturing, we'd like that to stay in california and not fly over our state, thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tom Scott: scott, national federation of independent business. i just strong support as amended and appreciate the senators who are come behalf of small businesses. thank you so much.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Quirk: okay, assemblymember bill jonah quirk changing vote on ab 87, excuse me, ab 887 cooper, yes to no.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Richard Bloom: bloom changing vote on ab 887 from yes to not voting.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sharon Riley: good morning, mr. chair and members. please. sharon jonah riley on behalf of judical council, we are the sponsor of this bill and just briefly, i'd like to thank the assemblymember and her staff for working with us on this bill. as well as the chair, and his staff are working with us on the amendments.
[{'start': 45, 'end': 63, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Charles Margines: Thank you. Good morning, Mr. Chair and members, Charles Margines, presiding judge of the Orange County Superior Court on behalf of the Judicial Council. I've served on the bench just under 24 years. Before that, I spent 18 years practicing criminal defense, first for six and a half years as a deputy public defender in Orange County, and the rest of the time in private practice. I am certified as a specialist in criminal law by the Board of Legal Specialization of the state bar. Based on my extensive experience in criminal law, both as a practitioner and judge, I have every confidence that commissioners have the training, qualifications, accountability, and Independence to perform the duties that are authorized by AB 745. As this Committee knows, California continues to suffer from a critical shortage in the number of trial court judges. The ramifications are serious and far reaching and include a significant decrease in Californian's access to the courts, compromised public safety, and backlogs in some courts that inhibit fair, timely, and equitable justice. At the same time, recent rulings, legislation, and initiative measures approved by the voters, all have increased the workload of criminal courts. In our ongoing efforts to seek efficient solutions to ensure that justice is served, the presiding judges recommended that the Judicial Council sponsor this legislation. AB 745 addresses the burdens on courts created by the critical shortage of judges by allowing presiding judges to assign court commissioners to perform magistrate duties. The principal functions of magistrates include issuing search warrants, arrest warrants, fixing and granting bail, conducting preliminary examinations, and acting as on-call magistrates, when courts are not in session. The Judicial Council is confident that commissioners can perform magistrate duties with the utmost fairness and competence for four important reasons, number one, training. Commissioners are required to receive the same level and rigor of training as trial court judges which includes subject matters specific training on issues such as arrest and search warrants. When performing magistrate duties they will also use the same tools as judges such as bench guides which bench officers rely on for reference when considering search warrants and other matters. Number two, qualifications. Courts use rigorous selection processes when employing commissioners that are equal to the appointment process for judges. Number three, accountability. Like judges, commissioners are subject to the California code of judicial ethics and under the California constitution, they are subject to oversight by the Commissioner on judicial performance and number four, Independence. Like judges, commissioners are independent, and public or political pressure cannot be brought to bear on commissioners as the public cannot fire them. By expanding the authorized duties of commissioners to include duties currently performed by magistrates, AB 745 takes a first step to help address the critical shortage of judges by authorizing the presiding judges of San Bernardino and Riverside Superior Courts to assign magistrate duties to commissioners. Thank you, and I'm happy to answer any questions.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 34, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 48, 'end': 64, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ignacio Hernandez: Thank you, Mr. Chair and members, Ignacio Hernandez on behalf of the California Attorneys for Criminal Justice. I realized four blocks is my limit for sprinting to the capitol, in short order. It used to be five, and also three flights of stairs. First of all I want to commend the author for taking on this issue. For those of us who've been around for a while, we know this is a challenge that's been discussed many, many, times about judicial openings and the need for additional judges. We understand that need and we support that need generally and happy to engage in discussions with judicial counsel going forward. Where our concern comes in on this bill, is that we're now going to allow at-will employees to preside over felony cases and that is where our primary concern is with this bill, in particular with felony preliminary hearings. This would be the first, and I should clarify that, under current law court commissioners can handle all levels of felony cases with the consent of the parties. Repeat that, with the consent of the parties, that is current law. What this bill would do is allow court commissioners to preside over these felony cases without the consent of the parties. And as criminal defense attorneys, we have significant concerns about this, mainly because of the structure of the at will employment of these court commissioners. I don't think I have to tell all of you, as elected officials, how difficult it is to preside over tough Public Safety Committee hearings and hear very difficult Public Safety Committee bills and the amount of public scrutiny and pressure that is inherent in those discussions. You could imagine the difficulty it is for someone who is an at-will employee to preside over an alleged heinous crime and be the very first stop where there is evidence heard, witnesses cross-examined, and the first opportunity to have a case dismissed. And for the almost 2,000 attorneys that are members of our Association that I represent, we take those preliminary hearings very seriously and we try to go after bad cases and bad evidence in those hearings and we expect the judges to make very difficult decisions, it's not easy. And we do know that, most of the time, judges rule to hold these cases over for trial. But occasionally, we do win. I, myself, have won preliminary hearings on cases that were very controversial, stabbings, where the evidence just wasn't there and to my surprise and Delight, the judge made the difficult decision to dismiss it at preliminary hearings, very rare. How can we expect at-will employees, even though their bosses are essentially the presiding judge or the Committee of judges locally to feel comfortable enough to make these difficult decisions on a day in and day out basis? I don't believe, CACJ does not believe, that we should put court commissioners in that situation. That is not their duty, that is not their role. Lastly, let me add a couple of things, and I hope there's questions on this, because there's just so many layers to this. Now, two things. Number one, in review of the Judicial Council annual statistics, criminal filings are actually going down in California. In particular in the two counties that are covered, the overall criminal filings have decreased. For our purposes, felony filings have decreased and I have the numbers here in front of me. If I can turn to it, just a second, I don't have my glasses, I ran so quickly. But if you look at both San Bernardino and Riverside, the numbers for felony case filings have dropped significantly. I want to say in one county it was about 20,000, 19,000 annually, going down to about 15, just under 16,000. So we're actually seeing a decrease. So why is it that we're now going to push these commissioners to handle felony cases under the premise that there is somehow a growing caseload for these particular cases? Again, I'm only talking about the felony cases. If they want to expand into civil, family, other things, I will step back and let you debate that, but for criminal cases and felony cases in particular, over the objection of a criminal defendant, we just can't support that. I promise 10 seconds. Yeah, the other thing I mention in my letter is that, judges and commissioners are subject to papering. 176.6 which means, in particular, well both sides, but prosecutors tend to exercise that ability to challenge a judge and we've seen it over and over again when there are judges that rule in favor of defendants too often. Entire prosecutor offices will file this 176.6 motion simply to get rid of that judge so that they can push that judge into a civil rotation away from criminals. Imagine the target that a court Commissioner at-will employee will have if he or she rules in favor of the defense too often. Prosecutors will paper them out of, really, their role, under this bill. So we just think it's the wrong way to go, push them out into other cases, but for felony cases we ask that you not support that, thank you for all the time.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2784, 'end': 2788, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Steve Chambers: good morning, steve jonah chambers, western fairs association on behalf of california 78 fairs. we want to appreciate, ask for your aye vote. we greatly appreciate the author helping us try and rebuild a model for funding california's fair network. we had a model for 80 years called horse racing. it's not working anymore for us. we appreciate your aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maya Ingram: Hi, Maya Ingram from the ACLU of California. We're pleased to support this bill, because it removes barriers for low income individuals to vote. According to the US Census, 47% of adults with a annual family income of $20,000 or less, voted in 2012. Where in contrast with families with $100,000 or more incomes, 80% voted. AB 674 will help remove these barriers by ensuring that individuals can vote at any time of day on election day when it's a holiday, rather than at the crowded times before and after work. For those reasons we respectfully ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tyler Blackney: Yes, Chair, members. Tyler Blackney with the Wine Institute. We support the bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Jones: Thank you. Mr. Chairman and members, David Jones with the City of Santa Rosa in strong support of this important economic development project.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Skippa: mr. chair and members of the committee, mike steve skippa with alcohol justice. with all due respect to the assembly member who is my assembly member, this is a bill we can't support. it's a special interest bill, which will create an exemption for one special interest, it's death by a thousand cuts. the strong fabric of alcohol control in this state is being piecemeal, separated and done away with piece by piece over the years, and this is just another cut. unfortunately we can't support it. thank you.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jared Blinding: good morning mr. chairman and members, blinding on behalf of lucky chances casino, capital casino, king's casino, and seven mile casino in strong support, and thank the author for leadership on this issue.
[]
Melanie Cuevas: good morning, cuevas on behalf of the viejas band of kumeyaay indians, echo the comments previously stated. the recent amendments have moved our position from opposed to neutral, and we look forward to working closely with the author, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paula Treat: Paula Treat on behalf of the Pechanga Band of Luiseno Indians and the Colusa Indian Community, watch like a hawk.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Barry Brokaw: brokaw on behalf of the agua caliente band of cahuilla indians. we're watching like an eagle.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cathy Christian: mr. chair, members cathy mike christian for the united auburn indian community. we share the concerns and watching capabilities of our fellow tribal partners.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Baca: Good morning, Mr. Chair and members, Michelle Baca with the California Medical Association, in support of the bill, thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Fred Jones: And Fred Jones, on behalf of the California Council on Alcohol Problems, in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ben Johnson: Ben Johnson, LAO.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Newton: mark jonah newton, lao.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Adam Dorsey: adam mark dorsey, finance.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Erica Murray: Hello, I'm Erica Murray, I'm the President and CEO of the California Association of Public Hospitals and Health Systems, and I want to thank publicly Director Kentwell for her leadership and Medi-Cal 2020. As all of you know, the 21 public healthcare systems are deeply engaged in waiver performance work meeting very ambitious performance targets and working hard every single day to achieve those performance targets in order to provide more efficient, cost effective and patient centered care and we couldn't do that without the partnership of the department. And so, I want to thank her and her team for the leadership and the resources that go into making this possible.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 159, 'end': 167, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Linda Nguy: linda with western center on law and poverty. we appreciate the department's work on the whole person care and dti and would encourage that for the dti first mid year report due in august that that be made publicly available. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Janice Canalen: Janice Canalen on behalf of children's defense fund in the California Children's Health Coverage Coalition. We want to just strongly support the department's efforts to improve dental health for children with the children's access crisis that California is facing. And we look forward to working with the department to support efforts to improve screening and continuity of care in local pilots. And we hope that the pilots will be expanded to more communities and we're looking forward to the results and evaluation from those, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brianna Pittman: pittman with the california dental association. just, we're really pleased with the dental transformation initiative dollars that are in the waiver. we've been pleased to work with the department on several of the domains, including domain two. i think we're very, i know i've said this before, but very cautiously optimistic about the improvements that that program will make and very much looking forward to the data, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ben Johnson: hi, ben adam johnson, lao. i would just note that we're continuing to track the case load and enrollment trends for the ac optional expansion especially given the new state sheriff costs in 16-17, and even higher costs in 17-18. so look forward to the may revision budget and the case load assumptions that are therein.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tam Ma: good morning, mr. chair and members. ma with health access california, and we just are so proud of the significant strides that california's made in the last half decade to reduce the number of uninsured in california and thanks to our robust implementation of the affordable care act and our embrace of the medicaid expansion we have at this moment the historic low numbers for the uninsured and we've actually gone beyond federal law to also cover undocumented children and ensuring that as many californian's as possible have access to quality, affordable, comprehensive care. i think, right now as we speak, there are active efforts in washington to move the american healthcare act forward and i think while most of the attention in last recent days has been macarthur amendment and proposals that would really significantly undermine protections for people with pre-existing conditions, the underlying proposal, which does include significant cuts to the medicaid program, essentially effectively ending the medicaid expansion. it is still part of that bill, and that's something that is of great concern to us. i do want to thank director cantwell and the department for their quick work to put together a cost estimate about how that proposal would impact california both in terms of our budget. a cut of upto like $26 billion over the next decade, 4 to 5 million people losing coverage. that's been very helpful to our work in educating members of this legislature as well as our california congressional delegation about how this would proposal would impact us. so we continue to work on this and look forward to working with the legislature and the days and months ahead.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1146, 'end': 1154, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Linda Nguy: thank you. linda, with western center on law and poverty. we'd like to echo many of the comments made by health access. we appreciate the administration in implementing medical expansion. health coverage does save lives, and our continuing to push on the federal side. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Savage: Karen Savage, California Panethnic Health Network. I would like to echo the comments of my colleagues also note that Medical expansion significantly impacted Health coverage for communities of color and limited English proficient communities in particular. Also allowed us to expand access to mental health and substance use treatment for our entire MediCal population. So I'd really like to thank the members of this Committee as well as the department and the Governor for your advocacy to maintain those gains, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Alley : Good afternoon, I'm Jennifer Alley with the California Association of Health Plans. And we've requested a statement be deleted from the existing trailer bill language in the section deals with care plan option services are, which health plans have the authority to provide services that are outside of their contract with the state and so there is no reimbursement for those services. And so, what we're asking for is that for plans that offer care plan options outside of the normal scope of required services within, within the program that we have a separate grievance process for that. We don't want to have the broad health plan grievance process be available for enrollees for services that we're not contracted with the state to cover and so this, it's not new. It's an existing program. Current policy and direction from DHCS has required health plans to develop an internal grievance process when they offer these additional benefits or services and that they track them and report to DHCS what those are. This our trailer bill change which is kind of conformed with the current policy is.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 34, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 994, 'end': 998, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Peter Hansel: Hi, Peter Hansel with CalPACE, that's the California Association of PACE programs or Programs of All Inclusive Care for the Elderly. We are part of the coalition that whose recommendations are summarized in your agenda. And we think they're definitely worthy of consideration of ways to improve care coordination, assessments and building infrastructure, and so forth. One of the amendments deals with PACE, as was mentioned and I just want to spend a minute talking about that. So PACE is a specialized managed care program, essentially, for older beneficiaries, those who have pretty extensive needs. You have to qualify for nursing home level care to go into the program. It is currently presented as an enrollment option in the Cal MediConnect portion of the CCI, which is something we strongly supported because we think it should be available for beneficiaries at that level of care need. It is not in the MLTSS side of the CCI. So that would be the portion of the CCI involving both duals and non-duals that have to enroll in a Medi-Cal managed care plan for their long-term supports and services. We think this in inadvertently not part of CCI. We actually think the Department's intent may well have been for PACE to be among the managed care choices in that process and we'd like to work with the Committee and the Department on trying to make that happen. Thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Nguy: Thank you. Linda Nguy, with Western Center on Law and Poverty. We support the long-term services and support work group's proposed recommendation as we believe it'll promote care coordination. Particularly, we support deleting the lock-in provision, as well as clarifying the 12-month continuity of care. We are just now reviewing the health plan's requested amendments, but would like to see that there be some development of a comprehensive internal procedure to record and address complaints for care plan option services that is available and reviewable by the Department. And would also like to note that in terms of ending the interagency agreement between DMHC and DHCS in terms of the CCI Ombudsman, we do prefer that this stay with DMHC, as they do have the institutional knowledge and neutrality, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nancy Murrish: Hello, I'm Nancy Murrish for the Congress of California Seniors and I appreciate the opportunity, and all that I want to say is to reiterate some of the public comment that's already been made. We are part of this work group and support the continuation of the Cal MediConnect and encourage review of the proposed amendments. Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Janet Heath: Good afternoon, my name is Janet Heath. I'm with the MSSP Site Association and I wanted to reiterate our approval and support of the LTSS work group's proposal and also to ask for your support in the directives established by the Assembly Sub One Committee, directing the LAO to help us write some SRL, Supplemental Rules Language, on MSSP, and its relationship in this transition. And we thank the Department for their willingness to work with us and the LAO's office for their undivided attention to this issue right now. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Teresa Ogan: hi, i'm teresa. i'm the site director for the mssp program serving sacramento, placer, and yolo counties and i also just want to reiterate my support for continuing to have the work groups and continuing discussions about how to transition these frail seniors in these programs. thank you.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Nguy: nguy with western center on law & poverty. would like to reiterate many of the comments made by cpehn. we do appreciate the department's effort on this very heavy lift, and would prefer that some of the responsibilities remain with dmhc. as a regulator, they have experiences and have a different perspective then as a payer. and so, we would hope that some of those responsibilities would remain with tmhc. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 96, 'end': 101, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tam Ma: Great. Tam Ma with Health Access. I want to align myself with the comments from CPEHN and Western Center. Also want to note that we have sponsored much of the legislation around network adequacy over the years and just want to strengthen oversight over network adequacy, so there are ongoing conversations through the two policy bills to implement the managed care rolled out. What's the best way to go forward in terms of Doing the time and distance standards for certain provider types, and how do we do it in a way that makes sense with the existing structure that is in law now? So we look forward to continuing those conversations.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 80, 'end': 85, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Alley : Jennifer Alley with California Association of Health Plans and I'd like to align my comments with LHPC. We are all of us working very hard to address, to review and analyze the policy bills for the public hospital piece. It is a significant new risk to Medi-Cal managed care plans and we're just working to ensure that there is some risk mitigation language in there to offer some plans protections. Because it's a lot of water for us to carry. And again, we would also like to see some synchronization between the reporting requirements between the two departments. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Linda Ng: Linda Ng with the Western Center on Law and Poverty. We support the department's BCP proposal, although question whether it's sufficient. We do know that there are current wait times averaging 20 to 25 minutes for the ombudsman. We also support CPEHN's proposal trailer bill language to add as data collection.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 245, 'end': 250, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tam Ma: tam with health access. i want to align myself with ms. ng's comments, and also add that we're very pleased that the call volume has been slowly increasing at both the medical ombudsman, as well as the dmhc health center. however those numbers of calls received are still very tiny compared to overall enrollment, and we know that it's not because everyone's happy with the access and services that they're getting. and we also really echo the efforts at cpehn to improve data collection and everything, and this is all to fully implement the vision that mr monning had a few years ago when he authored the legislation to revamp the office of the patient advocate. and give it the ability to really look at all the different consumer call centers across all the various health agencies to kind of understand what is going on, how long people are waiting to get help with their problems with their health plans and whatnot. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 56, 'end': 58, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 558, 'end': 565, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bob Giovati: good afternoon, mr chair and members, bob ben giovati with the state council on developmental disabilities. the state council is formed by federal and state law to make sure that people with intellectual and developmental disabilities get the help they need. and in regards to the concept of the ombudsman, just like to speak generally for a moment, we have 12 regional offices throughout the state, one of the things we found repeatedly through surveys we've done and our trainings in communication is that yes, there are barriers to language and that the system itself is really confounding and confusing to the average person. and so what you see repeatedly is the situation where folks who have higher levels of education and more time to devote to fighting city hall, to use the vernacular expression, are able to get through and finally get the services and supports they need. whereas people who have english as a second language or from more disadvantaged communities and things of this nature struggle. so to the extent that we have proper funding and resources for somebody who could actually answer questions and direct individuals to the proper state agency or individual who can help them, this is really important. thank you so much.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stuart Thompson: thank you, mr. chair and members, thompson on behalf of the california medical association. i'll try to be brief with my comments. i know we have a lot of stakeholders at the table. some that can actually provide real-world experiences to the challenges that they face with the current medical system. but for the california medical association, the biggest barrier to access is getting an appropriate number of physicians to participate in the program. right now, we have about 40% of california's physicians provide about 80% of the services within medical, and that's a number as far as the number of physicians who participate that we want to raise. when our members talk about participating in medical, there are two reasons that they frequently cite, as to reasons that they don't participate or limit their participation. those are low provider rates and administrative burdens. right now, since 2008, since we've expanded the program after the aca, we've nearly doubled the amount of medical enrollees that are eligible for medical services in this state. about 14.3 million people, over a third of the state's currently enrolled in that program. we currently provide the second lowest rates compared to the 50 other states to the providers who provide these services.  since we've expanded, nearly doubled the program, during that same amount of time we've actually cut provider rates by 10%. so there's a lot of frustration, i think, within providers, especially physicians, that we're providing more coverage to people but we're not actually making the requisite investments in the system that links the coverage to actual services being provided. so for physicians, low medical rates, depending on their specialty, depending on where they're practicing, affects them in a number of different ways. some limit the amount of medi-cal enrollees they take, simply because they lose money or they break even on medical, so it's really a finite number that they can accept.  a lot of physicians stop accepting new medical patients. so i think for us, getting a system where we make targeted investments into provider rate increases will directly result in more access to care. simply getting more physicians participating in the program will directly result in more services being provided. and i think the state does a very good job at a primary care level linking up medical enrollees with those services. but where we see the major gap, the major problems in access to care is once they need a referral to a specialist, that's where we see medi-cal enrollees not getting the service, putting off the service, or eventually dealing with it in the emergency room. so for us those are the issues that we're working on. obviously some larger issues going on with provider rates, but i think i'll limit my comments to that during this panel discussion.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amber Kemp: Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and members. I'm Amber Kemp, Vice President Health Care Coverage with the California Hospital Association representing over 400 hospitals and health systems throughout California. Hospitals are a vital component of California's health care safety net, providing high quality health care services benefiting all Californians, insured and uninsured alike. Now that one in three Californians is enrolled in the MediCal program, including half of the state's children, and rely on the MediCal program for all of their healthcare needs, ensuring access to care is as vital as ever. The MediCal expansion is driving increased demand for healthcare services in California's hospitals. Nearly 1 million additional Medi-Cal patients a year are being treated in hospitals for acute care. Hospital Medi-Cal outpatient visits have grown by more than 4.4 million a year under the coverage expansion. The demand is driving over 2 million more MediCal members to hospital emergency rooms. The reduced payments to primary care physicians enacted during the economic downturn have also increased the demand for hospital services. When MediCal members don't have access to primary care providers or specialists, they often seek prevention in other non-urgent care and hospital emergency rooms. Providing preventative and primary care in EDs is inefficient and strains the entire healthcare delivery system. And though the Affordable Care Act expanded coverage for mental health and substance use disorder treatment, many MediCal patients still lack appropriate access to these services and they too seek care through the ER. The end result of the overuse of emergency rooms by Med-Cal patients is the health care system is spending millions, if not billions of dollars more every year treating patients who should be treated in more appropriate clinical and cost-effective settings. And this costs everyone more money. When Medi-Cal patients are admitted for inpatient services but no longer require acute care, many hospitals face significant challenges securing appropriate post-acute care. In these situations, patients typically exceed the average length of stay by several days, and sometimes weeks, and even months. Housing patients who no longer need acute care services in hospital beds is an inappropriate and costly allocation of resources that may be needed by other patients and is a factor in emergency room crowding. And often these challenges are masked because hospitals continue to provide treatment to these patients when the next level of care is not available. Providing coverage without ensuring access is a problem for the entire delivery system and it requires investment. MediCal provider payments are among the lowest Medicaid rates in the nation, only paying hospitals about 70% of the actual cost of providing care, leaving losses in the billions of dollars for providers. Hospitals have tried to ameliorate their losses under the Hospital Fee and ITT programs, mitigating about 40% of these losses, but leaving more than $5 billion in uncompensated care each year. And despite the massive underfunding government programs, significant administrative hurdles, and costs pressures, our hospitals are among the most innovative in the nation with per capita costs that are below the national average. And hospitals have worked really hard to reduce cost through delivery system reforms, care coordination, and clinical efficiencies. California must take measures to ensure payment rates adequately address the changing nature of healthcare delivery, and support those changes instead of asking providers to do more with less, so that we can ensure access for the 14 million members on the MediCal Program.
[{'start': 43, 'end': 53, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Stobo: good afternoon, my name is dr john and i'm executive vice president of uc health. uc health is a unique provider of highly specialized care. indeed, uc health is the largest provider of tertiary coordinating services in the state of california.  for example, ucla does more heart transplants than any other provider in the country. these services are needed for the most critically ill patients, including those in the medical program. given uc's mission and capacity, we have made an extraordinary commitment to the medical population. uc is the number two provider of outpatient and inpatient services for the state, based on oshpd data. with the recent expansion of medical population, we have experienced a significant increase in medical volumes. at uci and ucd, medical patients represent just under one-half of inpatient volume. with regard to cost, medical reimburses far less than the cost of providing services in california. therefore, supplemental payments made available through the cms medicaid waiver, and through the disproportionate share hospital program are critical funding sources. however, even with these payment sources, our costs associated with medi-cal are not fully covered. in 2016, uc health absorbed more than $700 million in unreimbursed medical costs. this represents almost a two-fold increase in unreimbursed costs associated with this population since 2013. this is due in large part to the complexity and severity of conditions that uc uniquely services. uc is working to address these financial shortfalls in several ways. we're striving to improve the equality and efficiency of our care delivery system. our approach has emphasized preventive care programs and improvements in chronic care programs. for example, uc irvine has strengthened its chronic disease management efforts. this has increased its percentage of diabetes patients with controlled blood sugar levels and a decrease in mortality in patients with congenitive heart failure. more broadly, we are seeking to reduce costs systemwide. our leveraging scale for value initiative has already reduced operational costs by over $500 million in 2 years. uc understands the greater demands to provide primary care, and in this regard we're working to address this need in several ways. through partnerships and affiliations we're expanding our clinical networks to include more primary care providers. uc san diego health system has entered into a long-term agreement with el centro regional medical center with a goal of enhancing the delivery of high-quality primary care to patients in the imperial valley. uc has also increased its medi-cal managed care contracts. most recently, uc davis has entered into a new contract with the united healthcare community plan for a full scope of services, including primary care, subject to united health care's negotiations with dhcs. uc is also in active systemwide conversations with major medical managed care plans to establish a systemwide master services agreement for the provision of the full range of clinical services to medical patients. finally, i want to emphasize how much we appreciate the partnership with the state in addressing these issues related to cost and access. appreciate the opportunity to be with you today, and look forward to addressing any questions. thank you.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathy Kneer: thank you, mr. chairman. kathy with planned parenthood affiliates of california. i am here today on behalf of shauna heckert, who is the executive director for women's health specialist, who has been providing reproductive healthcare quality care here in sacramento for 30 years. and unfortunately, tomorrow will be their last day of operation. they serve approximately 10,000 patients. it's a combination of factors, but primarily it's the low medical reimbursement rates for family planning and abortion services. and i can support her in that we've done our own internal analysis, and roughly our reimbursement rates are about half of what our costs are. both of us have been struggling for years to find ways to close the gap in cost, but over time, it becomes unsustainable. over time, all of our other costs continue to increase and if you're revenue doesn't, at some point you reach the end. also, there will be three planned parenthood health centers closing later this year. so the medical reimbursement rates for reproductive healthcare are critically important. to your point earlier that when you look at utilization, if a patient doesn't have access, you don't know they need it. what we know with a long history of reproductive healthcare is the federal government has recognized the value of providing family planning services. that's why they provide an enhanced reimbursement rate of 90-10, because they know it's important for every woman to have access. we also know through our family pact program how important removing barriers to patients, it's not enough to say they have an insurance card, there are other barriers our patients face. language, transportation, child care, convenient hours. many of people on medical also work or have part-time shifts. they need after hours,they need weekends. we do what we can to remove all of the barriers our patient face, but those come at increased cost for us as well. so we are at the point of our starvation diet, that it's economically unsustainable. and we can talk about the trump administration trying to defund us and the services we provide, but the reality is the state of california, with these reimbursement, may end up having the same net effect if our reimbursement rates aren't adjusted so that we can continue to provide the services our patients rely on us. and it's not just women, we also serve men. and we know that with reproductive healthcare needs it's important to be able to provide, have patients find a provider they know and they trust. and oftentimes, women elect to go to an ob gyn or a specialist rather than their primary care doctor. so our clinics sort of fit that mold. we're experts at what we do. we know their healthcare needs and a lot of the issues that they have to deal with. also, patients who come to us for family planning services also rely on us for abortion services are now are also trying to serve lgbt and transgender communities. so we're a vital but small part of the healthcare delivery system. so we're here today to try to have our small part of the healthcare system, have you understand how important it is for the patients we serve, and i know you know it's cost effective. thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 110, 'end': 124, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Naomi Fuchs: sure. thank you, members, for the invitation to share the community health center perspective on issues affecting access to care for medi-cal patients. you mentioned, my name's naomi. i am the ceo of santa rosa community health centers. i also serve as the current chair for california primary care association and a board member for health plus advocates, the cpca advocacy organization. so, community health centers serve more than three and a half million medical beneficiaries. clearly, we are at the core of delivering primary care to this high-need population. over the past five years, we have been working incredibly hard to expand services to meet the rapid growth from the aca, the 5 million additional people that we needed to serve. providing things such as integrated mental health, behavioral health, tele healthcare coordination, opioid addiction treatment to address the profound complexity of the health code needs of our patients. we've seen great results from these efforts, including improved health outcomes and reduced hospital and utilization, despite the fact that i know with more people there is still more utilization. but several studies have clearly demonstrated that community health centers produce tremendous value for the investment, by lowering the total cost of care. we believe that this model of comprehensive, integrated care is the best solution for achieving the triple-aim of improved quality, improved experience, and lower cost. however, adding services and sites do require sufficient funding. and although community health centers collaborate and work in partnership with the hcs in many, many areas, one of our biggest challenges in being able to effectively respond to our community needs comes from the hcs in several areas. in their effort to eliminate fraud, waste, and abuse, the hcs has also created administrative barriers that make growth and expansion extremely challenging. we are unable to get timely rates established for new facilities, or updated rates for centers that have added services and programs. we endure multi-year fights over our rates, provider productivity, allowable services, and sometimes in a lag in payment that could take 3-10 years to resolve. this makes it very challenging to plan effectively for new programs and services and has deterred many people from expansion, despite the patient need. similarly, access to dental care continues to be a challenge for beneficiaries and the recent dental audits from dhcs and cms have had an extremely chilling effect on our ability to expand services in that area. so, financial sustainability, like for all of us, is essential as we worked diligently to serve the expanding medi-cal population and stay competitive in recruiting in this primary care shortage that we heard about earlier. working with specialty providers is also extremely challenging. as we've heard, the poor medi-cal reimbursement rates is a disincentive for specialists to partner with us, lleaving patients without access to critical speciality services. i know at our health center, patients drive two to three hours to access care, if they can get it at all, or they wait months, or sometimes even years for an appointment. despite these serious challenges, community health centers have some suggestions. for strengthening the medical program through several bills past and current. last year, the governor signed ab 1863 that would allow marriage and family therapists to be reimbursed for behavioral healthcare in community health centers, helping to address this tremendous backlog in access in mental health care. and there's a much larger, oops sorry, okay, time. i do want to say that as that program was eliminated, we will now have to lay off staff that was anticipated. so we also support the $100 million for primary care expansion and workforce development for primary care. we can't provide services without the needed workforce to do the work. so, these bills, along with the mft reimbursement and reducing administrative barriers, we think are really critical to making sure that the strong and vibrant community health center, primary care services continue to serve this patient population. thank you.
[{'start': 177, 'end': 182, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Luther: Mr. Chairman, members of the community, thank you for the opportunity to be here. I'm John Luther, I'm Chief Dental Officer of Western Dental. Previously, I served as Senior Vice President in American Dental Association in charge of dental practice, and have also owned and operated a dental practice in California for about 18 years. Western Dental is the largest dental provider in California with over 170 practices across the state delivering about a million and a half office visits. They're also the largest Denti-Cal provider in the state. With about 60% of patient visits being Denti-Cal. The state has done a very good of expanding coverage. But unfortunately, with so few providers able to take Denti-Cal, we've essentially really limited access. And as you pointed out before, that of course impacts utilization. We have a lot of barriers in Denti-Cal. Certainly, the department has done a good job looking at the administrative barriers, and there are many in terms of improving data exchange, various claim submissions, and so forth. And although that is extremely important and really reduces some of the headaches that providers face, it pales in comparison to the greatest issue, which is reimbursement rates for dentists. And certainly, these administrative hassles are a big deal for a large organization. But when you think about a small practice trying to negotiate some of these administrative issues, it's just, it's very daunting for them. The department has really done a good job in things like reducing the size of the application for providers, and, also, their developing outreach strategies. It's been my experience that many Denti-Cal members don't understand what their coverage is, and they don't even know that they have coverage. So, these outreach activities are very important, and certainly no one is in a better position to provide them than the department. Concerning administrative hurdles, certainly, one of the best advice I can give is to make everything electronic. And if we had just that, very similar to what's done in the commercial world, that would be a big step forward. In terms of the Dental Transformation Initiative, which you've all heard about, that is very promising, and certainly we'd like to see some metrics that really show us how effective that program is in getting provider participation and increasing access. And we look for that in the future, but also keep in mind that that dental transformation initiative is built around children's and preventive measures only. There's no restoration involved, and adults are not included in that at this time. So, although we expect that to be very promising, the dental transformation initiative was never expected to be a fix for Denti-Cal. So Denti-Cal enroll, yes, sir.
[{'start': 86, 'end': 97, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Williams: Good afternoon, everybody. Amy Williams, I'm the Deputy Director of Legal Services of Northern California. We're the nonprofit legal aid serving 32 California counties doing health care access. I'm also here as the Co-Chair of the Building Healthy Communities Health Equity action team which many others I think stayed true, there they are, okay. They're so tired that they didn't put their hands up, Stayed through here and that group was really banded together, because several years ago UC Davis ended its last contract with Health Med and effectively hasn't provided primary care services that its brick and mortar UC Davis Medical Center site since 2015. So, I support, we support the efforts to identify barriers to the medical community, there are many. You guys have discussed many of those, and shared concerns when our public hospitals and our situation, UC Davis isn't accepting the public insurance Medi-Cal for primary care services. When we're identifying as Miss Kent did. The over use of the The excessive costs. I'm assuming a big portion of that $700 million cost is because 50% of your patients are coming through the emergency rooms. And then they're getting care later. And Dr. Stobo I appreciate your candor, talking about investments in primary care and preventative services and treating chronic conditions long term and that will reduce costs overall. That's what the Affordable Care Act is about. So we've been working in the community for two years on this issue, trying locally to get UC Davis to talk to us about what are these barriers. So, I appreciate Senator Pan bringing you in here, so we can hear first hand. And I also appreciate that it sounds like we're very close hopefully to united becoming a role player. And I share Senator Pan's concerns in finding out how many beneficiaries are we talking about. There are 442,000 Medi-Cal manage care beneficiaries, just in Sacramento county alone. And zero, none of those folks are going to UC Davis Medical Center for primary care services. So that creates a large access problem for us. So when we're talking about barriers, the first one would be, having our UC's contract with MediCal Managed Care plans. So I don't know, encouraging it, requiring it, asking for it. But getting those contracts signed so that folks in the community can go in-community and get this high quality care. So for us, healthcare at a UC is not a luxury item. It should be something that everyone gets. So I appreciate you saying that you're committed to this effort going forward. Thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 978, 'end': 982, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1199, 'end': 1204, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1592, 'end': 1595, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1768, 'end': 1771, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Linda Nguy: nguy with western center on law and poverty, would like to align our comments with legal services of northern california as access to access for medical beneficiaries to uc hospitals primary as well as specialty services is key and it is not just an issue in sacramento davis area but throughout the state. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tam Ma: Tam Mal with Health Access California. We've been very supporting of the local Sacramento community's efforts to encourage UC Davis to contract with MediCal managed care. I just want to note that it's very disheartening to know that the residents of the low income communities, where they could see UC Davis Med Center from their home, cannot go there to receive services and we hope that we're optimistic that will change soon. And I think with regard to the other access issues that the Committee and the panels have spoken to, Health Access has put forth the proposal regarding investment of Prop 65 dollars and part of that proposal is asking the Legislature and the Governor to prioritize increasing rates for the Family Pact Program. We are very sad and concerned to hear about women's health specialists closing its doors because that will deeply impact access to services for the women and families that we see of services now in Sacramento, Grass Valley, Redding, and Chico. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ben Hudson: Hi, my name is Ben Hudson. I am Co-Chair with Amy Williams of the Health Equity Action Team, which is a community based team, community members who have come forward to address in our region UC Davis' lack of a primary care contract through Medi-Cal. I'm not as fancy as these folks, I just gotta keep it clean. I'm the Executive Director of Gender Health Center here in Sacramento, and we actually partner with UC Davis School of Medicine in having a free student clinic. I'm sure you're aware of those clinics that happen. Unfortunately, UC Davis puts very little economic value behind those clinics. There's no faculty hired to help teach students how to do this care and the students are first and second year students. However, at our organization, we primarily treat transgender individuals. So we are in effect providing transgender healthcare curriculum for UC Davis students. And the UC Davis doctors, primary care doctors and residents who come and provide the precepting to those students who volunteer on their behalf, have now become within our region some of the foremost knowledgeable physicians on transgender healthcare in the nation, in some ways.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 46, 'end': 58, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Edie Chang: okay, good afternoon, chairman and members of the committee. my name is edie jonah chang. i'm a deputy executive officer at the air resources board. i'm going to start with issue number one, the proposed southern california consolidation project. the air resources board is requesting $413 million to consolidate and relocate our emissions testing facilities from el monte to riverside. last year, the legislature provided $6.4 million, which allowed us to secure a site in riverside near the university of california at no cost to the state, and to develop necessary detailed performance criteria for the new facility. these efforts over the last year formed the basis of this proposed budget request. this project is a major investment in our future. our existing southern california facilities are stretched beyond their capacity. they cannot support arb's existing and future testing needs. they do not provide adequate infrastructure to expand or upgrade equipment and they are not energy efficient. the work done at our facilities in el monte has contributed to the development of rigorous approaches to testing and certification of emission control systems on virtually every kind of engine used in california, from cars and trucks to lawn mowers and motorcycles. the scientific information collected has led to regulations that lower smog-forming and toxic air pollutants and greenhouse gases. in addition, in el monte, we test existing vehicles to help identify non-compliant ones for recall and repair. testing conducted in 2015 was instrumental in confirming the presence of defeat devices in light duty volkswagen diesel engines, which we'll be hearing a little bit more about in issue two. california's worldwide reputation for developing effective approaches to reducing vehicle and engine emissions, improving air quality and addressing climate change is the direct result of arb's focus on sound data and science as the foundation of all of our regulations. our southern california facilities have played a central role in this success for decades and the proposed new facility would ensure that this success continues well into the future.
[{'start': 72, 'end': 88, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ross Brown: thank you, mr. chair and members, ross edie brown with the lao. we don't have any major concerns with sort of the proposal for the lab itself and the construction. it is, as ms. chang mentioned, a large expense and the proposal is for $413 million, and originally, the proposal was to use, and our major issues are just sort of, the fund source and how to pay for the lab. the original proposal in january was to use all lease revenue bonds and that would be paid off over a period of roughly 25 years, probably through three different funds, the motor vehicle account, air pollution control fund, and vehicle inspection repair fund, and there would be sort of different proportions to those different funds. the most recent proposal in april that the administration put forward used part of the vw civil penalty settlement money, instead of lease revenue bonds, so of the $154 million in revenue from the vw civil penalties settlement, 83 million of that would be used instead of the lease revenue bonds, and all of that would be used to offset the air pollution control fund portion of the payment. so we wanted to raise a couple of issues that we think the committee should consider. we think it should consider using the entire 154 million of the vw settlement to offset even more of the long term debt service payments. and we also think the committee should considered looking at using those funds to offset the costs in some of the other funds, not just the air pollution control fund, but perhaps look at the motor vehicle account. the air pollution control fund, to us, looks like it's in pretty good shape, has a significant fund balance, looks to be structurally balanced over the next few years. the motor vehicle account, i think has a little bit more of a structural issue. i think it's barely balanced over the next several years and in some years might actually drop into a operating deficit, so those are a couple just some of the technical fun issues that we think you should be considering.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 178, 'end': 183, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 796, 'end': 798, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 906, 'end': 908, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Anne Smart: hi, my name is anne ross smart and i'm the vice-president of policy at chargepoint, we make electric vehicle charging stations. i'm here about the appendix c. we were disappointed to see the plan focus less than 10% of vw's total investment communities further more the plan lacked any details as to vw's business model how electrify america will work with third parties like us. how they will acquire sites, how they will go through an process, the what the details that will be what technology requirements will be of us, and our competitors. and with that lack of detail in both those things we do think that that is counter to sb 350, including the requirements in focusing investments on communities that support low and moderate income communities, as well as protecting customer choice, competition, innovation we also just continue to be concerned that carb does not understand the long-term implications of enabling one single automaker to dictate the future of our industry and that of our competitors. we're concerned that this could crowd out private investment and that we could beholden to rfps or a procurement process from electrify america for the next 10 years here and across the country. we're also concerned the impact that this has on auto makers. vw will have access to charging data from all of its competitors, every auto maker, every make, model across the country. how they intend to use this? we're very concerned that there's lack of restrictions there. so overall, we urge you to consider these things. take the power that you can take, have carb consider these implications, and use its power to recite this investment a bit more.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Allan Abs: good afternoon, my name is abs. i'm the executive director for the california air pollution control officers association. representing the 35 area districts in california, about half of which would be presumably implementing the oil and gas rule moving forward, and so there is basically two types of air districts under this oil and gas proposal. we have air districts that are going to be responsible for oil and gas and these would be like the san joaquin's, south coast, central coast air districts. and then we have the non-associated gas air districts, primarily in the sacramento valley that would have to add a significant number of sources for a non-associated natural gas production. funding to implement the oil and gas rule is going to be critical for the small districts in the northern sacramento valley. many of them only have staff of three or four people to cover several thousand miles of air district sources and so the extra workload that's going to happen at the air district level to implement this rule really needs, really requires some state support for training, for staffing and for equipment to make sure that we're really giving the reductions that the regulation requires, thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Scott Smithline: Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair, Members of the Committee. My name is Scott Smithline, the Director of the Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery, as you mentioned, otherwise known as CalRecycle. Starting with our first budget change proposal, number one is regarding administrative support workload. The Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery requests eight permanent positions and $929,000 in distributed administration for ongoing workload driven by increased fiscal activity and increased demand and reliance on information technology services. Our organization has undergone significant growth in the last several fiscal years, since fiscal years 2010-11, we've grown by personnel of 108 with no new fiscal or IT support associated with that growth. This creates a significant increase in staffing, translates into additional allocations, payroll, salary advances, travel, an increase in payments, and document reporting for our fiscal services branch. By the way, if I may, please, I brought Sarah Keck, our Physical Services Branch Manager with me this morning, Branch Chief, I apologize for failing to introduce her earlier.
[{'start': 70, 'end': 85, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1014, 'end': 1024, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark Murray: Mr. Chair and Members, Mark Murray with the environmental group Californians Against Waste. I want to just say that we are very supportive of all of the budget items that have actually been presented by the Governor as it relates to this department and this department has certainly had its hands full in terms of of helping public agencies and private agencies deal with the the myriad of state waste reduction and recycling programs. They've had a tremendous amount of success. It is against that background, that backdrop of all that success that makes the absence of success with the Beverage Container Recycling law so frustrating for stakeholders, for the public. Certainly Acknowledge Senator Mcguire and Senator Wieckowski, you have attempted to involve yourself in this process. Stakeholders have engaged in a number of meetings and I kind of feel like we're all waiting for someone to make the first move and I don't think it needs to be maybe as complicated as has been suggested. It would be great if there was a proposal on the table that stakeholders could react to and that we could maybe have some dialogue and discussion in advance of a budget actually being presented and approved. Stakeholders, I think, are willing to be very creative, and understand that when you have super high recycling rates, you end up with a shortfall of funds. We've gotta come up with some money for that. So that's a hard one to grasp, but the solution can't be allowing the program to crumble, allowing recycling rates to fall, and therefore there's lots of extra money in the fund because we have such crappy recycling rates, and that's where we've been sitting for the last 15 months. So that's not a solution. That is a continuation of the problem and so I'm hoping there's some kind of opportunity to put an actual solution on the table that stakeholders can react to.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 700, 'end': 707, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 720, 'end': 730, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sean Martin: thank you mr. chairman. sean anne martin with the legislative analyst's office. we're passing out a web post that we posted on april 4th of this year, and in light of concerns about the department of toxic substances controls execution of it's programmatic responsibilities, the legislature has been held numerous oversight hearings to monitor the performance of the department and also has established the independent review panel to provide oversight of the department. and improve the additional funding and positions for the department to address some deficiencies that have been identified in its programs. along with the legislature's approval of many of these proposals, there have been measurable performance goals and specific deliverables such as reports or plans that the department has agreed to provide to the legislator. so in our web post we discuss the departments progress to date and addressing the deficiencies in its program and we focus on the programs where they've received additional funding and personnel. and in our post, we provide a brief program description. we summarize the resources that were approved by the legislature to address identified deficiencies. we include data on outcomes that have been achieved to date, and also projected outcomes. and we provide questions for legislators to ask the department of toxic substances control, to hold them accountable for achieving the outcomes that they committed to achieve when they were had the resources approved. and we note that in some cases, it may take years for them to fully address these problems. i'm just going to go over a couple of examples of programs where resources have been approved. and everybody should have this as a copy. does everyone have that? so if you turn to page, two, where it's says hazardous waste management program, the facility permitting backlog. so the department issues permits to facilities that manage waste that's toxic, corrosive, reactive, and it issues hazardous waste permits with a 10 year term limit and each permit establishes specific conditions that a facility must comply with. they issue about 127 of these permits. they need to complete about an average of about 13 permit renewals per year to stay on track, since these are 10 year permits. in the spring of 2016, the department had 30 permitted facilities or roughly one quarter of them operated under continued permits with pending permit renewal applications. and some of these permits have been continued for more than five years. to address the backlog, they were provided with 3.6 million to convert a previously approved limited term position to permanent status, and to provide 15 additional permanent positions. these additional resources were intended to eliminate the existing backlog of permit applications and complete most future decisions on permit renewals within a two year period. so if you turn to the next page, page 3, you'll see figure 1, and it displays both past and projected performance for making permitting decisions and reducing the backlog of permits continued more than two years past expiration. so for example, for 2014/15 they've had a total of eight permit decisions. and the permits continued more than two years past expiration. there were 27 of them. this went down to 18 in 2015/16.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Barbara Lee: good morning, mr. chairman and members of the committee. as you said, my name is lee and i'm the director of dtsc. i have with me today ms. francesca negri, she's my chief deputy director as well as my leadership team is here in the audience to the extent you have questions that you would like to ask of them. i appreciate the opportunity to present to you the governor's proposed budget for dtsc for fiscal year 17-18. in the last year, dtsc has made significant improvements to its programs and processes. i'd like to provide for you a few key highlights before summarizing our proposed budget for the coming year. let's begin with exide. dtsc approved a final closure plan and environmental impact report for the exide technologies facility in vernon in december. exide is securing permits from other agencies and we're reviewing their closure implementation plan. we expect demolition work to begin on the site this summer. we provided job skills training for 45 residents of communities around exide. nearly all of them are now employed in the residential cleanup. and in fact, some have already parlayed their experience into career development opportunities. the department completed sampling at over 8,600 residential properties on 7,600 individual parcels around the exide facility. we have access to sample about 800 more. we proposed a cleanup plan in december for approximately 2,500 residential properties in the preliminary investigation area around the exide facility. we also proposed a draft environmental impact report and we are currently reviewing over 900 comments received. we expect to finalize the cleanup plan and the environmental impact report, and to have work begin on the residential cleanup this summer. we also have initiated what are called time critical removal actions at residential properties and daycare facilities around the exide facility. this is done on a case by case basis where soil sampling and other data indicate potential exposures and we are taking actions right away to protect public health, especially sensitive individuals.
[{'start': 81, 'end': 84, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 140, 'end': 155, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sean Martin: sean with the legislative analysts office. ...given the uncertainty about the amount of contamination from lead acid battery recycling facilities, too. we think that it makes sense to have the department prepare a report, due march 1st, 2018, to sort of give the set budget. subcommittees and legislature an update on where they are in terms of implementing this act, and what they found, and what information they have towards answering the question you just asked.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Theresa Marx: Thank you Mr. Chair, Members of the Committee. Thank you for allowing us to speak with you today. My name is Theresa Marx, I'm the Chief Deputy Director of the Department of Pesticide Regulation and I have with me today, Lu Saephanh who is our Fiscal Chief. DPR's 2017-18 budget proposes 101 million and 405 positions. Up for discussion are two proposals. Issue number one is a request to keep DPR's Pest Management Research Grant Program at the current level of 1.1 million per year for an additional two years. The Pest Management Research Grants are focused on funding to find a reduced pest management practices, and techniques that can be used as alternatives for agricultural fumigants, and other high risk pesticides. The base funding amount of those grants is $500 per year. It was approved in fiscal year 2012-2013. In fiscal year 2014-15 as part of the budget that Legislature augmented the research grant program by $600,000 per year for three years, with the purpose of the grants to be aimed at reducing reliance on conventional fumigates. As of March 26th, 17, eight projects have been funded through the Pest Management Research Grant Program, four of which included augmentation funds. At this time, we have nine ongoing projects with an additional four that have been selected but have not yet begun. Without this extension, the research grants program will revert back to its baseline appropriation of $500,000 per year. In addition, we are requesting that the scope of the augmentation funding be expanded to include high-risk pesticides, as well as fumigants. This proposal also requests budget bill language to make funding for both of DPR's grant programs available for encumbrance for two years instead of just the one year that we currently have. Issue number two is a proposal to realign funding for our Pesticide Registration Database Management system. The Legislature approved funding for this project in 2015-16 just as the California Department of Technology transitioned it's IT Project Approval Lifecycle process. As a result, additional reviews and requirements were added to the procurement process. This year, excessive material deviations in bidder responses to the request for proposal delayed the project even more. A material deviation occurs when a bidder's response does not meet one or more specific requirements. I do want to note that while there had been delays, the delays are not creating cost overruns to the implementation of the project. On the contrary, the more stringent reviews and requirements are leading to better project plans and more detailed analysis of the business problem to be addressed. All of this will ultimately result in a better project. I can also report that DPR is committed to providing updates every six months to the LAO and legislative staffers on the status of this project going forward. This is in addition to the score card writing tracking available on the Department of Technology's IT project tracking website. I appreciate the staff's recommendation to approve both proposals as budgeted. This concludes my presentation, I'm happy in taking any questions you might have.
[{'start': 109, 'end': 121, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 221, 'end': 232, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Paul Towers: Excuse me, Paul Towers with Pesticide Action Network, Californians for Pesticide Reform, the Center on Race Poverty in the Environment, and El Quinto Sol de America America. Wanted to support the efforts around allocating additional resources for the pesticide management alternatives dollars, research grants. I actually personally serve on the Committee that reviews some of those grants, and so I've remained very supportive of that process. I think injecting additional resources into alternative research for fumigants is essential in the state, given the amount of fumigants we continue to use. The most widely used pesticides in the state, these gaseous pesticides need alternatives as well as some of the highly hazardous pesticides like chlorpyrifos, other very volatile neurotoxic pesticides. And so, we need tools to look at alternatives to using those products. And so, I think we continue to support that, as well as the other measures. I think along the lines of schools, we sent a letter to the Committee expressing concerns about the lack of tracking of pesticide use in proximity of schools, as those regulations move forward. We have no measure of tracking the effectiveness of our new rules and regulations when they move forward. And so, urge the department and the Committee as we move forward to make sure that there is part of the annual process of evaluating pesticide use in proximity to schools. We make that part of that annual process in a report so we can measure the efficacy of these new rules. Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Donahue: thank you, madam chair, paul, on behalf of opportunity fund, in support.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: Kyle Jones, Sierra Club California in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julia Kingsley: Julia Kingsley, representing Heal the Bay and the California Compost Coalition, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: Kyle Jones with Sierra Club, California in support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Lovell: john on behalf of the california correctional supervisors organization. we're the sponsors of this bill, this bill again addresses excluded employees who as senator neilsen was once quoted as saying are the forgotten state employees. what this bill does is provides for parity for excluded employees in bargaining unit seven. currently, excluded employees do get parity in bargaining units five, six, and eight. now again, department of finance opposed this bill last year when it was sb 1058. but, again, we would submit that the cost estimates that they made in connection to that bill are inflated. first of all, parity is not limited to salaries, parity also includes the ability for example to use seniority and shifts. parity includes the ability to have seniority as a benchmark on issues like vacation, access to overtime. secondly, it is a fallacy to assume that parity that involves salary involves additional general fund costs, because all that really needs to happen is when management is bargaining with the represented employees. they look at the totality of their budget to include both the represent employees and to allow for excluded employees in the process. if you don't do this, if you don't pass legislation like this which you get. it's what exactly you have right now in bargaining unit seven compaction. and when you have compaction you have disincentives for people to promote. bargaining units five, six, and eight, which would provide for parity also have supervisors, qualified supervisors, who have an incentive to promote. on the other hand, in bargaining unit seven, first level supervisor positions are largely vacant, why? because there isn't an incentive to promote, that's bad for the organization itself. again this truly a cost effective measure and we support the measure. and we will respectfully take issue with what i expect we will hear from department of finance shortly.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 165, 'end': 172, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Lovell: lovell on behalf of the association for los angeles deputy sheriffs, the association of deputy district attorneys, california association of code enforcement officers, california college and university police chiefs association. california narcotic officers association, los angeles county probation officers union, afscme local 685, los angeles county professional peace officers association, and los angeles police protective league, all in support.
[]
John Lovell: John Lovell on behalf of the California Correctional Supervisors Organization. We're the sponsors of the bill. This bill is very similar, virtually identical, to Senate bill 950 last year, which was vetoed by the Governor and we believe that veto was based on factually inaccurate assertions. Finance indicated last year that there would be at least 30 arbitrations a year as a result of extending this to excluded employees and that's simply not born out by the facts. Represented employees in bargaining unit 6, for example, only had 12 arbitrations last year during that period. Here's what happens when a request is filed for arbitration. Unlike the finance assumption of last year, it doesn't mean you go to arbitration. What happens is, once there's a request for arbitration, and I used to work for a labor arbitrator many years ago. Once there's a request, what happens is, is then the parties say, okay, can we win this or not? And they start to look at settling, and that manifestly is not what happens now. What happens now with excluded employees is grievances are just denied across the board, why? Because they can, and then it leaves the organization representing excluded employees with one very costly option, litigation. And that costs both the state and the excluded employee organization. Arbitration is manifestly less expensive. The other feature of this bill that assures an incentive for settlement is there's a provision in the bill that provides that the loser pays the costs of the arbitration. So, I'm the excluded employee, Senator Hill is Cal HR. I file for arbitration, and Senator Hill's coterie of people look around, and say, okay, can we win this or not? Similarly with the excluded employee organization and guess what, the parties do what they're not doing now, they try and settle the grievance. This is going to be cost effective. I recognize, from the analyst comments, that litigation costs of the state aren't going to necessarily be reduced, but I would submit that costs like discovery in connection with that litigation. Any other kind of investigatory costs will manifestly be reduced. This is a bill that is a good sense bill and will cause labor peace and will result in decreased costs, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1561, 'end': 1565, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1569, 'end': 1575, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1613, 'end': 1617, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Department of Finance: I do have a file on this one. I apologize that we're low this week, but we are working on the May revision. The Department of Finance is opposed to this legislation, as Mr. Lovell said, it is virtually identical to last year's bill that the Governor vetoed. And in that veto message, he stated that expanding the grievance process for the state's managers to include legally binding arbitration will reduce the Department's ability to effectively manage state operations and will result in significant unbudgeted state costs. While we don't know the numbers, we didn't know them last year, and
[{'start': 173, 'end': 179, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Virginia Herold: i'm virginia jonah herold, i'm with the board of pharmacy. we ask for your aye vote, please.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Bower: good morning, mr. chairman and members, paul virginia bower on behalf of elevate, an online lender in support of the bill.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Cutrona: Good morning, Sarah Cutrona and I'm with Rise Credit of California in support of the bill.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Scott Govenar: mr. chair and members, scott paul govenar on behalf of california financial services association in support. thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pamela Gibbs: Good morning Mr. Chair and Senators. Pamela Gibbs representing the Los Angeles County Office of Education. And for the reasons previously stated, we also support the bill. We are in the envious position of reviewing budgets of 80 school districts. And for that reason, because we want them to remain solvent, we strongly urge your support.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Daniel Cohen: Daniel Cohen with the California Teacher's Association in opposition to the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: good morning chair, members of the committee. kyle scott jones with sierra club california, and also on behalf of the california league of conservation voters, today in strong support for sb 224. we think that this bill appropriately asks for opr to determine, through its robust stakeholder process, what is the correct way to close this loophole that the senator just mentioned. this loophole is robbing the public of their right to know about changes in impacts around them, and is creating baselines that are completely misleading. we think that with sb 224 and opr's work that we'll make sure that costs for environmental damage and costs to public health are going to be appropriately borne by those parties responsible for those impacts, and not the public at large. and we urge your support when the time is appropriate, thank you.
[{'start': 46, 'end': 62, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cassie Gilson: good morning, mr. chair and members, cassie kyle gilson on behalf of the california building industry association. and perhaps surprisingly, i don't disagree at all with what the senator said. if people are breaking the law, that shouldn't be allowed. but in this case, both ceqa and our robust suite of other environmental laws already make the conduct that she's describing entirely illegal. so if you are on a site and you build something without the permits that you're required to pull. we have laws, both ceqa and otherwise, that allow you to fully go after the folks that have built that. and said, you don't have the permits to do this, you can't do this. we're going to come after you and either have you pull it out. or have you remedy it and retain the permits and make the mitigations that you might have to do. that's true if i make a improvement to my home and i don't pull a permit. i get the building inspector out there, and they say, pull it out or get your permit and redo it. this is a dramatic expansion of ceqa to start messing with what we consider the baseline. and that also runs through the rest of our environmental laws, which is the notion that you are responsible for mitigating the impacts of the project that you propose. you are not responsible for mitigating the impacts of something that somebody else did. ceqa is one of the third rail things we talk about in here. to start sort of using that to try to get at, what my understanding is, perhaps a lack of communication between the enforcement folks and the local government. and the planning folks and the local government, is not the right policy solution to that. and then from a sort of ceqa practitioner standpoint, the ceqa guidelines are designed to interpret the statute. and they get updated semi-regularly mostly to reflect case law, so when the judiciary has over time interpreted the statute differently. when this bill was originally proposed, it was a change to the ceqa statute. it was then amended to say, we're not going to change the statute, we're going to direct opr to make changes to the guidelines. but that's not how it works. you can't have the regulatory agency make changes to guidelines when neither the case law or the statute has changed at all. so for those reasons, we oppose. and i've also been asked to express the opposition of cal chamber as well. thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1342, 'end': 1346, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1677, 'end': 1681, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jacqueline Wong-Hernandez: jacqueline cassie wong-hernandez, department of finance. i don't have a file on this measure.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: kyle with sierra club california, and also for autobahn california, in support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julia Kingsley: Julia Kingsley with Eco Consult, representing Heal The Bay, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: Kyle Jones of Sierra Club California, also on behalf of Audubon California, in support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Julia Kingsley: Julia Kingsley representing Heal the Bay, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyle Jones: kyle jacqueline jones of sierra club california and also on behalf of audubon california in support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Larry Doyle: good afternoon mr. chair and members. larry jonah doyle, on behalf of congress of california bar associations. we're the sponsors of this bill. the bill was very adequately and excellently summarized by assembly member maienshchein in his opening and the analysis does an excellent job of doing it. it's one of these bills that you really, and i'd like to think isn't necessary but because of conflicting interpretations with various administrations of the office of secretary of state, it became necessary to clarify on behalf of the practitioners and the corporations involved, that indeed separate buyout agreements do not have to be established in the actual articles of incorporation, but can be referenced in those articles and, excuse me, addressed that way. it's a common sense bill. it's meant to make things easier and more effective without any laws or protection, and we ask for you aye vote.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 219, 'end': 231, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kimberly Chen: All right Mister chair and members my name is Kimberly Chen. I'm here on behalf of the California Pan Ethnic Health Network. I'm here on behalf of over 90 immigrant rights and health consumer advocates, organizations, to request to appeal the Newly Qualified Immigrant Wrap Program. The governors January budget proposed to move NQIs from full-scope Medi-Cal where they are right now to a recovered California plan with Medi-Cal covering the cost and Medi-Cal offering a wrap program for services that are not available through the Covered California plan. For over 20 years, the state has provided comprehensive Medi-Cal coverage to this population newly qualified immigrants legal permanent residence who been here for less than five years. This proposal will put immigrants at risk and forcing them to navigate new health care systems adding additional scrutiny and from this federal administration and facing a loss of health care coverage. We are optimistic that the tremendous technical in implementation challenges are becoming clearer and clearer to the department and the administration, I want to clear about that. However, this wrap program was set in statute in 2013 and remains in statute and a lot has changed since then. Covered California was not in operation when the statute was first put into place. And we've lived with the ways that and the ways that they don't work together with MediCal. Health For All Kids has happened. We cover undocumented children so the state would be covering those individuals while still proposing newly qualified immigrants who have been covered under full scope Ben Carson's the 1990s into a wrap program and most importantly, we are in a different place at the federal level facing an anti-immigrant hostile federal administration. And again, we're very optimistic that the operational challenges that the advocate have been pointing out for the last two years are finally gaining for the consideration but even if the program does not move forward this year. The underlying law remains in statute and that is not a good thing for immigrants. And given the lack of any new solutions to the technical challenges and the political climate for the forseeable future. We must respectfully request that the state keep this community covered under MediCal. Just have like we have, for the past 20 years and repeal the NQI Wrap program altogether.
[{'start': 46, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1613, 'end': 1625, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tam Ma: Tam Ma with the Health Access in support of the stakeholders proposal for the reasons stated, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jen Florey: Jen Florey for Western Center, in addition to the repeal of the NQI Wrap. We also support obligating the department to find minimum essential coverage certification for all full scope state only MediCal programs. We don't believe it was ever the intent that somebody enrolled in full scope MediCal would have a tax penalty. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Megan Stubers: Thank you, Mr. Chair, members. Megan Stubers on behalf of California Health Plus Advocates in support of the stakeholder proposal. Thank you.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathy Moss: chair members, kathy jonah moss with the local health plans of california and we would agree with all the comments made here. we do support the stakeholders proposal. thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Alley : Jennifer Alley with the California Association of Health Plans. At this time it's not feasible for the transition to occur and we've been in communications with the department and your staff regarding this technical issue, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Noah Padamo: Noah Padamo representing California Rural Legal Assistance Foundation, in support of the stakeholders proposal to repeal the relevant statutes. And in recommendations made forward to include specific requirements are supported, thank you. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Hicks: randy kathy hicks, california's disability rights in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Evelyn Taurus: Hello, my name is Evelyn Taurus with Street Level Health Project, and we're also in support. Just a little background on our organization. 93% of our patients are foreign born and 43% have rescinded. And a lot of the barriers are language barrier and also access, and we do get patients who have MediCal. But it's only about 1% and converting them to Cover California will just create a lot of chaos. So we hope that you will consider repealing this, thank you. Thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Imelda Plascencia: Hi, Imelda Plascencia with the Latino Coalition for Healthy California. There are numerous technical challenges to implementing this and we support the repeal of the NQI Wrap.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Evelyn Gonzales: Hello everyone, Evelyn Gonzales with Community Health Councils, we are an enrollment entity and know for sure that the support of the stakeholder proposal would definitely be useful for our consumers. We have always been against the NQI Wrap, because we don't know how it's going to be operationalized. So we really ask that you repeal it altogether forever.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Curt Child: Curt Child, Disability Rights California and we're in support of the proposal.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ronald Coleman: Ronald Coleman on behalf of the California immigrant policy center also in support of the advocates proposal. We have strong concerns about the administration's proposal and would definitely like the law repealed and for folks to stay in MediCal, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Su Hee: Hello, my name is Su Hee, and I am from the Korean Community Center of East Bay. And we are a Cover California enrollment entity. And we're also in support of the repeal of the NQ Wrap. Because we're very concerned that our newly qualified immigrants, who have been getting a portable and secure care through MediCal to lose their coverage. This NQI Wrap have to be implemented, thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mari Cantwell: hi, i'm mari randy cantwell, department of healthcare services. so this proposal is to create a new fund for the managed care administrative fines and penalties which currently is in the mrmip fund. and then propose to use it to continue to fund the major risk medical insurance program. and then to the degree there's any balance remaining, to use that funding to fund the medical program. i just want to be clear, this doesn't change anything about the mrmip program. we would still continue to fund it at the levels that are necessary to sustain the program.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Metzker: Brian Metzker, LAO. We find the governor's proposal to be reasonable given the high remaining fund balance and the ongoing revenues that could be used for other budgetary considerations.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Nguy: Linda Nguy with Western Center of Law and Poverty with conquering with health accesses comments.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Janice Canalen: Janice Canalen I'm with Children's Defense Fund, on behalf of the children's health coverage coalition. We're grateful for the department's work on the DTI and we support this thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Nguy: Linda Nguy with the Western Center on Law and Poverty as mentioned there are policy bills moving forward. And so we hope that those conversations as well as the conversations with the different stakeholders including the different departments DMHC DSS as part of the grievance and appeals is included in this discussion. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tam Ma: tam mari ma, health access california. we certainly support implementation of the federal medicaid managed care role. however there are policy discussions taking place with regards to the network amnesty provisions. so we ask the committee to keep those conversations in mind. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Curt Child: Mr. Chair and members, Curt Child, Disability Rights California. Thank you very much for the opportunity to talk with you about this important item. Thank you very much to staff for a comprehensive analysis as always included in the agenda. As is clear from that agenda item that persons who are able and should be able to leave a nursing home often can't do that. Because they are trapped in the facility because they don't have the resources to maintain a home for which they could ultimately return to. And not only that during the time that they end up having. Because they've lost their home the state continues to pick up the cost for the nursing home care during that time period. The answer for that really is what exists already is the home upkeep allowance. And that was established by regulation some time ago. In California provides essentially $209 for that home upkeep allowance. The federal government does allow states to adopt those. And essentially how they work is if the resident intends to return to their home within six months there's a statement from a physician that makes it clear that there is the ability to return to the home in six months. There's no spouse or other family member who's residing in the home during that time that they're in the residential care, and there is a home ultimately to return to. So as I mentioned the real problem with that is $209 does not allow very much at all for a resident to accumulate to maintain that home. The response that we're proposing to that is increasing the home upkeep allowance to the federal poverty level, so essentially little over $1000. So if you have a person who would be in the facility for the six months that would be $6,000, essentially one month of care in a nursing home estate cost, that they would be able to use that along the way to maintain that home so they can return to that home and in a case where they're actually eligible to do that. A few years ago the Health and Human Services Agency that was taking a closer look at many of these issues for potential cost savings did not the home upkeep allowances as a strategy to save dollars for the state nursing home costs. So we would encourage the Subcommittee's consideration of the home upkeep allowances. Part of it's overall medical budget strategy, thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Hicks: Randy Hicks, California the disability rights. We like this. We like this proposal. It does not make sense for somebody who has to live in a nursing home who wants to be outside of the nursing home and be with their families. It's also for emotional well being and health. Sometimes things don't always have to cost money. And to be able to say I live independently and I can be on my own and I can have my friend and my family there, that's very important. We have a friend of ours now, who lost her home and she's now in a nursing home and her son can't come in and see her all the time, and her family members doesn't know she even is there. And so, let's say she has to stay in this nursing home and only gets this much money. She'll never be able to get out of that nursing home to go back to her home where she felt comfortable and safe. So this proposal is just long wide-ranging proposal that would make independent living a thing and agent in place. Is that what it's about? And as that nice lady said, we're going to save money in the long run. It costs more to keep somebody in a nursing home, institutionalized than living on their own. For that reason, California's Disability Rights are in strong support of this proposal.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Gonzales: gonzales, national association of social workers california chapter, also in support of this proposal. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Nguy: nguy, with the western center on law and poverty, also in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Patrick Johnston: I'm Patrick Johnston thank you Mr. Chairman and members for looking at this item 23. Senator Pan had authored SB145 and it had the effect of stabilizing the Robert F. Kennedy medical plan for united, farm workers. And farm workers union and farmers themselves have a trust fund for providing health care for about 16,000 farm worker family members. What happened with the passage of the Affordable Care Act was to remove limits, and because farmers and farm workers have a constricted ability to fund their own health plan, they had a limit of $70,000 in benefits. And with the Legislature's judgement and Governor Brown's judgment was in in 2015 with Doctor Pan's bill was that the state would provide stop loss insurance in effect by saying that for episodes of care, those who'd exceeded $70,000, there could be a reimbursement. And what it has done, therefore, stabilized the health plan and reduce what would otherwise be a cost to the state because if the health planned failed then at least half of those individuals would be eligible for MediCal which could be counted. And the others many of whom are undocumented would just go without care and then would be subject to whatever limited urgent care was available in their communities. So what this proposal does is remove the sunset. And the reason is, that we've learned for three years now that it works, that the possible $3 million of stop loss coverage by the state has resulted really in only $2 million last year and probably this year of reimbursement for those high-cost claims. And so it's well within the limit, and for the health plan itself for the Robert Kennedy health plan, it is meant an additional month each year of financial reserves. So the actuaries recommend that the health plan have 12 months worth of reserves. Where at 3 months in effect and with the current legislation with it's sunset we'd get to 7 months, but removing the sunset for another five years mean that will get 12 months. So over this time the state would save some money and farmers, and farm workers who together contribute $25 million toward healthcare would continue to do so. So it's stabilizes the fund and would also therefore save the state some money.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 93, 'end': 96, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 615, 'end': 620, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1621, 'end': 1635, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ronald Coleman: Good afternoon, Chairman Arambula. Ronald Coleman, Director of Government Affairs with the California Immigrant Policy Center. Here to present on Issue 24. Expansion of Medical up to age 26. Also known as healthcare for all young adults. Very much appreciate and thank you for having this on the agenda today. We certainly also appreciated your strong support of the implementation of SB 75 with providing materials and great information to individuals in your district, about to the expansion to healthcare for all kids. Certainly that recent expansion ensured that no matter where a child is born or what their immigration status is, they can still see a doctor when they're sick or if they need preventive care. As my colleague Anthony Wright from Health Access always says, every child in every classroom and on every playground at every school now has access to healthcare, and that is a very, very significant gain for all kids in California. And it has changed the lives of tens of thousands of people but we must do more. With the recent passage of Prop 56 the tobacco tax which is expected to bring in about $1.2 billion, we think we can build on the successes of SB 75 and expand MediCal to all state residents up to age 26. According to the UC Berkley Labor Center. Researchers we can do this expansion with the reasonable investment of just $87 million, which is just about a tenth of the expected revenue that we think we will get from the Prop 56 rather than tried a back field MediCal program as the Governor's proposal suggests, we think it's time to uphold California's values and do more to expand healthcare to all of our state's residents. If California does take this leap, it is only a small investment, a very modest investment. But could significantly change the lives of up to 80,000 people. Covering all residents in the state, regardless of the immigration status, up to age 26. Is consistent with the age of individuals that are in foster care in Medi-Cal Program that are youth. And also consistent with youth who are able to stay on their parents' health care coverage under the Affordable Care Act. Investing in young adults is investing in the health care of our state. As you know immigrants are a fundamental part of our workforce and also our communities. No one should have to suffer or die from an easily treatable condition because of where they were born. And we believe this small investment is absolutely necessary and critical to save the lives of thousands. Thank you very much for your longstanding commitment to this issue and to this population. We hope that this Committee will consider taking action at a later date, thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 33, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 35, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 731, 'end': 745, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tam Ma: Good afternoon, Mr Chair. Tam Ma with Health Access California, in strong support of this proposal. In addition to echoing the comments that Mr. Coleman made I will add that before the ACA, young adults had among the highest rates of uninsurance of any age group. While the Affordable Care Act allows most young adults to stay on their parents' health plan until age 26. Unfortunately for the undocumented population, most of them are not able to take advantage of that. Because many of their parents don't have employer-based coverage. So many of them are still left uncovered. California took a tremendous step forward in the last couple of years with the implementation of SB 75. And the Department of Health Care Services did tremendous work to quickly implement this. To make sure that all children under age 19 are able to get into full scope Medi-Cal. And we think that California should take the next step forward and extend full scope Medi-Cal coverage to all young adults up to age 26. So that we can not only have near universal coverage for kids but also near universal coverage for young adults as well, thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 145, 'end': 152, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kimberly Chen: kimberly tam chen with the california pan-ethnic health network. just to echo the comments of my colleagues and urge the legislature's support for this proposal, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Imelda Plascencia: iimelda kimberly plascencia with the latino coalition for a healthy california. we believe this is a great investment for california to continue to lead in health access for all.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Maya Ingram: maya imelda ingram, aclu of california. echoing the comments of my colleagues and asking for your support for this proposal, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lee Lo: lo with the south east asia resource action center, in full support. and i would like to echo the comments of those before me about expanding full scope medi-cal to undocumented young adults, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 2, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrew Medina: andrew of asian americans advancing justice california. echoing the comments of our colleagues in full support of the stakeholder proposal. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Janice Conallon: conallon, children's defence fund and also on behalf of the children's health coverage coalition. in full support and we hope to build on the success of sb 75, thank you.
[]
Evelyn Gonzalez: Evelyn Gonzalez with Community Health Councils also in strong support, very strong support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katie Andrew: Katie Andrew, Children Now, I just want to echo the comments of my colleagues. And say that we are also in strong support of this proposal, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Noe Paramo: noe maya paramo representing california rural legal assistance foundation, in strong support of the proposal. let's go forward and expand coverage to our young future leaders of california.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Hicks: Randy Hicks, California Disability Rights. because there's lots of folks there out there that are disabled, who are also uncovered. And so let's get them covered too, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Curt Child: curt noe child, disability rights california, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jody Hicks: Hi. Thank you, Jody Hicks representing Planned Parenthood Affiliates of California. Here to present on item number 25. And thank you for allowing the opportunity to present our proposal. We are requesting an increase in reimbursement rates for family planning and abortion services. We believe that can be done out of the Prop 56 funds. As you know, and we've been here before talking about some of the attacks that Planned Parenthood is facing, this year in particular. But Planned Parenthood serves 850,000 patients in California, with 115 health centers throughout. 87% of our patients are low-income and we serve all comers. So regardless of income or immigration status, we are there to serve those patients. And we like to think of ourselves as a safety net of safety nets. We are the leading provider of reproductive health care and because of that, we do face continual attacks. And I just want to bring those up just to talk about some of our cost and resources that were having to expend. So since the videos that were released in 2015, we've had a 900% increase in violent attempts on health centers and providers. So we've had to spend millions and millions of dollars and increase security, dealing with staff issues because of that. We've also had to expend much in legal resources and other resources to fend off the continued attacks at the federal level. So I bring that up to talk about some of those pressures. And most recently we worked closely with another clinic, the Women's Health Specialist in Northern California. And she couldn't be here today. But I wanted to bring up that particular clinic in Sacramento because they, unfortunately, had to close their doors on Saturday. So they serve 10,000 patients in Sacramento, and they closed for good. They have other clinics in Redding, Chico, and Grass Valley that they're hoping to be able to keep open. And just recently our Northern California Planned Parenthood board has voted to close two clinics in the Bay Area, as well. And I would like to blame all of this on everything that's happening at the federal level and it's hard to come to terms with talking about today. Really, we are talking about inadequate funding from the state level is why they had to close their doors. So, everything that's happening and we're having to increase our spending on other things and that's putting pressure on. But really, it's our MediCal rate increases that are, year after year not covering the cost for the services that we provide. So, cost have gone up at about 40% for reproductive health care. We're at the point now for our family pact rates are covering about half the costs of those services. And we know that for every dollar spent in that, in family pact we're saving the state money at the back end for many things that we prevent. So, we're here today asking for an increase and some relief so that we don't have to close any more clinics and that does not continue to happen. And if we're funded at a level maybe some of those clinics can reopen and we can continue to serve the patients today. So, it is late in the day and I thank you for the time. Thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tam Ma: Sure. Good afternoon Mr. Chair and members Tam Ma with Health Access California here in strong support of this proposal. With Prop 56 dollars it raises about $1.2 billion for MediCal and we have put forth a proposal on how to invest those funds to improve the MediCal program. And among that is targeted increases in provider reimbursement rates. Last week, we presented on our DentiCal proposal and this week we're here to very pleased to support increases in rate for the family pact program where providers there have had their rates frozen for a couple of decades now. And we think this is a good way to invest some of the Prop 56 dollars and get a lot of value in terms of increasing and maintaining access. And we are also very distressed to hear women's health specialists has closed its doors, that deeply impacts access to services here in Sacramento as well as in Grass Valley, Redding and Chico where they had clinics for women and their families, thank you.
[{'start': 43, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Chen: Kimberly Chen, here on behalf of the California Pan Ethnic Health Network, in support of this proposal.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Hicks: Randy Hicks, California Disability Rights speaking for Randy Hicks. Key chain says I support Planned Parenthood. Okay, Planned Parenthood is a very good organization especially for the LGBT community. They are the few organizations that does comprehensive sex education, and I'm distressed to hear that they closed those clinics, especially in those very conservative areas where they don't do that. And so, we have done everything we can to bring these clinics back online, to protect women's health, and support the LGBT community. Thank you, Planned Parenthood.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 55, 'end': 66, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ronald Coleman: Good afternoon, Ronald Coleman here on behalf of the California Immigrant Policy Center also here in support of these funds. Certainly this program, Family Pact, is open to all state residents and we're very strongly in support of this investment. Thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrew Medina: Andrew Medina with Asian Americans Advancing Justice California also in support of the proposal. Thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Nguy: Good afternoon. Good afternoon. Can you hear me here? There we go. I didn't think you could hear me. Linda Nguy with Western Center Poverty. We appreciate the sub Committee considering raising the MediCal aged and disabled income eligibility threshold to 138% of the Federal poverty line. Under healthcare reform, all adults except for seniors have an income eligibility threshold of 138%. By nature of their age, individuals 65 and older are subject to a lower income eligibility threshold of 123% of the federal poverty line or about $1,235 a month. If a senior's income is more than this amount, he or she can only get free MediCal or he or she can only get MediCal with the share of cost. That means, a share of cost is the amount an individual must pay before free MediCal kicks in. So, if an individual's income is $1,250, we subtract $600 and the share of cost is $650. This is based on the antiquated idea that individuals can live off of $600 a month. And that amount has not changed since it was first established in 1989. So forced between paying for rent and food or their MediCal share of cost, many seniors forgo needed medical services, prompting them to move into skilled nursing facilities at a high cost to the state, and an even higher personal cost to their own independence and well-being. It's time to provide parity and relief for low income seniors who but for their age would qualify for free MediCal. Every month our low income, our legal aid attorneys see seniors who are negatively impacted by this including individuals who at age 65 are eligible for free MediCal but because of a birthday are now not eligible for free MediCal. We appreciate the Assembly Budget Committee last year did approve this measure. Unfortunately, it did not get out of Conference Committee. But we strongly urge the Subcommittee to move forward with this proposal this year. Thank you.
[{'start': 101, 'end': 111, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ronald Coleman: Good afternoon, Ronald Coleman here on behalf of the California Immigrant Policy Center also urge the Committee to adopt this proposal for all of the reasons that my colleagues previously stated. Thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Hicks: randy curt hicks, california disability rights. we support the proposal because it keeps people at home and it keeps them independent and it saves the state money.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Curt Child: curt, disability rights california. this is a long overdue fix, and we strongly support it for all the reasons stated by western center. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Noe Paramo: noe randy paramo, representing california rural legal assistance foundation. in support of the proposal, to remedy the inequities impacting our elders in our communities. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Chen: kimberly noe chen with the california pan ethnic health network in support of this proposal.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cynthia Tucker: Okay, hello, I'm Cynthia Tucker with the Office of Systems Integration and I'm here with
[{'start': 17, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Renee Marla: renee kimberly marla, department of health care services
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jen Flory: flory with the western center on law and poverty we do support this budget proposal. we've learned a lot of lessons from the cal... implementation in particular. particular in user testing so that we are now getting cal.. to where it's working and medi system that determines where the medi-cal beneficiaries get their medi-cal when they are at the doctors. so we hope we learn from these lessons and have a long good planning process so that meds is done right.
[]
Marta Green: okay? good afternoon chair and committee members. my name is marta renee green and i serve as the chief deputy director for the department of managed health care. with me i have jenny phillips, our deputy director of legislative affairs. mary watanabe was to join us today but unfortunately a last minute conflict came up, so it'll just be jenny and myself. i'm here to talk about 4 bcps and first i will give you a general overview. our department, our mission is to protect consumers health care rights and ensure a stable health care delivery system, we do this in a number of ways. we license and regulate approximately 123 health plans that provide coverage to more than 25 million californians. this constitutes more than 90% of the commercial health care coverage market. our proposed budget for 17, 18 is $76.9 million with 450 authorized positions, which are funded by annual assessments on the health plans. we have no general funds. for our programs, first we have our help center. since 2000 the department of manage health care has helped more than 1.7 million californians, resolved complaints and issues with their health plans such as coverage disputes or access to providers or billing issues. next is our office of plan licensing, health plans are required to apply for and maintain a license to operate as a health plan in california. we review all aspects of the plan's operation to ensure compliance with the law. next is our office of plan monitoring. in this office we do two major functions, we monitor provider networks for adequacy and we also conduct on-site routine and non-routine medical surveys, which are akin to operational audits. next is our office of financial review. this office actively monitors the financial stability of health plans and medical groups through regular reporting, financial audits and other monitoring tools. this office also reviews proposed premium rate increases in the individual and small group market to make sure that health plans are providing detailed information to the public to justify their proposed rates. as well as annual medical loss ratios filings to ensure plans are appropriately investing in enrollee healthcare. our last program is our office of enforcement. we use a variety of tools to enforce the law when violations are uncovered such as corrective action plans, settlement agreements, financial penalties, cease and desist orders, freezes of enrollment, and other such measures. and with that, that's the overview.
[{'start': 61, 'end': 78, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 178, 'end': 192, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 238, 'end': 251, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 340, 'end': 345, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tam Ma: Good afternoon, Mr. Chair, and Members. Tam Mall with Health Access California, here in support of the department BCP. We believe the department should get the resources necessary to fully staff its help center so that consumers are able to get assistance when they have problems getting the care that they need. As well as getting assistance when their health plan denies any medical services that they should be entitled to, thank you.
[]
Kimberly Chen: Kimberly Chen with the California Pan-Ethnic Health Network. Also here in support of the request. We would encourage the department to work closer or take another look at working closer with the office of the patient advocate who has noted in the past the end reporting of complaints by those who speak a language other than English. We don't think that this is folks just not having as many problems but perhaps a larger issue going on. So we do request that those issues be looked into further with the office of patient's advocate.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Hicks: hicks california disability rights, we're also in support of this, as a consumer i definitely am in support of this. but as california disability rights, where our thing is about access, were they denied access, did they not get a wheelchair scale, did they not get a bed that raised up and down. there's a lot of ada compliances that must be going through here and so any kind of amount of money and extra staff to take a look at this we appreciate it, thank you very much.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Metzker: brian marta metzker legislative analyst office, our office reviewed several requests from departments for information security and for it resources and positions to address security risks across different departments. we didn't take any specific issue with this vcp, but we did identify the need for the california department of technology to take a strategic role in addressing the security risks across state departments.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tam Ma: good afternoon mr. chair and members, tam brian ma with health access california, we were the core sponsors of ab 72 last year which provides the nation's strongest protections against surprise medical bills. and this bill was as result of many many hours of work on the part of dr wood who's one of our seven joint authors last year. seven assembly joint authors in this bill and ultimately received very strong bipartisan support. so we're very please to see that it's at the stage where the department of managed health care can implement and enforce the law. so we support the department's bcp for this to have the resources to implement the law to make sure that consumers are protected as well as making sure that the payments between health plans and ad network providers are handled appropriately. thank you.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 282, 'end': 286, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kimberly Chen: Kimberly Chen with the California Pan Aspect Health Network. We supported the legislation last year and are pleased to support the budget change proposal. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Savage: Karen Savage California pan ethnic health network we appreciate the efforts here. The implementation of the managed care final rule is an ongoing process. There are many conversations and we do think the Department of managed healthcare has a really important role to play so we would appreciate the conversations continuing on this, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tam Ma: ma with health access, echo the comments my colleagues had stated. and i want to add to that that there are a couple of policy bills that are moving through the legislature at the moment to implement the federal medicaid managed care regs and their ongoing discussions around a network adequacy pieces and kind of which department should be responsible for promulgating standards and enforcing them. and so we ask that this budget sub committee consider those consecrations in its deliberations, thank you.
[]
Kimberly Chen: Kimberly Chen with the California Pan Ethnic Health Network. The voice of consumers is absolutely critical to the work of this department and we support this BCP or this stakeholder request
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Howard Backer: hi chairman arambula and committee members, my name is dr. howard tam backer, i'm an emergency physician and the director of the emergency medical service authority. this is dan smiley, my chief deputy and our department of finance colleagues. i'm going to provide a brief overview of our department, our budget, and our requests for next year's budget.
[{'start': 12, 'end': 20, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 59, 'end': 76, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 174, 'end': 184, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Christie Belmar: Mr. Chairman, Members of the Committee, Christie Belmar on behalf of the California Professional Firefighters in support of this proposal. Our members, it's their livelihood when they're subject to some sort of an investigation, some licensure action pending. And they have experienced what happens when a retired annuitant meets its cap of working time, and then disappears, and then we are still pending an investigation with no resolution. So we urge you to take some consideration of this proposal, and get the agency properly staffed. These funds are coming from paramedics paying extra fees and penalties, so we appreciate your support.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ruth Holton-Hodson: Good afternoon, members, I'm Ruth Holton-Hodson. I'm the Senior Policy Adviser for the state treasurer. The treasurer's requesting statutory authority to redirect $20 million from the current Help II Loan fund balance, under the California Health Facilities Financing Authority. To establish a one time emergency grant program to assist non profit small and rural community clinics that maybe facing significant financial hardships or their ability to meet. Our challenges to their ability to meet the demand for care as a result of federal actions over the next four years, whether that might be changes to the ACA, cuts to federal funding, or regulatory actions. The Help II Loan program is a revolving loan program for capital expenses for small and rural safety net providers. The current fund balance of $29 million is result of 20 plus years of 100% repayment on the loans, and 3% interest accrued on those loans. The treasures financial adviser has determined that redirecting this 20 million from the fund will not jeopardize the sustainability of the loan program, and we ask for your support. Thank you.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cathy Frey: Good afternoon, I'm Cathy Frey, the CEO of the Central Valley Health Network, in very strong support of this proposed grant program. I think you know that the community clinics in the State of California are basically the backbone of the premiere care delivery system for MediCal. They are facing very uncertain times in the next four years. Any little thing could be the proverbial straw that breaks the camel's back on that fine thin line that they operate on. This grant proposal would absolutely be a lifeline for those small house, particularly in rural areas, or those that are the sole provider of care. And because of that, the health centers in the Central Valley of California absolutely support this proposal, thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Janice Conallon: Janice Conallon with Childrens' Defence Fund in California. And we support this request. And we're particularly interested in the ongoing and emerging research on trauma informed care. And its ability to heal even the most painful difficult circumstances that children face. And we're hopeful that this body will continue to support that research, that work and that funding. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Gonzales: rebecca howard gonzales national association of social workers california chapter we want to thank the assembly member for spending so much time and energy for looking at this very important problem, ways to make our communities healthier. i also looked at the list of organizations you suggested for giving or receiving these grants, and i want to support those organizations. i've had the opportunity to work with the racial and ethnic mental health disparities coalition, and they've done great work on trying to reduce mental health disparities for minority communities. so i want to thank you once again, and to support this proposal.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melvin Harshah: Good afternoon gentlemen, my name is Melvin Harshah. And I am a BSW student-intern at an NSW. And I support this. I actually grew up in Los Angeles, in this impoverished area. And I am still a  Black man, and so I support this. Thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Fran Mueller: Great, good afternoon. I'm Fran Mueller, Chief Deputy Director with the Office of Statewide Health Planning and Development, also know as OSHPD. I appreciate the opportunity to come back today, provide additional information on this proposal, and address questions from the first hearing. OSHPD currently operates out of two facilities in California. Our headquarters in Downtown Sacramento and a Southern California office in Los Angeles. OSHPD is in the process of moving both offices due to expiring leases. In 2014, CalPERS the lessor for our Sacramento location, notified OSHPD and the Department of General Services, which acts as the real estate agent for state departments, that it would not renew the lease for OSHPD headquarters once the soft term lease expired in November 2020. Additionally in the spring of 2016, the Metropolitan Water District, the lessor for our Los Angles office notified OSHPD and DGS that the building requires a seismic retrofit and other structural upgrades. Metropolitan Water District needs the space currently occupied by OSHPD. To make these changes and will not renew our lease when it expires on May 2017. Our proposal here today request increase expenditure authority in the amount of 1.2 million ongoing. Beginning in fiscal year 2017-18 to support increased rent cost due to the new leases for both buildings. 1 million is attributable to OSHPD's new Sacramento Headquarters and approximately 200,000 is for the Los Angeles office. The 1.2 million is from existing special funds, the proposal does not include general fund. I'll cover a little bit of background on the Sacramento relocation first. So OSHPD headquarters relocation a large project requiring approximately a 125,000 square feet for multiple programs and more than 400 employees. Given the size and complexity of this relocation and the tightening real estate market, we immediately engaged DGS and the Department of Finance when we were notifed the list would not be renewed. CalPERS also requested that DGS expedite OSHPD's Sacramento relocation, so it could relocate CalPERS staff currently leasing space in West Sacramento to the space that we currently occupy. Due to the lack of current available space to lease, along with increasing market rates. DGS advised OSHPD that it would be prudent to enter the market as early as possible to secure an appropriate space large enough to accommodate our department and to capture the most competitive rent structure for the duration of the lease term. With me today is Patrick Foster. He is the Chief of the Real Estate Leasing and Planning Section at DGS. And Mr. Foster can provide some additional detail regarding the real estate market conditions at the time and the site search that was conducted for OSHPD in early 2015.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2527, 'end': 2541, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2623, 'end': 2629, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Patrick Foster: Good afternoon, thank you. Patrick Foster, Department of General Services. Yeah, just kind of want to add, Fran did a really good job of summing it up, but as you know we just built a new arena here in Sacramento. So there's this term that we use in the real estate industry called the arena effect. There are folks thinking that the market is going to increase. The economy has been better. The amount of available space has decrease since the arena had been put into place. So when we heard the news of a 125,000 square feet which is roughly their requirement needing to go out to the market place. And seeing that the market was not only decreasing of opportunity and space. But also increasing in cost that we felt it was an opportunity to do it sooner rather than later, so.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 107, 'end': 111, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sam Goldman: my name is goldman, i'm a professor of neurology and occupational and environmental medicine at ucsf and at the veterans administration hospital in san francisco. i have studied parkinson's disease and environmental risk factors for parkinson's for the past 25 years and we know that at least a 100,000 californians have pd, we think. well, we absolutely know that that number is going to double in the next 30 years and that the current economic burden in california is about $3 billion currently. parkinson's disease was first described 200 years ago, the height of industrial revolution in england. and since that time, we have learned that some of the greatest risk factors for parkinson's include pesticides and solvents and some of our work has found up to a 10 fold increased risk for people exposed to some of these agents. we've also learned that about 90% of the cause of parkinson's disease is environmental, not genetic. california has some of the highest pesticide usage rates in the country. silicon valley, for example, is one of the most polluted ground waters areas in the state. most people aren't aware of that and our preliminary work found that specifically the solvents that are on the groundwater in silicon valley are those that increase risk of parkinson's disease. so the reason that we need a registry is to identify hotspots throughout the state. we don't know if rates are higher in certain areas. we suspect that they are and our preliminary studies found very high rates in areas around fresno and curren county and silicon valley, much higher than we anticipated. by identifying the clusters, we can identify causes and we can prevent parkinson's disease. we firmly believe that it's a preventable disease. forward thinking california has invested millions of dollars over many decades to establish the best environmental databases in the world. we know where pesticides have been applied for 50 years, but that data is only of value if we put it to work and we can do that for a relatively small amount of money. we can really leverage this multi-decade investment in environmental data in california. there's nowhere else in the country this work can be done. just with our little pilot projects several years ago we're able to bring in over $1 million in federal funding. just to study parkinson's in these four counties. we will have the only parkinson's registry in the country with the best environmental data to go along with it and this will really drive research dollars into the state this will be the only place this kind of work can be done. and i just think this is a tremendous opportunity, can't be done anywhere else and we can really make a huge difference in the health of future generations in california, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matthew Marsen: Good afternoon Chair, Members of the Committee, Matthew Marsen, Vice President with Public Health Institute. We are in strong support of this proposal we have partnered with the California Department of public health and health care services for many decades now in support of the California cancer registry and we have seen just how critical that resource has been to the state on that disease issue and we think seeing the increased burden and the threat of the Parkinson's to our state economy and to families and communities across California, we think that the registry will bring a vital, investment to help us to treat and ultimately prevent Parkinson's disease, so thank you.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 62, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ryan Hicks: ryan rebecca hicks, california's disability rights. i'm going to speak on a personal note here. my partner's dad died of parkinson's and because that happened, he didn't know he had it, he didn't know how fast it was coming on, and when you have an onslaught like that, it's very expensive, it costs a lot of money. luckily he was a veteran and he was cared for there, but people who don't have those sources and resources, there's not enough money that can be spent to research and for a cure so that for you we thank you for that.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert Purdie: Good afternoon. My name is Robert Purdie. I'm a Board Member with the Valley Fever Americas Foundation and I'd like to start by telling my story. On December 1st, 2012, I woke with a really bad headache, which continued for about six weeks unabated. I was misdiagnosed in that time. I was told twice that I had a sinus infection. I was told that I had cluster headaches. In February of 2012, I was diagnosed with the meningitis form of Valley Fever, known as cocci meningitis. As a result of that, I spent about six weeks in the hospital recovering, and I started to rebuild my life. In October in 2012 I was readmitted to the hospital because the medication they had me on had quick working. So at that time I started my second type of medication. The following year, I was readmitted again and they found that that medicine wasn't working. So at that time, I was started on my third type of medication, a drug called voriconazole, which is known to have very severe side effects when used at the dosages which they use it for Valley Fever. So it can lead to skin cancer. I have a friend that's a survivor that the drug put him in a wheelchair In addition, because I had failed two other drugs, they installed a port in my head, which is what this is. And they begin what they call intrathecal amphotericin B treatment, which means that they inject a really toxic horrible drug directly into my brain. I was lucky enough to only have to do this twice a week at starting point and I'm lucky enough now to be at the every four week mark because I was diagnosed with skin cancer twice as a result of the third medication I was on I was able to get on the fourth medication, which is the newest medication. The most expensive medication but also the best medication. So, I sit before you now my life basically requires me to live in Kern. County. I have restricted travel and every four weeks I have to go to the Doctor for them to inject that drug into my brain. And that is, at this point, my normal life because Valley Fever has no cure, no vaccine. Our best weapon is awareness because of that, I became involved with Valley Fever America's foundation and last year I became a board member. Valley fever is very proud of the relationship we've had with the State of California and working together on research in the past, as well as research that we've supported on our own which has been very important in getting to the stage where they're at now, working towards a vaccine and a cure. To give you an idea on Valley Fever of what the effect is in the places that it's endemic, there's a Doctor in Arizona that is doing a lot of the research, his name is Dr Galgiani. And he compares it to Polio in the endemic areas and the effects of Polio in the endemic communities. Because Polio has, thankfully, been mostly eradicated, I thought I'd give you some numbers comparing it to Zika. Since Zika recently has got a lot of nationwide and local attention, and a lot of funding, as well. So since 2015 there have been 534 travel-related cases of Zika in California. There been no locally acquired primary cases and only seven person to person cases. As a result of that there have been five live born infants with birth defects. In 2016 there were 1905 cases of Valley fever in Kern County alone and if you add that to 2015 that number goes to be over 3,000 in the same time period. All those cases were locally acquired cases, they were six deaths in 2016 from Valley fever, and there were 15 more for the same period that we compared to sequel this 2015 through 2017 just in current county. There's also an unknown number of chronic in debilitating cases of valley fever because of that we're here talking to you about allocations of funds. There's a lot of different ways that funds could be allocated that we're having immediate impact on valley fever. Testing for Valley Fever is one that we're here talking about. Along with testing I want to share a story. In Arizona Quest Diagnostics lab allows you to walk in and ask for a Valley Fever test for $30. In Curren County you can pay $67, $74 excuse me, for a valley fever test, but unfortunately without a Doctor's office they can't receive it because they can't process it at the health department or anywhere else without a Doctor's orders. So one thing the state could do would be to assist in subsidizing that test so people could walk in and get that test for $30. So it'd be similar to what's being done in Arizona. The difference would be in the quality of the test. The test done through UC Davis and the current county health department are 99% accurate with each other. So they have the highest record of being accurate. Other than that there's also research. The State of California has funded research for the vaccine project in the past unfortunately the vaccine in that capacity didn't work, but they are working on a new one and they seem to have a very high likelihood of success. In addition, as Assembly Member Salas alluded to there's a potential cure called Nikkomycin Z. This drug research was actually started on this drug in the 1980's, but it has reached the point now where they are ready to go to human trial. The FDA has fast tracked it under the orphan drug program and within 12 months they could be at human trials if they had the money to literally produce enough drug to start the trial. That is their stumbling block.  Through some donations at the foundations made they've been able to work out the manufacturing process. They just need an influx of funds to actually manufacture the drug. And start human trials which could begin in less than 12 months. In addition there's a vaccine, it's farther from being ready to be human trials by a large degree, but it is close to being ready to be tried in animals. If you're unaware valley fever is a disease that affects all mammals. So I believe in Fresno there was a sea otter that died from valley fever last year at their zoo, but until those things come to pass our biggest and best weapon is awareness. Currently the state allocates no funds to awareness. The health departments and local entities receive no funding for awareness. So what awareness is being done is being done from their general fund. I wanted to wrap up by reminding you that because of all these facts spending on Valley Fever is an investment and it has a direct recoupment in two programs Medical and State Disability Insurance systems. Thank you for your time.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2661, 'end': 2669, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4983, 'end': 4988, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Christian Brown: How are you doing, my name is Christian Brown, I am an advocate for children overcoming sickle cell. My son was diagnosed with sickle cell anemia at birth, and as of today, I know that there isn't a sickle cell foundation in Northern California. So I think that this particular bill would be very progressive, to be able to give children and their family a holistic view of how children could overcome sickle cell, not only using diet and nutrition, but also using contemporary medical care as well. So I would hope that this bill would move forward, understanding that there has been a very limited understanding, and limited in dealing with sickle cell anemia.  Most doctors in medical school, they spend four years in medical school, but they only spend one month studying sickle cell anemia. And I personally feel like that has everything to do with the population that's most affected by sickle cell. So I think $80 million might be expensive to some, but when you consider everything that the African Holocaust produced, I think sickle cell anemia is one of them, and when you consider how disastrously disruptive our diet and nutrition have been over the last four centuries, that is due to, not necessarily our own merit, but just where we ended up at through our journey and our experience. So as a father with a son with sickle cell anemia, I truly believe that this might be a step in the right direction with being able to give children and their families a holistic understanding about how you can actually deal with it. And heal yourself through diet and nutrition, but also contemporary medication, as well.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Brooks: Hi, good afternoon. I'm Jessica Brooks, the State Director for Best Buddies California. We're a state affiliate of Best Buddies International. With me is Larry Larkin a long time Best Buddies Jobs participant who has been employed at Silicone Valley Bank since 2012. Best Buddies was founded in 1989 by Anthony Kennedy Shriver as a college student at Georgetown University. Inspired by his aunt Rosemary who had an IDD and his mother Eunice founder of the Special Olympics. Best Buddies is a 501C3 non profit organization whose mission is to provide opportunities for one to one friendships, integrated employment, and leadership development for people with intellectual and developmental disabilities. I'm honored to speak to you on behalf of the nearly 6,000 Californians who participate in Best Buddies program throughout the state. Our Best Buddies School friendship programs facilitate the social integration of individuals with disabilities. This is achieved through the delivery of time tested inclusion programs that overcome the social, and physical barriers that inhibit the growth of mutually beneficial relationships between students with and without IDD. Best Buddies participants are less likely to experience the negative effects of these barriers. Such as an increased vulnerability to bullying, and a damaging social isolation that can impact their ability to live a happy, healthy life. Participation in Best Buddies makes students with disabilities both college and career ready by supporting the development of essential social skills. Our Best Buddies jobs program has been a trend setter. Advocating for the competitive integrated employment of people with IDD since 1994. Best Buddies jobs' staff members provide individualized assessment, job development, job placement, on-the-job training, and follow-along support for individuals with IDD, ages 18 and up. All services are person-centered, and are based on the individuals' interests, skills, and career goals. Best Buddies jobs has a proven track record of helping participants secure non-traditional supported employment. In settings like law firms, financial planning firms, the entertainment industry, hospitals, luxury hotels, and high profile government offices. The average hourly wage of a Best Buddies jobs participant in California is $13.97, significantly above the average wage for people with developmental disabilities, which averages $6.44 to $8.48 per hour. The federal minimum wage of 7.25 and California's own minimum wage of 10.50. Best Buddies jobs participants in California working average of 23.79 hours per week, which is nearly double the national average of 12 hours per week for most individuals with IDD. Investment by the state in Best Buddies helps us leverage private dollars. For the current fiscal year, this successful public-private partnership has raised $0.57 for every $1 invested by the state. For the next fiscal year we are on track to increase this to a dollar for dollar return on your investment. We respectfully request $1.5 million from the State of California to support 6200 participants at 100 Best Buddies chapters statewide. 20 new chapters in Fresno and San Jose, that serve an additional 600 students. 110 adults with disabilities, already placed in competitive integrated employment. 30 new adults with disabilities by expanding our jobs program in Los Angeles and the Bay Area, and a minimum of 30 new adults through the expansion and addition of our jobs program to Long Beach Harbor City and Fresno. Now, I am pleased to have Larry share about his experiences through the Best Buddies Jobs Program.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 154, 'end': 166, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 303, 'end': 326, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 395, 'end': 403, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 434, 'end': 440, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3560, 'end': 3565, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Larry Larkin: Hello, everyone. My name is Larry Larkin. I'm a Best Buddies Ambassador. I'm 23 years old and I'm from San Mateo, California. I work at Silicon Valley Bank, I'm a sports fan, a good friend, and a hard worker. I was diagnosed with autism when I was three years old. And I wasn't able to speak until I was five. I've been a Best Buddies ambassador for the last four years, and I even got my job at Silicon Valley Bank through Best Buddies. I love my job, and I'm thankful to Best Buddies that I have a job that I love. Before I got my job, I was in Project Search. It's an internship for high school graduates where you get job training. Through that job training, I landed at my current job with some help from Best Buddies. Now, I've been [UNKNOWN] for the last four years and the mailroom clerk. I'm in charge of delivering mail to the employees, and emailing people when their packages come, and I'm darn good at what I do. One thing I've Learned from Best Buddies, is that my disabilities will never keep me from my dreams. Best Buddies makes me feel stronger and more confident. I am proud to share my voice in the community. By giving speeches to Best Buddies, I've been able to be an advocate for myself and all my friends with disabilities. Best bodies has helped me find my voice. Once I started speaking, I never stopped. We hope you'll help us expand our life changing friendship, leadership, and jobs programs to more communities in California. So more individuals like me have a chance to follow their dreams. Thank you all for your time and have a great day.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Doyle: Thank you Mr. Chair and members, John Doyle, Developmental Services. As the agenda correctly points out, the department was provided a one time augmentation of $1 million in the current fiscal year through the conference Committee process. With that $1 million, we've contracted with the Best Buddies program. The funds are used to support a minimum of 6,000 participants in programs at middle schools, high school, colleges, and in communities around the state.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vanessa Garcia: garcia with the department of finance, the department of finance acknowledges the merits of the proposal but cannot support additional funding.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amir Beardsley: my names amir ryan beardsley, im a sac state student, and ive been in the best buddies club for two semesters now. and ive already seen the positive impact its had on the students and the community. i support it. thank you.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ken Berrick: Good afternoon. My name is Ken Berrick. I'm the chief of office of law enforcement support. I'm going to give a little history in relationship to why we're asking NRBCP. Basically in March of 2015 agency provided a report to committees pertaining to the underperformance of OPS, Office of Protective Services, law enforcement within Department of State Hospitals Department of Developmental Services. That plan was not accepted in its entirety and a different plan was under compromise, different plan was suggested and passed. And basically, it was concreted in statute 4023.78 of the Welfare and Institution Code. And just quickly, basically our function is oversight of the facilities law enforcement within both departments. So what we do is, if it's a serious allegation of misconduct against staff and the investigators at the facilities is going to investigate it. We monitor their investigations, I have a staff of attorneys that will contemporaneously when the allegation is made the facilities call us immediately within two hours so we can assess if we need to roll out. So we're there on the ground of that when the investigation starts and we assess it as it progresses throughout the stages of an investigation. Whether it's criminal, then it goes to the DA if there's probable cause to do that. If it's administrative then we also monitor the administrative adverse action part of that all the way to the State Personnel Board. And we evaluate and assess the investigations. So that's one. The second is that if the serious allegations against police officers I have a team of investigators that will conduct the internal affairs investigations if it meets to criteria within both departments, so that's two. Also the third element on what we do is identify best practices of law enforcement within both departments. And the final thing that we accomplish is we produce a biannual report. It's transparent report on our evaluations yes. The second one is actually thicker than the first. So we actually started in January of 2016. So these are our two reports for the first year that we actually initiated this program, our office under what the mission is under the statute. So basically with the original mission, or plan, not going forth, and the budget that we had was for the original plan. So we identified a couple of items or areas that we need, that we are asking for additional funding. One is vehicles. I have to have the ability for my staff to travel to the facilities that are located throughout the State of California. And so that takes transportation costs. And that wasn't funded initially. So we're asking, best approach is to rent those vehicles on a long term basis from Department of General Services. So we're asking for 71,000 ongoing for that. Another element that we needed additional funding for is since we became an oversight entity and had to produce a report. We needed to create a investigative case management and also a over sight case management system where we can put all out information into, and actually produce these reports. So, we created a system to start the operation up. And basically, what we need to do, is expand upon this system, so we can actually produce these reports in a more quick manner, instead of intensive man hours. It would be more automated. Also we have to be able to look into the systems of both departments law enforcement, they're records management system where they capture all the police reports. As an oversight entity, we have to have the ability to look into those systems. On an outside look, without going through them and requesting information. So we have worked with the vendor to get a tool, because there wasn't one developed. So they developed the tool so we could look into it, but it's just a temporary fix. We need a more robust tool so we can do the over sight function of our job and be able to see into their systems. With that said, I'm quickly going to go into kind of the findings of our first year reports. Basically, the first year my office conducted 37 investigations into possible serious allegations involving peace officers within both departments. We monitored 219 investigations that the department performed and reported on those in the report. Also, just to note, the first reporting period, the first six months of operation sustained allegations were 22% in the second reporting period, they jumped to 29%. So the quality of the reports, I believe, are getting better, and they're good. All this continues to recommend that DSH review its law enforcement command and control structure and the Sar always reports on progress of 32 previous ongoing recommendations regarding law enforcement hiring, training, supervision, chain of command, as well as legal and hiring authorities standardize practice and discipline. And also, having medical staff available to the investigators as subject matter experts when a quality of care issue arises within the investigation. I'd like to report also some of the accomplishments that the Departments have made based upon our recommendations. One is standardized policy and procedures. Both departments now have a statewide policy and procedure, so it doesn't matter which facility you go to, it's the same policy. Training plans for the officers, basically they enhance their performance and their knowledge within how to operate within their environment, standardized training plans have been developed. DSH has implemented a statewide police academy for their cadets. Also, both departments have initiated hiring plans and I have reviewed those and reported on those in my reports. Also, an early warning system to flag problem behavior within law enforcement has been implemented within both departments during the reporting period. Those are just some of the highlights and thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christopher Kemp: Yes, thank you Mr. Chair, Members, Christopher Kemp,Secretary Health and Human Services. So I think your agenda has sort of some updates to it. We've been working with the California Law Enforcement Association on some language to address the recommendations in the report in terms of the other law enforcement structure. I think the first question was, sort of, what do we think of this? We think the recommendation has merit. And I think we are in support of the new language that we've worked together with CSLEA to produce. So if you like, I can give a sort of high-level overview of that. Please. Okay. So what this legislation or these amends would do is really, first put in place the Chief of Protective Services as a Deputy Director at the department. Right? Now, the chief is sort of an advisory body. And it has some limited oversight. This would raise him to the level of a Deputy Director, put him in the governing body for the entire department, and sort of enhance his oversight over the officers. This legislation would also upgrade the local chiefs to be on the executive team at the local hospital. Right now, they report to the hospital administrator and the hospital administrator is the local law enforcement official. This is sort of a strange relic of the past. This legislation would fix that. It would bring up the hospital Police Chief to being on the executive team of the hospital, who would then report to the Executive Director, and the chief of headquarters. So it would fix the sort of reporting issues we've had and sort of make operations still integrated and functional but remove that sort of antiquated reporting to the hospital administrator. So we think these minutes overall address the concerns and keep the hospital police integrated at the local level they need to be but address the issue.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kate Bell: kate amir bell with capital advocacy on behalf of cslea. so the state hospital police are members of cslea. and we're just very pleased that we've been able to come to a resolution on the issues. we have been facing a lot of problems and challenges with the structure of law enforcement. and as noted in the analysis, ois had recommended this change repeatedly, and so we're happy that we're now making some progress there. we had posed, in our april 6th budget memo language, which we are rescinding and are in full support of, this revised approach, which you have before you, and we shared that memo with all relevant stakeholders, as well. so we appreciate it. and we respectfully ask for your support of the language.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Lungren: mr chair and members, brian kate lungren on behalf of my family. we've had personal experience with law enforcement in napa state hospital, and they're outstanding men and women. my son is going on nine years there and i can attest personally that they are professional. they are ethical. they are very caring and this proposal to adjust their level, as it were, is very supported by our family.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Peter Kelly: i'm on. sorry about that, trying to, as we said, wade upstream. chair, members, thank you, my name is peter brian kelly, i'm with the office of systems integration, and here to give you an overview, is it not, is that better? great, i believe this is the first time i've been before this committee before, so i have a brief prepared overview, and hopefully that's, excuse me. so the office of systems integration, osi, was established to manage a portfolio of large complex health and human services it projects. and has developed a track record of successfully managing and deploying large, complex mission critical systems to support health and human services and employment programs at state, federal, and local level. we provide project management oversight, procurement support services for multi $1 billion portfolios of high criticality projects, coordinating communication, collaboration, and decision making among project stakeholders and program sponsors of the projects. generally speaking, we manage procurement contract negotiations and contract management aspects of the acquisition strategy for these technology systems and services. as well as overseeing the design, development, implementation of those projects which serve health and human service projects. additionally, and i know it's today before you, is horizontal integration, we also have the office of the agency information officer within osi administratively. the aio provides guidance and oversight of agency information technology assets, projects, systems of support. and in alignment with our agency strategic information plan, look more broadly to work with all of the offices and departments within health and human services agency to make sure that we're making the best possible investments as we go forward replacing legacy technology systems to make sure that they're more integrated, and that we're ensuring that systems are kept viable. and that we are looking for the best opportunity to take lessons learned from each of our projects, whether they serve one department or multiple departments to make sure that systems going forward are implemented effectively at the right price and to achieve the right outcomes for our constituents. i believe that was the first topic and the second topic this council has.
[{'start': 102, 'end': 119, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Frank Mecca: Which I shall not repeat what I did, Sorry for getting out ahead of my skis. No, it's okay. It's my own fault for apologies Thank you Mr. Chair, Frank Mecca, County Welfare Directors Association. I think it's ironic that we're here talking about a huge state information technology system and a new direction that we're being required to pursue. When the system actually works. It's not that the typical place that you're in as a member of the Legislature. And so from the kind of Welfare Directors Association standpoint We completely agree with Mr. Lightbourne's assessment, that the federal direction now, is the direction we have to pursue, and it's inevitable and regrettable. But if I could just take a moment to talk about some of the lessons that we've Learned over the last 20 years, I think they're relevant in how we move toward the new direction of the single system. The other thing I'd like to start out by saying is, that the technology can sound a little dry. But right now, one in three Californians is getting a life savings safety net service or benefit. Largely through, from the technology standpoint, the statewide automated welfare system. One in three Californians, at this very moment, are getting healthcare through Medi-Cal, nutrition through Snap, vital safety net. Funding and services through CalWORKS. And that all goes through this huge, complicated solar system that I would argue is the largest success we've ever had in our state for automation. Other than the eligibility workers and the social workers who work with clients, the technology is the most important tool, that the State of California uses to make sure that vulnerable people get the services and benefits that they're entitled to. And so I appreciate the time that you're giving to talk about this. For over a decade until the mid 90s the state tried to pursue a single statewide system for welfare automation. And the state couldn't pull it off. And so the Legislature and the administration at the time, with the agreement of the county Welfare Directors Association, and I was there at the time decided to shift the strategy to a multiple-county consortium model. And the reason this single statewide system strategy didn't work for that period of time, there were a couple of big reasons. And from my recollection, and from my vantage point, I would say that it was due to technology. A system so big, the bigger the system the greater the technological risk. And from a technology standpoint the state couldn't figure out how to scale it. But there was political risk as well. When there was one vendor and take it or leave it, every other vendor that wasn't selected, had a reason to come to the Legislature and try to undermine the project. And there was an ongoing tension about the distance between the state folks who were procuring or trying to procure the system and the end-users who are county employees eligibility workers. And so the administration and the Legislature at the time looked at an existing county consortium that worked. That was actually the predecessor to the current column system and said. The state wide approach hasn't worked for a decade and a half lets try a county consortium model, and it actually worked. And it worked because it chunked the technology into manageable sizes, the state was chunked up into manageable sizes. It created maximum vendor competition and it really did assign appropriate roles, from a governance standpoint, between the state and the counties. The state has oversight, sets the parameters, sets the rules, has the final say on money and contracts. The counties through a shared governance develop the procurements and manage the vendor on a day to day basis, so that they can make sure the technology is as up to date as possible to meet the end user goals, and it worked. And as we have moved from four to three to two and then eventually to one, largely due to pressure from federal government, That has a hard time understanding states west of the Mississippi or states as large as California. If I had a nickel for every time I heard a federal control agent say, but in Nebraska they don't need multiple consortia. And there's only one system in Iowa. But it is what it is, and I really do bring this up to say that I believe we're moving in the direction we have to and I believe we're moving in it with a full cooperation and partnership and I'm completely on the same page with the state, but as we do so I think it's critical that we keep our eye on the technology's risks. The importance of maintaining maximum vendor competition and maintaining the essential governance roles and responsibilities that made the multiple consortia approach work so well. We're happy to have a strong partner with the state as we move forward in this inevitable and the regrettable direction.
[{'start': 145, 'end': 156, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 551, 'end': 562, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Adam Dondro: hello. thanks for having me. adam peter dondro, assistant director for horizontal immigration with the department of social services. the proposal before you is relatively straight forward. it's taken me and my team with our existing responsibilities over immigration from department of social services to within the office of the aio. which as peter mentioned administratively reports through si, but directly reports to the undersecretary for health and human services. and so, what we do is we try to step back from the programmatic focus that most folks have in all departments to try to get their program operating well. and we kind of stayed above that to say, how do we step back and look at this from the clients prospective. what are there needs more holistically outside of those individual silos. and try to bring that prospective back. so we've been working over the last four years to bring that culture to the agency, through the department of social services. and we've realized that over those four years that we're more appropriately housed within the office of the aio. both because we really do have the perspective of the entire agency and because that particular office has the existing responsibilities to look at projects as they're proposed. from concepts on through to completion, and with that integration perspective there, we can meet those needs earlier on to bring that culture of integration and human-centered focus from the very beginning of looking at those.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 345, 'end': 350, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kevin Gaines: good afternoon, kevin adam gaines, department of social services. there are a couple of questions, i'll just get to the questions on the agenda. one related to what milestones we're expecting to complete during the fiscal year, the budget year, excuse me. and it's hard to, i'm assuming that the agenda has much of the narrative on the milestones that we have surpassed this in the current year. okay, so let me start with an overview.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lourdes Morales: Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and members, Lourdes Morales, with the Legislative Analyst's' Office. I would just note for the Committee that there is incredible uncertainty regarding the ultimate cost of seeing this project through. The current estimated cost is $420 million, but that number was estimated when the project was anticipated to move forward under the traditional or monolithic approach. The total project cost was not revised, when it was switched to the modular, agile approach. The administration has noted that the agile approach is new and therefore had significant uncertainty on how it would move forward. Well we have estimated the budget for 17-18 and find those costs reasonable. There's lots of uncertainty about what the out year costs will be.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tyler Woods: tyler kevin woods, department of finance. we would just add, that we concur with what ms. morales just said. and we're continuing to monitor this project on a year by year basis given that this approach to this project, the agile approach, is new to the state. and department of finance along with department of technology on the project are closely monitoring it on a year to year basis. and all what mr. kelly embellished, on the fact that we are anticipating some empirical evidence on the coming year along with the release, one, which will better inform our ultimate total project cost estimation this coming year.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 90, 'end': 97, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 406, 'end': 411, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brandon Hanser: Thank you. Yes, Brandon Hanser, Department of Technology. Wanted to kind of reiterate a lot of what Mr. Kelly had already stated. This project is more than just a change in software development. There were many changes that are being demonstrated here that Department of Technology is also part of from an oversight perspective and taking those lessons learned so that we can apply these to other projects. And see if we can reduce risk to the state for large system integration projects by breaking them down. From a project management perspective, procurement perspective, software development. Again, the user-centered design, a new way of approaching, ultimately, it's about the users and what they need and being able to be responsive to that. And we see this already demonstrated in this project, that as software is being developed it is confirmed with the users and modified if needed, but it's not set to requirements that were documented years ago. So we're already seeing positive changes and we look forward to how this project proceeds and how we can take these lessons Learned and apply them to other projects.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 104, 'end': 109, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cynthia Taiker: Cynthia is good. Cynthia Taiker, yes. Deputy Director for the BM division at the Office of Systems Integration and I'll be speaking with you on both issues 6 and 7, but before we hit that I'd like to.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 17, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pete Chervenko: thank you, mr. vice chair and members. if pete tyler chervenko with the department just really briefly. i just wanted to tag on that last issue, if i may. kevin and peter did a great job presenting. i wanted to make you aware to you staff, for over a year now, is getting monthly reports on the project and we intend to continue to do that. they are fairly detailed we're again as you expressed really proud of the ground breaking work being done there. we view that as a model for future procurements and therefore we are highly invested in its success so i want you to know at across the leadership level. we're really proud and paying attention, and appreciate all the support we've gotten from our department of finance colleagues, and the technology agency, and the govops agency as well. so we are talking and believe me, we're sharing too. so, i appreciate that opportunity. on this issue, on cmips ii, you may be aware that we are undergoing a procurement of the maintenance and operations services for our existing cmips ii system. there are two major components in that system. the first is the case management. a portion of that system. it case manages every time i'm in front of you, the number is larger, over 530,000 cases on an ongoing basis. and the other side of the system, payroll's the over 430,000 people that take care of them. that's obviously a critical program for us in the in home supportive services. seamed to itself provides the infrastructure that allows us to successfully operate that program. we have an existing contract that led to the implementation of seamed to statewide in november of 2013. that's been successful in operating. of course, we're doing ongoing efforts to improve. but this procurement that's under way, let me say, this a different way. the current contract ends in march of 2018. so, we have a procurement under way to maintain and operate that system on an ongoing go forward basis. we're nearing the point where we'll be receiving final bids. we expect to award a contract sometime in august of this year. and the request in this issue for you is if we end up with a different vendor than we currently have, there are some transition activities that will have to occur as outlined in your agenda. if we maintain the same vendor, obviously, the need is lower than that. so that's really what the request is in front of you and a total of 8.9 million, and your agenda did a really good job as always in summarizing what the request is.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 62, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 155, 'end': 160, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 165, 'end': 170, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Iliana Ramos: Iliana Ramos, Department of Finance. I just want to just reiterate that this is a set aside up to a certain amount. The department will provide evidence that the amount is actually needed and we'll review with CDT, as well. And anything that we do decide, the provisional language does require for us to keep the Legislature aprise.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Hicks: anything you guys can do to implement the program, get it working? that's great with us. we know there are big changes. i'm an hhs caregiver, hicks, california's disability rights, and an hhs caregiver. and i understand there are a lot of changes coming, so this proposal here, this is a very good idea. we need the money. and i see that a lot of it's going to go to administration. so we want to get it right the first time, because we already have a lot of issues about time sheets. everybody is already having issues about the federal labor standards act, and anything you guys can do to make this easier for any of us, all the caregivers are out there. that's what we should do. and i appreciate that. and thank you. thanks, department.
[{'start': 142, 'end': 147, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 188, 'end': 191, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Doyle: Thank you Mr. Chair and members. John Doyle, Department of Developmental Services. We completely appreciate the good intention Assembly Member Mathas' proposal. And do agree that additional funding can do a lot of good for our community. However I think the thing that we would want to point out is that from a department perspective our Regional Center budget is fully funded. While we understand there're other priorities that the community is concerned about, and we're concerned as well. Issues like local minimum wage, unfunded state and federal mandates. We're aware of these issues. But we think these issues have to be considered in light of the other competing general fund priorities throughout the state budget.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 143, 'end': 149, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Vanessa Garcia: Vanessa Garcia from the Department of Finance, apologies. The Department of Finance is opposed to this proposal because it is inconsistent with the state's current practices regarding the sale of state owned property. In addition, all savings from the closure of the developmental centers should go to the general fund for overall budgeting decisions in the future.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rick Rollins: Thank you. Mr Chair and members and distinguished staff. Rick Rollins representing ARCA, the Association of Regional Center Agencies. We have a long standing policy of trying to retain as much funding from our overall system in our system moving forward. And we appreciate efforts to do that. We want to lend our voice of support for this, and all measures. This is really a non partition issue. We have folks on both sides of the aisle that support the idea of retaining funds in our system. Thank you.
[{'start': 57, 'end': 69, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jacquie Dillard-Foss: I'm back, my name is Jacquie Dillard-Foss with the California Supported Living Network. And I think I work argue that our Regional Center system is fully funded. If you look at the comparison of the Developmental Center staff and the pay they receive, and the direct support professionals in our community, doing the exact work, with the exact complex needs. because my agency serves very complex need individuals, and my hire rate is 11.50. The state is not hiring people at the developmental center at 11.50 an hour. The folks that I support have G-tubes, complex behavioral services. And we're saying that there's funding that could be used for other services? When $15 an hour hit, what we're saying, and I'm going to dispute one little thing. I was talking to the National Alliance of Direct Support Professionals, and the Bureau of Labor Relations. He asked the question, why is our community of direct support professionals so under funded in comparison to say CNA? The average wage across our nation is $10.09. And she said, because she's an analyst, she said it's because you require lower cognitive ability for those you hire. And we're saying to our community that these direct support professionals are people with lower cognitive ability. And I argue they are not. Our system must, if we are talking about 330,000 plus the 700 individuals who are left with the Developmental Center coming into our community. We as the State of California, the great State of California, have to say these direct support professionals need to be recognized for direct support profession. And so they are not lower cognitive in ability, and so we must, every dollar that's available to this system needs to stay in this system. Thank you.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Guy Houston: mr chair and members, thank you very much for having this hearing today. it's very special that you would do this. guy, i'm with mission hope day program, we serve 450 special people every single day. and i was a former member up here, and so kind of in your shoes as well. to hear the statement that that the system is fully funded is an inaccurate one. there was a fantastic thing that happened last year where there was a raise and an increase. what not a lot of members don't know is that was the first increase in over 12 years. and actually were reductions along the way. and so we're just getting to the point where now we can pay our people minimum wage to serve our clients. it seems very reasonable that monies that are in the dd system now stay in the dd system. it's kind of special, it's unusual, again being in your shoes formerlly, is that we're not asking for a sales tax increase. we're not asking for any kind of tax increase, we're not trying to take it from somebody else. because as you know, that can be incredibly difficult as well. and so monies that are in the system can stay here. it's unfortunate there have been developmental centers in the past that have closed. and those savings, back then, weren't kept in the system. we might not be in the same condition we are today. so with potential 500,000, yes there are costs, but there's scores of tens of millions of dollars available. keep it in the system to serve all these great people that are providing for the most unfortunate in our communities. thank you very much.
[]
Barry Jardini: Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and members. Barry Jardini from the California Disability Services Association. I want to thank Assembly Member Mathis for bringing this issue to all of our attention today. I'm going to join the trend, and say that we certainly take issue with the fact that services are currently fully funded. I think if that was the case, you wouldn't see such significant staff turnover. You wont see programs who aren't able to take more clients on, because they don't have DSPs to actually serve the individuals. So fundamentally, I think that there still are shortages. And I know Mr Doyland and the department are aware of some of the other unfunded mandates that are facing providers now. So this money, if we can keep it in the system, it certainly would go a long way to alleviating some of those concerns. And also building up some of the system supports for the more challenging individuals. Not just the people transferring out of the DCs, but those who are already being served in communities who deserve better services that might not be available today. So we have a source of funding. And just to point out, in this year's budget, we're proposing to take from the community side budget to pay for shortfall in the DC budget. Right, so in that context, the money's fungible, right, between the DCs and the community side. Well if it can go that way to fund a short fall in the DCs, I would contend that it should go the other way as well. And so that the DC budget should also be available to fund the community system and make it as thriving and as wonderful, as we all know and hope it can be. Thank you. Thank you, sir.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 138, 'end': 144, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 601, 'end': 608, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kristie Sepulveda-Burchit: Hi, I'm Kristie Sepulveda-Burchit, a merchant from Educate Advocate. We're a statewide grass roots nonprofit organization that serves families with special needs children. And we are definitely in support of making sure that the funding follows the person with exceptional needs, and not back the general fund. Thank you.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jordan Lindsey: good afternoon, chair and members. jordan, executive director of the arc of california, as well as chair of the lanterman coalition, which represents the coalitions made up of 24 statewide agencies and organizations representing people with intellectual and developmental disabilities. as previous speakers have stated, we appreciate the department's statement, but we have to disagree that the system is fully funded and i've been up and down the state speaking with providers, and families, and individuals who may have a therapy but don't anymore because of certain cuts. may have had a certain service, but no longer have that, and who are still unable to maximize the potential and opportunities in our community. and so we disagree that it's fully funded at this point. and so there are a couple things, one is the savings that will occur, for the 500 plus $1 million, and there's already as we understand it a fund set up within dds. the dds trust fund, which is already set up in statue where the funds could be distributed to you, and as well there's a second issue which is the properties themselves and those properties could be one time or ongoing revenue for to provide critical services for people in the community and we hope that the legislature will agree, just because precedent says that these funds, the proceeds from these, whether it's ongoing or one time, of these properties will go into the general fund, doesn't mean that we have to do it this time. those properties have been here, and they've been supporting the community forever, the system forever, and they can continue to do that in a very real, tangible important way. and we hope the legislature will agree with that.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Terry DeBell: Good afternoon, Committee, Chair, and members. My name is Terry DeBell. I represent families from Fairview and Portivel developmental centers. I'm a family member also, of someone with a disability, my brother Patrick, now deceased, who lived at home, at Lanterman Developmental Center, and in the community. And I want to thank Assembly Member Mathis for recognizing the value of, and the need for the protection of the Developmental Center budget, and physical assets for the use of everyone served by the system. Because of my brother I've been involved my whole life in this system, which is rapidly becoming unified with the closure of the DC's and the transition of almost everyone into the community setting, along with at least some experience in qualified DC staff and effective programs, the bitter and time wasting and spirit draining and absolutely impossible arguments that we used to have about DCs versus the communities can now be set aside and to a large part they have been. Now there's pretty much a unified community of advocates that understand that one of the biggest determinants of how individuals succeed is to provide the services and supports that they need, and that only happens when those services and supports are on a solid and continuous financial footing, when those supports fail, true capacity can and does result. The California Legislature voted to close the Developmental Centers, along with that comes an obligation to ensure that the community care of the DC movers and all others served by the system is adequately funded. The closure of the DC should be an opportunity to get more funds to community services instead of just a budget savings, thank you.
[{'start': 58, 'end': 70, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 210, 'end': 217, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 345, 'end': 351, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Janelle Lewis: good afternoon, my name is janelle pete lewis. i serve on the state council on developmental disabilities where i chair the legislative and public policy committee. i'm also the parent of an adult with a developmental disability and i'm also a volunteer advocate who has assisted families impacted by autism for almost 20 years. there is not a day that goes by that i don't hear from panicked family members about the lack of services and support that exist in our community. we have increasing numbers that are becoming adults with developmental disabilities. and i do not understand the statement about our system being fully funded. i encourage you to support taking the funding from the dc closures and applying that to the system in which is should be applied. thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Hicks: Randy Hicks, California State Disability Rights, we agree with that. Thank you, Mr. Mathis. It just seems to me that every time we put any kind of sale or money into the general fund, it stays in the general fund. And then, everybody has to fight over that. Health and Human Services is over 20% of the budget. Could you imagine every time we have a budget fight DDS has to continue to fight for something and it was their land in the first place, it was their buildings in the first place. It just doesn't make any physical sense for this to happen. So for me, I concur with all the speakers here, the system is underfunded, and it if you keep it funded they should be able to keep their own money. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 84, 'end': 90, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Colleen Fernandez: hi, i'm colleen janelle fernandez. and i'm here on behalf of my two autistic daughters, kelly and katrina, 46 and 36 years old. i agree with what everyone has said. i feel it is underfunded. my one daughter is on a waiting list for a day program, so she sits at home. she has and abscess, and we are fighting to get her to see dr. begall, with the insurance, it was denied and i had to go to the department of health and human services to have it over turned and she still hasn't been seen yet. so imagine having abscesses and in pain and you're still waiting to be seen. their voice would be, please have the money follow the people. thank you very much.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 88, 'end': 93, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 98, 'end': 105, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 331, 'end': 337, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Elizabeth Drake: i'm serving multiple functions today. i'm here for elizabeth colleen drake. the irony is elizabeth doesn't have her speech device because her power chair is broken, and so she can't mount her dynavox to able to have our own voice. so as we talk about funding and money following the person and why this community needs to be more funded, i also am a proud provider for colleen and her two daughters. and katrina can not just go to a dentist, she needs to have that dentistry. so, it's really, it's a very passionate thing. but, i'm going to shut up because elizabeth is going to hit me. so i will now be a speech device. hello, my name is elizabeth colleen drake, i want to first say thank you for your time. i am living with cerebral palsy, i am a consumer advocate at the agency called step, strategies to empower people. on behalf of myself and the step agency, and all of the developmentally disabled community, i would like to say that the system is still in crisis. my life is in your hands, the lack of funding for the developmentally disabled is outrageous. in my life, i live on my own and i work in the community. i also have high service needs and personal care needs such as changing, eating, grooming, and other basic needs. when i hire staff, it's really hard to keep them. the amount of work and care they do does not compare to how much they're being paid. so they quit and i have to start all over again looking for staff. this interrupts my work and my personal life. i have seen countless agencies go out of business due to not enough funding. i do not ever want to go back to a group home or go back to not enjoying the life to the fullest. i enjoy my independence and being a valued member of the community and want to keep it that way. it's very disappointing to me that people can fund basketball stadiums, but can't seem to keep up with the funding for people with developmental disabilities. the funding has to stay within the developmental disabled community and those who work the hardest to support people within our community. without my direct support professional, how can i live? who's going to provide my g-tube feeding and changing? someone like me would end up in an institution, and i'm afraid of being abused or isolated. and that would cost the state, obviously, millions of dollars. instead, i have the privilege of living in my own home and working in my community. i really do work and pay taxes just like everyone else. i will no longer be ignored. my staff is barely making minimum wage, and they actually quit and go to mcdonald's, who pays more. my day program in services are being cut. the list really does go on. and the time to act is now, with this additional funding. i can no longer wait, this is a state of emergency. the community again continues to be on the brink. the budget you use to fund the institutions and other similar settings should now go into the developmentally disabled community, as it aims to support our independent living. it's time to invest that money in the community. the working care that is done in the community by direct support professionals doesn't compare to the developmental centers. my staff does the exact same job as a state employee of the dc center. matter of fact, they probably do it better. my staff doesn't even get paid half as much as those state employees doing the same job and this is not right. the time is now, i ask now that the dewey community is not forgotten in the future. please always remember to keep the promise that once was made, once again, thank you. thank you. and that's it for me.
[{'start': 51, 'end': 74, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 89, 'end': 98, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 369, 'end': 376, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 404, 'end': 411, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 557, 'end': 566, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 639, 'end': 662, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Matthew Sparks: good afternoon, my name is sparks. i'm an advocate for more than 100 people with intellectual, developmental disabilities. more than 100 people with families who depend on us. i hope you understand that your constituents all depend on this service. we provide something that our founding fathers set up. thomas jefferson flat-out said we have inalienable rights, life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. don't take the money away. doing that, we can't do our jobs. i love my job, i can't pay my bills with love. these are my friends, these are my family members. you don't get to do this, you get to take care of us, because we take care of them, take care of our community. you are a part of our community. the smart thing here is to make sure that when i'm hiring staff to take care of my people, that they are paid well enough, that they get to stay in that job, that they will want that job. it's a good job, i hire people with phd's, master's degrees, bachelor's, and even just high school diplomas, because they do their job, and they do it well. these are very intelligent people, they take care of equally intelligent people. they just have disabilities, they can't always express themselves. they need their devices, our facilitated communicators. they need their insurance, they need their homes. where are you going to put them? are you going to put them in prison because they act differently, they misbehave socially? no, they have a home, they have staff, they need their staff, thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 304, 'end': 320, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kelly Young: hi, my name is kelly elizabeth young. i wear a couple different hats today. my most important hat is the mother of a 20 year old daughter who has cerebral palsy and epilepsy. so we havebeen in the system since her birth. and she is getting ready to transition out of high school and into the big world of adult services, and we're concerned and i think as many of the parents that are here, once you have a child with a disability your whole life changes. and for many of us, and i have a couple over here, their focus becomes the system that supports their children and i am one of them. when my daughter was younger i heard about the, landmark case that set the dcs, it's unconstitutional to put people in these institutions. and for the last 15 plus years i've seen how much we've spent on continuing to operate those dcs. and it shocked my conscience actually for the few people that were there and comparing it to what we were paying for people who were living independent lives, having choices and living full lives in the community. so for me i look at it more from what are we valuing, so in the past we valued putting people in institutions. we put a lot of money in there, we have a lot of assets there, and now that we're moving away from that, where is that value now, where is the value? are you just going to take all that money away and put it back and let the system which is a life raft, that is sinking, for me it is a human right, that we take care of people who need our assistance. and i just hope you think about that because at any point in time in your life you might have your sibling, your spouse, your child, your niece, your grandchild either be born with a disability or have a disability and when you are in that position you will understand the position we are in. every person has value and they should be part of our community and we still have people that are segregated. if you were at the press conference you saw my daughter sitting next to the microphone. she has a very inclusive life, but we worked really hard for it. and she's a beautiful gregarious little girl so it's easy for her to be included in society, not so for every person. and it breaks my heart when i see that we still don't value people with disabilities and that they are still segregated, and on the sidelines, and if i think it was any other, my words are going, any other category of people in our society people would be outraged. and i don't know why we're not outraged and how we can still discriminate against people with disabilities. so it is very near and dear to my heart. i work with families that have little kids with disabilities and so i'm looking prospectively at what's waiting for them when their kids grow up. so i'm part of the early start family resource centers and the network. i also work with ida, which is the infant development association of, california, which is the wonderful professionals that support these kids and we are all really concerned about what the future looks like for our kids. and it's in your hands and i wish my daughter was sitting here because you need to look in their eyes and say, are they worthy? thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2827, 'end': 2830, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Betsy Cates: good afternoon. my name is betsy and i'm a board member of the arc of california. i'm also the mother of a 35 year old son with an intellectual disability and i have spent most of the 35 years in some meeting like this at one time or another advocating for the preservation of this system. these issues have been going on for a long time and we certainly need a long-term sustainable solution and not just a band-aid on it from year to year. because we're always back again, filling the halls here. we don't have anywhere else to go. this is where the solutions need to be found. the need to restore our system and invest in services is felt by individuals with developmental disabilities, their families, the direct support professionals who work in the community and the people who keep the fragile programs going. people are at the heart of what we do and we need to retain dedicated workers in our system and pay them in a way that's commensurate with the valuable work that they do. so we definitely hope that we can, you find a way to ensuring that money saved upon closure of the developmental centers is directed into the systems of community services to benefit individuals in the community. and from everything i'm hearing, i think we all feel the same way, so i won't restate what's been said over and over again, but this is a critical issue for us. and i would like, before i finish, on behalf of the lanterman coalition, we would like to thank the committee staff for working very hard on this issue. thank you very much.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andie Patterson: I'm Andie Patterson, I'm with the Autism Business Association and I also wear the hat, I'm the elected representative for the Orange County providers for the Regional Center. And we regularly have our meetings and it's continually the same message that we received from all the providers whether it's adult day SLS, Supported Living Services, or ABA, that they cannot staff the folks that they're getting referrals for because they cannot give a competitive wage. As the previous person said, whether it's fast food, or other minimum wage jobs, are taking the staff away. So the most valuable resource we have, the most finite resource is the staff, the people that are caring and have the hearts to do this and there's nothing more touching and rewarding but we need to be able to compensate them so that they can stay in the field and raise their family, and we can retain them. Thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael Forsberg: good afternoon, my name is michael kelly forsberg. i'm a behavioral analyst at autism behavioral services. i work with a number of these individuals, especially young adults who are growing up in this system and they really rely on these services and this funding. the families i've met over the years are just some of the most incredible people you'll ever meet and and i wish you guys were able to see a lot of them here today. but the stories they have and the things they're able to share are just so incredibly powerful and moving. these funding really will help them continue to grow and gain independence and integrate into our society. so thank you guys very much for your time.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Elizabeth Marchant: Good afternoon, my name's Elizabeth Marchant and I'm the Executive Director of the Arc of Placer county. We serve approximately 350 clients with intellectual and developmental disabilities and have about 90 staff. I'm here today to talk briefly about the importance of keeping the money in the community. I'll shorten this because I don't want to repeat what everyone else said, but essentially the money is already established for serving this vulnerable population. Just because the doors are shutting to the large buildings, Doesn't mean the people they were serving are disappearing too. Those people still need services. They will just be receiving them in a different way. The cost of operating day programs and other programs enabling people with IDD to function independently in their communities are the costs of running any other business in California. We have mortgages, rent, transportation costs, salaries, benefits, multiple insurance costs, just to name some of the larger expenses of running a company. Despite the rising cost of running a business, our reimbursement rates don't increase. And in the extremely rare occasion that they do it's usually targeted to a specific cost such as staffing. While those small increases help that specific cost, they don't help the overall operating cost of our organizations. Furthermore, in the rare instances of increased funding, it usually just off sets the huge cuts we've just sustained for years previous. This industry is constantly just getting by. For example, there is a huge need for serving our aging clients who become more cognitively and physically fragile as they age. My board and I are in the early phases of starting a program to serve our clients who are no longer being able to be served by our current programs. Eager to be able to serve these vulnerable clients, we developed the proposed new program's budget based off of existing rates paid by our Regional Center and our projected expenses off of our true current expenses associated with our other programs. Our projections to serve these clients will run a $27,000 to $52,000 a year deficit each year. What person in their right mind would start a business knowing it would never make money? That's where we're different. We're not in this industry for making money. We don't have a choice. Our clients need services appropriate for their stages in life. Where does that money come from to cover that deficit? It may or may not come from community donations, desperate attempts at fundraising, and cutting other important services elsewhere in our programs. Or it could come from the existing pot of money that is going to the developmental centers. We're not asking for new money, we're asking for the money that is already designated for our population. Please keep the 500 million in the developmental disability system for our community services. Dont let it get absorbed into the general fund. Thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Linda Plourde: Good afternoon. My name is Linda Plourde. Im Director of Bayberry in Napa, Santa Rosa in Clear Lake, California. We cover four counties, provide community support services for people with disabilities. So I've been in the field for a long, long time, a few decades. And I was so excited when I joined the Regional Center team because I was learning a long time ago that there was a promise in California. I worked in other states where there is no promise. And there were long waiting lists and California, couldn't wait to get started. There was a promise made to people with developmental disabilities, but you know, my excitement quickly faded because I Learned we have to fight every single year. Regional Centers actually set a day aside every year called Grassroots Day to come fight for funding to support this promise. So, I also lost the excitement about thinking that California was so progressive amongst all other states that I worked in. because why create a promise and then not support it, not back it up? The fight continued in my time with Regional Centers and now in the community to always ask for our increases that we're supposed to get to support the folks in the community so that they can live out this promise. And the struggle to me really became loud and clear last year and the year before. Our fight became very loud and we just did not stop and fortunately, we did get an increase. But beyond that the fight to have the money follow the consumer, or the client, from the developmental centers, has always been there. That is an age old fight and we are still here talking about it today. And I am frankly really, really, really tired because managing a community agency, is really hard when you can't pay your employees a decent wage. It's really, really hard when you can't provide the appropriate service because you're just not funded appropriately. So I'd like to urge you, urge you please, let the money follow the consumer into the community. The promise wasn't meant just for people in developmental centers where the funding is outrageous. Its meant for people to live a life they choose in the community. Thank you for your time.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Terry Trubel: hi, my names terry michael trubel and i work for step, i am a dsp. and, i have to go because im about to hit overtime and i would just hate to take away from her services, because they have to pay more. so i'm going to make this short and sweet this really feels like a slap in the face that we have to argue for this money. we were here last year and the years before arguing for more funding and now the money is here, and now we have to fight to keep it. and it just doesn't seem right, let alone fair. and i do represent the dsps for step. so, got to go, because i'm hitting overtime. thank you ma'am.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Renee Ford: hello, i am renee terry ford and i was born with cerebral palsy. and fortunately for me the special school system was so bad i could've never hoped to mainstream into public schools. my parents were able to send me to a catholic school who didn't seem to care whether i was disabled or not. and because i come from the time when the school had to consent to take you if you were a disabled person. and i progressed, i'm still paying taxes, although i'm not working anymore i'm still paying taxes. and i've always been a voter and it's wrong for you to have this money for the developmentally disabled not all of them. because they're going to go into the community and they're going to have costs. the only reason i can pay for all my dental work is because i have a care credit card. there's no dental insurance available, really, for anyone who doesn't qualify for medical and even with medical the dentical is limited, my dentist tells me, to get in your teeth pulled out. that's not healthy. and you have to be giving more money to the agencies like step, i'm a step client. but to all of them because i have a wonderful micro supervisor who helps me with every aspect of my life, and she's trained to do it. and what she wasn't trained for, step taught her. and she's looking at taking a second job. she works very hard, never sits down a minute, 40 hours a week. and she needs a separate job, another job, to start to make ends meet that is a bad thing. and it's even worse when you say, well governor brown wants the minimum wage to go up, but all of the people funded by agencies like step or funded by the ihss program will not make a dime more. and it's also difficult for members of step if they do quality for ihss funding to find help that will work that because step is able to pay a little bit more. so what funding we have, the disabled community, we should keep. you may say on the budget you're fully funded, but you're not. and more and more disabled people are having trouble with rent and medication, and there is nowhere to go for that. so i don't know if you just boost up the wages so we could keep highly trained proficient people. because my medical needs keep increasing with every single year. then thats what you should do. and if you want me to vote for you, thats what you should do. [inaudible] thank you, mam. [inaudible]yeah, and my roommate also votes.
[{'start': 12, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1508, 'end': 1513, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2338, 'end': 2341, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Desiree Pollard: Good afternoon. I'm Desiree Pollard, I am another staff employee and I just want to say, keep the promise. Thank you, and I know that you guys have a very hard job and you just trying to help everybody you can, and sometime you can't help everybody, but try to put the money in the right place. And I just want to say thank you for your time and just think about like this young lady over here who look like she say she's about to be far from 80 but don't look it. She is absolutely right. It's like, it's hard and you just don't understand unless you do the walk. It could be your family or someone else that you know that might need this help. So I just want to say keep the promise and just do the right thing. Thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pete Chernenko: well pete renee chernenko with the department, i appreciate the opportunity to be here. i would simply observe we've been the proud operator of this program for more than 30 years and i'm learning that when the person in front of you is both articulate and compelling you should just be quiet.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Hicks: Randy Hicks, Californians Disability Rights. This is a very important spending. And we need to have this for reasonable accommodation as in the Ada and Title 24. So we thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Desiree Pollard: my name is desiree pete pollard. i work for step. and it's very hard for the deaf people to communicate. and that cause behaviors and other things. so it would be great if you guys can provide the needs for them, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Scott Wetch: mr. chairman and members, scott jonah wetch on behalf of the state association of electrical workers. just one more trying to tighten up to make enforcement for the contractor state licensing board a little bit easier, and so we urge an aye vote.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brett Barrow: mr. chair, members, brett scott barrow, the national electrical contractors excuse me, speaking in support, thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Catherine Elson-Scott: catherine brett elson-scott the california academy of physician assistants, we are also in support with the amendments to allow for physician assistants to be a part of that team of 18 that can be used side by side with the doctors as they do in their practice. currently they do practice in many areas including orthopedic as well as in the community. so i think there are other areas of specialty where we're without physicians as well pa and ps and certified nurse midwives can be helpful, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Holly Borgmann: chairman low, members of the committee, thank you for this opportunity to speak with you today. my name's borgmann. i'm the head of government affairs for adt security services. with more than 140 years of industry experience, adt is the leading provider of residential and small business security services in the us. we have about 17,000 employees, including about 2,000 in california and we take our responsibilities very seriously. we're committed to protecting and connecting our customers to what matter most. and we are also committed to driving down the number of false alarms. now unfortunately, these false alarms can sometimes overload already strained police, and delay response time for true emergencies. we support efforts to meaningfully reduce false alarms, including the establishment of false alarm reduction programs created at the local level that encourage proper use of systems. and they fine users for excessive false alarms. we find that that is the most effective way to reduce the number of false alarms. studies have shown that in general about 80% of false alarms are generated by 20% of the alarm users. so by having an escalated fee structure, that tends to encourage people to better use their alarm and learn how to use it properly. unfortunately, some municipalities in recent years in the interest of expediency have found it's a lot easier to just send the bill to the alarm company as opposed to finding the user who maybe forgot to give the sitter their alarm code. this is kind of like sending a speeding ticket though to honda. we find that it doesn't really encourage customers to respond and to use their alarm systems better. and that also denies the user the access to justice. they're not able to challenge the city for a false alarm. they'll tell us it was a false alarm but they're getting a bill from us as opposed to the city. so this bill, we think will help municipalities to adopt meaningful programs to actually reduce the number of false alarms, while allowing our customers to challenge in court or with the city, an instance where perhaps it isn't an actual false alarm. in closing, i respectfully ask the committee to vote in favor of this bill, and thank you for your time and consideration.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 12, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 106, 'end': 114, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sara Flocks: Mr. Chair and members, Sara Flocks, California Labor Federation. We are here because skyrocketing prescription drug prices are the fastest growing driver of our healthcare spending. And pharmacy benefit managers have a very important role in helping us manage our prescription drug benefit. And containing the cost of prescription drugs. We use them, because they can play this role. And we support this bill, because it gives purchasers the disclosure and transparency we need to effectively manage our contracts. To know where the spending's going. And to hold PBM's accountable, so they're more effective at the job they play for us. Right now, the big three PBM's control about 80% of the market. And they've divided up the country by region. So it's very difficult for any purchaser but the very largest like CalPERS with 1.3 million members, to get this kind of disclosure and transparency in contracts. We have trust funds that range from 500 members to 250,000. But 97% of businesses in California have under 100 employees. It is very hard for a business of that size, or even larger to be able to negotiate with a huge PBM that has knowledge of the industry. And audits, which are the tool used for transparency can cost anywhere from $20,000 to $200,000, so it's not an effective tool. This type of disclosure gives us the ability to manage these contracts and this is something that's happened at the federal level. The federal government has said, this transparency is good for federal purchasers. The ACA included disclosure, required disclosure for PBMs in it and the CBO said in 2010 that that type of disclosure would not increase prices. In addition Medicare has gone even further and said for PBMs that deal with Medicare part D, there's also increased disclosure about the MAC, the max allowed cost. And the Erisa Advisory Council has recommended that the 408 B2 ruled, which is the disclosure of fees and compensation for advisers to pension funds, be extended to PBMs. Because that type of disclosure will help a [UNKNOWN] of plans, self funded plans, carry out their fiduciary duty. Which puts the interest of plan members, our enrollees first. So thisis all happening at the federal level. But of course, that is moving very slowly and only applies to federal purchasers. So, we think AB 29 is a very important step to bring that type of disclosure to state purchasers as well. So we would encourage your aye vote.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Caldwell: Good morning, Mr. Chairman. John Caldwell with the Pharmaceutical Care Management Association, with the national trade representing pharmacy benefit managers. First we'd like to thank the Chair, the staff, the author, the author's staff, for working with us to address a major concern we had with the bill. Providing the information to prospective clients would have surely resulted in information becoming public. And according to the Federal Trade Commission and the Congressional Budget Office. Public disclosure of negotiated prices would have raised drug prices. Again, we thank the author for removing that language. Unfortunately, we remain opposed. Our members feel this mandated information for our clients is unneeded. PBM clients are sophisticated purchasers. They are large corporations that provide healthcare across state lines for their employees. They're health insurers, their health plans, their labor trust. They have large departments that manage PBM contract, and there is a whole industry of consultants that help purchasers negotiate with PBMs. If clients want specific, relevant information for their business, they can and they do get it. Now the problem is, each client's needs are different. Some want a full range of PBM services. PBM services include claims processing, negotiating rebates and discounts, formulary management, pharmacy networks, mail service pharmacy, among others. Some take all of that, some take a little, just pick and choose. There are as many arrangements as there are clients, but this bill attempts to put information for all those arrangements. It's a one size fits all that won't fit all. We're also concerned with the fact that the in-house PBMs are exempt. This will result in an unlevel playing field. Again, we appreciate the amendment. We appreciate the time and effort of this Committee and the offer.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Steffanie Watkins: steffanie catherine watkins, on behalf of the association of california life and health insurance companies. we too, would like to thank the author, his staff, and committee staff as well, for the most recent amendment to limit the bill. unfortunately, we are here today in opposition. we are struggling as, we see pbm's as a partner in our process with insurance plans. as the client with unique relationships with the pbms, we think it's important for this to remain an issue that's negotiated through our contracts. we think that that's a better, more useful mechanism to ensure that we not only get the information that we require, but the information that's not necessary is not, there's not an additional administrative burden that pbms are creating additional unnecessary information that the client doesn't need or ask for. we kind of see this as a build maybe looking for a problem from our perspective especially from the client perspective. and so for that reason we're unfortunately opposed to that.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Winger: Yeah. John Winger on behalf of America's Health Insurance Plans. We had opposed and less amended position on the bill. Our primary concern was around the perspective purchaser piece. So we appreciate the amendment being taken. We're still looking at the disclosure language and want to make sure it's not overly prescriptive. And that it adequately protects proprietary information, thanks.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cindy Laubacher: Cindy Laubacher on behalf of Express Groups, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christina Elliott: thank you for having me. committee members, elliott, i'm the executive director for the calable board. we've been operational for about a year now. july 2016 is when i got on board. the assembly member is right, there are a variety of restrictions around the spending that people with disabilities can make out of able accounts. and we would put restrictions on the accounts as well as the program administrators. this bill is helpful in a variety of ways. the legislative intent at both the federal and state level is to ensure that people with disabilities achieve a better life experience through utilizing their able accounts, which as you can assume is what able stands for. so we're happy to be here and thankful for this work.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Curt Child: mr. chair, child, disability rights california, and for all the reasons that you've heard, the calable program is a very new and important program for persons with disabilities in california. and particularly, we believe that exempting amounts that are held in the accounts is going to have the effect from protecting them from money judgments will have the effect of encouraging enrollment and indeed increasing the contribution levels. we do have a small concern that with the amendments about capping at the $100,000 that i'm sure we'll be able to work with both the committee and the author on, first, with a $100,00. the amount that can be held is a $100,000 plus the interest that's accrued thereupon. so we would hope that, that would be covered within the exemption as well. there are also provisions, as we're going to program, that's a work in progress that could exceed the amount for other population. and i think as the rollout happens, we'll be able to have those discussions as well. so we're happy to support, and we'll continue to work with the author on that, thank you.
[]
Larry Doyle: Good morning, Mr. Chair and members. Larry Doyle on behalf the Conference of California Bar Associations. This bill comes out of the experience of members of the conference who are elder attorneys in San Diego who were very upset to find that there was certain circumstances where there were known advanced healthcare directives. The patient wishes were very clearly set forth, and these were being superceded by POLST forms that were being signed by persons who were far down the food chain in terms of proximity to the patient, and the knowledge of the patient's desires and wishes. And this just seemed to be wrong. The whole idea of the POLST form if you go back to the legislation creating it Assembly bill 3,000 of 2008 says clearly on the, legislative intent language. The physician order for life sustaining treatment form compliments an advanced directive by taking the individual wishes regarding life sustaining treatment such as those set forth in the advance directive and converting those wishes into a medical order. The practice however, over the years has become in certain circumstances to ignore that. This bill attempts to get back to the original intent, which is the patient's wishes should prevail. The patient is the one who knows what they want. They may not necessarily know what's best for them but that's their decision. And we're trying to make it possible, clear that in those cases the patient's wishes, whether executed by the patient him or herself when they had capacity. Or by a person whom the patient designated to make decisions for them when the patient has capacity, are going to prevail in circumstances over a POLST forum signed by a third-party who cannot reasonably have knowledge of the patient's wishes. It is again limited very much to those circumstances where you have an actual conflict. You have a known advance directive. Is not that the patient has one someplace. You have to have a known advance directive, and that advance directive has to conflict with the latest POLST form. It also includes, I mean advance records can be oral and under the law, there are ways of establishing that. But it also includes situations where in later inactive POLST form has been held to supercede the wages of an earlier POLST form that are actually executed by the patient when the patient had capacity. So again, it's only limited circumstances, but it's something really needs to be done, to be sure that the patient wishes in this circumstances are followed. So with that I ask for your support for this bill.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Hene Kelly: hene, california alliance for retired americans, in support.
[]
Karl Steinberg: Hi, I'm Dr. Karl Steinberg, I'm a family physician, and I've been a hospice and nursing home medical director in San Diego County for over 25 years. May I ask for permission to speak a little bit more since there's really been no opposition?
[{'start': 12, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brent Barnhart: Good morning. My name is Brent Barnhart. I'm a resident of Rossmoor in Walnut Creek and we're living in a condominium development where all the issues that the bill addresses are very real and do have a major impact on our ability to, on our own, to purchase solar for our homes. The principal thing I want to mention is the 67% vote that is currently required by many homeowners association affects principally the. I'm sorry, 67% vote is something we all have to get to basically sponsor an election that will allow us to have solar. And that vote is 67%, not of 67% of the people who actually vote, but each non-vote is a no vote. And this bill, which Ms. Eggman is carrying, addresses that and will resolve that problem.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 659, 'end': 665, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kelly Knutsen: hello, mr. chair and committee, my name is kelly jonah knutsen with the california solar energy industries association and we're in support.
[{'start': 43, 'end': 62, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Hene Kelly: Hene Kelly, Legislative Chair of the California Alliance for Retired Americans, many of our 1 million members, are in homeowners association, we strongly support this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Wada: mr. chair and members, jennifer on behalf of the california association of community managers. we would echo the comments of cai. we certainly appreciate the amendments that have been taken by the author and the sponsor and the commitment to continue to work with us. we want to ensure that the provisions protect all owners, especially because we're removing the owner vote. so for those reasons, we look forward to continuing to work with you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 125, 'end': 128, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kathryn Stebner: Good morning. My name is Kathryn Stebner. I'm the principal of Stebner Associates in San Francisco and I'm here on behalf of the Consumer Attorneys of California. My firm represents seniors and elder abuse cases. It's all my firm does. I've been bringing elder abuse cases since 1987. I was 12, but in 1987. I'm on the executive Committee for the Board of Consumers, Attorneys of California, LRS Board for the California Advocates for Nursing Home Reform and I am the past President of the San Francisco Trial Lawyers Association. AB 859 would narrowly amend a law so that defendants who intentionally destroy or conceal evidence are not able to avoid liability because the victim is dead or has dementia. When key evidence is destroyed by defendants, victims cannot speak out as to what happened to them, and that's why this very narrowly-crafted bill is before you, and that's why it's needed. The vast majority of my clients are either dead or have severe dementia and cannot speak for themselves. First, I handed out, I'll take some of you back to law school, or take some of you into law school kicking and screaming. This is just a little simple chart. The Committee needs to understand what enhanced remedies portion of the Elder Abuse Act is and what it isn't. So, on the left-hand side, I just want this committee to understand this is not a MICRA bill in any shape, any form. First, on the left, is medical negligence by a healthcare provider, that's MICRA. It's a negligent act, by preponderance of the evidence and it has to be a healthcare provider. Now, on the right. And then also, the preponderance of the evidence is what we use, as Assemblyperson Eggman said, is in financial elder abuse and any other, anything you ever bring, any tort in California, is always preponderance of the evidence. On the right, we've got elder abuse. You have to prove number one, recklessness, malicious, oppressive. And this, I tell people, this is like you're driving down a sidewalk and you don't care if someone's on it, okay. So it has to be I know there's something dangerous, and I'm going to do it anyway. So we have to prove that. Number two, we have to prove by a managing agent. So it's not just the CNA, the bedside, or even the charge nurse. It has to be the person who's the managing agent. In California, that has be the person who makes policy. So that's the boss, that's the person who makes the decisions of what to fund, what to do, and runs the whole place. And then third, we have to prove by clear and convincing evidence. So if you prove all three, all three of these, you get two things. You get attorney's fees, which you have to go to the court and ask for, and you get pre-death pain and suffering, because, and that's capped at $250,000. Okay, so whatever the elder went through, from a bed sore or whatever, you can get that. All we're doing is very surgically looking at this last one here, by clear and convincing evidence, and saying that if the judge or arbitrator finds that a defendant intentionally got rid of evidence or destroyed it, then it will be preponderance of the evidence. So it's very surgical just to do this. So we still have to prove recklessness by a managing agent.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1665, 'end': 1671, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Patty Schumacher: good morning, my name is patty kelly schumacher and i live in granite bay, in california. and i am here to support ab 859. i'm a constituent in assemblymember kiley's. my mother, sarah vydel, was a resident as a residential care facility in roseville, california. she had dementia and a history of stroke, and needed supervision and assistance with eating as she had a tendency to to pocket food in her mouth. while at this facility, she was not provided the necessary assistance and supervision. as a direct result, she choked on her dinner and died a painful death. i've been through a lot in my life. just six months prior to losing my mom, i lost my son, who was on active military duty in afghanistan and i am now a gold star mom. but to add insult to injury, during this course of litigation regarding my mother's wrongful death, the facility destroyed and falsified important evidence in the case including witness statements, training documents, incident reports, and other key evidence, which made it even harder for us to prove our case against the facility. these cases are already hard to prove and what happened to my mom and our family should never happen to anyone else. my mom wasn't just an unfortunate case of neglect. she was a caring and wonderful woman we all loved. thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 179, 'end': 190, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Greg De Giere: greg patty de giere with the arc and united cerebral palsy a california collaboration and coalition of people with intellectual and developmental disabilities and their families, friends and service providers. wanted to make the point that this is not just an elder abuse bill. this is an elder and dependent adult abuse bill. dependent adult is a misleading legal term that means people with disabilities who are subject to much higher levels of crime than the population generally, and it's often not caught. if we can't get them, through criminal to say... maybe we can get something to move through this and we support the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael McLaughlin: yes, michael, i'm a volunteer with aarp. aarp supports ab 859, and the letter in that regard will be forthcoming.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Curt Child: curt greg child, disability rights california, and we're in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kishwer Barrica: Kishwer Barrica, Staff Attorney at the Coalition for California Welfare Rights Organizations, and we're in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Hene Kelly: Hene Kelly, Legislative Director of California Alliance for Retired Americans, that covers over a million members. We are not just in strong support, we are a sponsor of the bill. We hope that you pass it.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amber King: thank you, amber curt king with the association of california healthcare districts, representing four standalone skilled nursing facilities. we're concerned about the costs of litigation and the access to care impacts this would have for those rural facilities, thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shane Lavigne: Good morning, Mr. Chair and members. Shane Lavigne, on behalf of the Cooperative of American Physicians and the American Insurance Association, in opposition, thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shari McHugh: Good morning, Shari McHugh representing Californians Allied for Patient Protection, the MICRA Coalition. We are opposed to the bill unless it is amended to remove reference to the evidentiary standard, thank you. Good morning, Mr. Chair and members.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Megan Allred: Megan Allred, on behalf of the California Dental Association, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Peter Kellison: peter amber kellison, on behalf of leading aids california, representing not-for-profit skilled nursing facilities and rcfes, in opposition, as previously expressed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lori Ferguson: Lori Ferguson, I'm here on behalf of the California Assisted Living Association. We're opposed unless amended.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dolores Duran-Flores: I apologize for being late, I'm late support. Dolores Duran-Flores with the California School Employees Association, thank you.
[{'start': 46, 'end': 66, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Barrera: Jennifer Barrera, I'm here with the California Chamber of Commerce, also in opposition, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ruby Santos: Ruby Santos, on behalf of Laborers Local 777 and 792 in addition to Orange County Professional Firefighters Association Local 3631 in strong support for the reasons previously stated.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matthew Siverling: Thank you. Mr. Chair and members, Matthew Siverling on behalf of the Association for Los Angeles Deputy Sheriffs, the Los Angeles Police Protective League, the Riverside Sheriffs Association, and the Association of Deputy District Attorneys, all in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gregory Cramer: good morning, mr chair and members. gregory peter cramer on behalf of planned parenthood affiliates of california. we would like to align our comments with the representative from now, and we support this measure. thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Leah Parrish: Leah Parrish from Consumer Attorneys of California, in support as amended.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Barrera: Thank you, Jennifer Barrera, on behalf of the California Chamber of Commerce. And we are opposed to this proposal, especially as it is proposed to be amended, and being placed back into the civil code with regards to the $4,000 minimum statutory damages for a violation. And as my colleague mention, this could be a violation of one penny. There is no standard upon which there needs to be a price differential, before it's triggered. And even though it may be a penny difference between the two products, it would be a minimum $4,000 statutory damages. We don't need to speculate as to what the abuse of litigation is, under this section. We've already seen it with regards to ADA claims and we've also seen it with regards to the Gender-Targeted Services Tax that this Committee actually just reviewed, a couple of weeks ago, I think a month ago. To try and limit the abuse of litigation that's going on with regards to that, where they're targeting minority-owned businesses, who are not sophisticated, and alleging that they've had a violation of the services tax for gender discrimination, and requiring those businesses to either agree to an early settlement, simply to get out of litigation. Or go and fight a battle over whether or not they discriminated on the basis of services, with regard to that. So we don't need to speculate, we've already seen it, and now we're opening this up to thousands of products in the marketplace, at which somebody can come by, to a minority-owned business, target them, because they're less sophisticated and say theres been a violation with the products, with regards to substantially similar, and there's a price difference, and so, you can either pay us $4,000, or you can choose to go and hire an attorney and litigate it. That's a huge burden to put on these businesses, and a huge litigation threat to them. With regards to substantially similar in the objective factors, of which this bill includes, again, I appreciate that, but none of those issue come into place until you get into litigation. Nobody is going to challenge whether or not they are substantially similar. Nobody is going to be able to identify the objective factors upon which you can base the cost difference, until you get into litigation. And at that point, the business is already making the decision. As to whether they engage in an early settlement, based upon the minimum $4,000 statutory damages, or whether they hire an attorney and go battle this out. So we have a huge concern on the exposure to litigation that this bill presents to, especially those minority-owned businesses, who are not sophisticated and don't actually know their rights, and how to fight these in court. The second issue, the second issue that we have, I want to talk about the, brought up that we always allege frivolous litigation. Actually, we don't. And the Equal Pay that was discussed two years ago, we supported that bill and we actually thought it would mitigate litigation wth regards to employers who are trying to pay women substantially similar. The other laws that were addressed, were not in the same civil code section. Where there's a minimum $4,000 statutory damages, so we disagree. The other point that I wanted to make is, we have concerns about, if you have products that aren't targeted to women. If you have products that don't have any advertising to specific gender. If you don't have them placed in a retail location that's identified for men and women. How does the retailer, how does the business decide, whether or not it's a female product versus a male product? And that's when we get into engaging in stereotypes, that I don't think that the society wants us to engage in. We are automatically going to assume that something that's pink is for girls, and something blue is for boys, and that's a social standard that everybody's trying to get retailers to back away from, not engage in.  So I think this also triggers that issue, with regards to us identifying products that are male versus female. When they're not targeted to a specific gender. I also think the last point is, is that out of all of this, there's still consumer choice and to suggest that a female person cannot make an educated decision as to whether or not they want to buy a product that's pink versus red, and the pink costing more is a huge issue, as well, that needs to be taken into consideration, whether or not they can make those choices on their own. For those reasons, we are opposed.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Larisa Cespedes: good morning, larisa gregory cespedes, here on behalf of the toy association. we're also very concerned, regarding the litigation risk that ms. barrrera outlined.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 144, 'end': 152, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cliff Costa: cliff larisa costa, on behalf of the california new car dealers association. since we sell a negotiated product, we are also opposed at this time.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Larry Doyle: Larry Doyle on behalf of Conference of California Bar Associations. We're the sponsors of the bill. But I believe the other witnesses have pretty much covered the waterfront. We're just simply think that it's necessary, judicial elections should be pretty much simple and straight forward, it's a different kind of animal. And it really requires something that is simple, and honest and something you don't really want to start ranging out into hyperbole. So ask for your support on this important bill and thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bradley Hertz: goof afternoon mr. senator, chairman, members of the committee. my name is bradley, i'm a partner at the sutton law firm and we practice campaign and election law, part of that is of course advising judicial candidates incumbents as well as challengers on ballot designations. i definitely agree the system is not perfect but i don't think this is the answer. my first concern is the equal protection clause you have even though there may not be first amendment concerns you are here treating one class. candidates, professional government attorneys differently than you're treating private attorneys. and i could see this having effects that we really wouldn't want. so for example a deputy district attorney who handles domestic violence, and now might've been able to say, domestic violence prosecutor will be stuck with deputy district attorney or something to that effect. whereas a defense attorney who defends those accused of domestic violence could say domestic violence attorney or domestic violence litigator. so i think you may end up that the remedy doesn't quite resolve some of the issues. i also don't think the system is as broken as it's made out to be. there are certainly the cases that boggle the mind occasionally. but largely, there is a self-regulating aspect because there's a detailed ballot designation worksheet that has to be submitted where the candidate demonstrates why he or she thinks it's a proper demonstration. the registrar of voters is required to reject anything that is false or misleading. and those ballot designation worksheets are made publicly available for that window of opportunity to bring a writ. so there's often administrative advocacy that goes on trying to convince the county council and the registrar why something's false or misleading. the candidates have their own disincentive to cheat because it could get rejected, they could get sued, etc. and then you have if administrative advocacy fails risk of mandate. they're very few and far between relatively speaking. they're very quick and dirty to use the legal term. and usually the judges get the right answer. so i believe that there are various and very good aspects of the bill. the john eastman situation, for example, where someone running for attorney general was appointed to a position in south dakota and then used assistant attorney general. without stating california. so i think it's important to state the geographical area you're from. but i do think that this really puts the thumb on the scale against prosecutors, in favor of others, whether they be incumbents, or civil attorneys. i do think there are a few other ways that this could be improved. one could be looking at expanding the three word limitation. i've had many times where judges have told me my hands are tied. we've only got three words. so for example when paul bacagalupo ran and was a judge of the state bar and that was litigated to the court of appeal in an unpublished decision moses versus mccormick. he was judge, state bar. well if we had more words he might have been judge of the state bar. in this case, we're now maybe going to have to refer to the official administrative agency, which i think is a good thing. if you're a workers' comp judge, that's a different kind of administrative law judge. so i definitely think that there are some good aspects. i think there are some more things that could be clarified that i put in my april 26 letter dealing with the calendar year, the look back provision and others. but i really think that meat of limiting what a prosecutor can call him or her on the ballot would run into some real problems.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 75, 'end': 82, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2198, 'end': 2210, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2852, 'end': 2867, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2978, 'end': 2983, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2991, 'end': 3000, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ryan Gregory: Good morning, Chairman Stern and Senators. I'm Ryan Gregory, Supervisor for Napa County. Pleased to join my friend, Senator Bill Dodd and the legend, Senator Lois Wolk. Napa County Board of Supervisors has taken a unanimous position of support for SCA 3. There in Napa, we do so many great things at our library, I'll explain one of them. One of them is an online tutoring during program for our kids, that they get exclusively through the library card. I was really good at math, I became a civil engineer. But my kids got into precalculus and calculus, and I couldn't believe how much I'd forgotten. And the online tutoring that was available through the library for them, was invaluable. And here are these kids, who are at the cusp of keeping pace with their class or falling behind. And so for me, as educated as I was and as good as at math as I was, I needed this online tutoring program to keep our kids on pace. So that's just one of the great things our Napa library does. We do believe that at this point, we provide such great wrap-around services, very complimentary to our school district, that when we do want to support and grow our library, we would like the same accommodation as our schools. With this 55% threshold. So I would encourage your support of SCA 3. And thanks for having us today.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 28, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 47, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 124, 'end': 133, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 158, 'end': 167, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mike Dylan: thank you mr. chair and members. mike, representing the california library association, a sponsor of the measure. as it has been pointed out, library usage keeps continuing to grow and grow and grow. the need is huge, and we appreciate the committee's support. thank you.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Johan Klehs: johan jonah klehs, representing the city of ontario. mike mentioned the lunch program for students in the summer time. we are strong supporters of this, since libraries are really an extension of our educational system in california. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 53, 'end': 57, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Alan Smith: alan johan smith on behalf of the contra costa county library commission. in our community, if this measure had been in effect last year, two of our communities would have been well along the way to starting to build new libraries. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cathy Christian: i can't say anymore than that. cathy alan christian for the contra costa county board of supervisors. very much in support of the bill. thank you senator dodd.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 154, 'end': 158, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Paul Yoder: Mr. Chairman and Members, Paul Yoder. Supervisor has Napa covered today, but also on behalf of Solano County and their Board of Supervisors in support of the bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Wolfe: Mr. Chairman, thank you so much. Mr. Chair and members, good afternoon. David Wolfe with the Howard Jarvis Taxpayers Association, in opposition to the bill. And Members, I think primarily why we're opposed today is, SCA 3 represents the erosion of the third rail of California politics Proposition 13. It lowers from two thirds to 55%. The ability for libraries to pass local bond measures. And I think it's important to ask, why is that so important? And I think it's important, because while all voters vote on these local bonds, only property owners pay them. Only property owners pay them. It reminds me of the analogy of democracy. And I'm sure members, you've heard this one before. Democracy is two wolves and a sheep deciding what's for dinner, right? The sheep always gets screwed in that transaction. We don't want the sheep to get screwed. Especially when you're talking about local bonds, right? That last 30 to 40 years, devastating obviously for property owners and it's going to last far longer than the local government officials that put the bonds on the ballot in the first place. The sheep needs a voice, the taxpayers need a voice, the property owners need a voice. And again especially since all people get to vote on these but only property owners pay them. The bill also does nothing to ease the home ownership crisis in the state, and it's going to add to the 35% of the population because you're increasing below the line property taxes. It's going to add to the 35% of the population that can't afford medium priced homes. So I mean for all of those reasons just would ask for a no vote.
[{'start': 72, 'end': 83, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sean Hoffman: good afternoon, mr. chair and members. sean jonah hoffman with the the california district attorney's association. we don't have a position on the bill today. but as assembly member irwin mentioned, we've been talking with her staff. i think we've resolved all of our concerns. we look forward to coming on in support when the bill moves to public safety.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 182, 'end': 187, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Robert Callahan: thank you mr. chair. robert sean callahan with the internet association here in strong support. very much appreciate the author's work on this bill. also appreciate of this committee and some of the stakeholders we've been working with over the past two months on this bill. it is an improved product from where we started and we see that and we appreciate that. our premise with the bill is simple. it is reasonable and makes sense for the legislature to modernize a law from the 1980s that is, at best, being awkwardly applied to online dating services. and we can do so and i think we have accomplished that. do so in a way that retains those protections for consumers at the original statute address. while even adding new ones that are even more a, a just as relevant for consumers today in the modern online dating world. i think as a result of, as the analysis points out there are a number of remaining issues. we've endeavored to take the best and most important provisions identified from some of the stakeholders and in the original statute. and included in this bill and as the author pointed out the original environment as it applied in the 1980's and 90's for dating services in the brick and mortar world. a lot of those harms that the original statutes thought to address are no longer relevant in the online dating world. and that's a very intentional result of the way the internet empowers consumers with choice, with the ability to trial these services, etc. so we think the product is in a good spot, and we support the bill and urge your support.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kc Burton: Mr Chair and Members of the Committee, thank you for your time today. My name is KC Burton and I'm here today on behalf of the Match Group. Match Group owns around 45 different dating brands, online dating brands around the globe. Match Group supports the changes to the dating services contract act proposed by Abe 314 because it modernizes the DSCA to account for the reality of online and application based dating services. Recognizing that the harms that original statute sought to remedy, namely the high prices, the long term contracts, the high pressure sales tactics. Have already been addressed by the fundamentally different business model and more user friendly and user focused offering that the online dating services have. Online dating services are inexpensive, they have short terms, often as little as one month. It can often be used for free without buying and have a huge pool of nationwide users or worldwide users in the case of some products. And they're no longer the exception about how people meet each other. Now they're really one of the main ways that people do meet significant others. AB 314 maintains many of the important rights that were in the existing law plus adds a number of substantial rights for consumers of online dating products. The existing law does need to be modified it's terribly out of date like everybody has said it's from the 1980s before the Internet was a thing. For example, it requires the contract can be in 10 point font. When you're looking at something on your computer or on your screen, you can do the pinch, and the font size changes like that. It also requires that the customer be able to cancel including by telegram. As Mr. Moren noted if he moves more than 50 miles from the location of the business, again, where is the location of an online business? If it's only in one area in Dallas where we are, basically in California's outside of that 50 miles anyway. And then it also again requires a certain text appear on certain pages of the contract. Again, when you're dealing with an online product and the contract is all online, there's no pagination there. These provisions just don't make sense in the digital age and should no longer be applicable. With that said, we've worked with the very stakeholders to add meaningful protections for consumers of online dating services. For example, the ability to cancel the contract by email or other electronic means, which is then just as easy as it is to sign up for people. The ability to report concerns addressing the safety issues that consumers may have related to these, to online dating sites and then providing dating safety tips online in a place where customers can find them. Again, we've worked with the very stakeholders through the process, we have made a lot of modifications, so that it made this better. We believe that this brings the Dating Services Act into the 21st century and makes it, so they can keep growing with the industry, and for that reason Match Group supports this bill.
[{'start': 81, 'end': 90, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1692, 'end': 1697, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sean Hoffman: sean robert hoffman with the california district attorneys' association. we're opposed to the bill as currently drafted for the reasons stated by my colleague from santa cruz. but, do wish to convey our appreciation to mr. mullen, mr. callahan, the committee staff for the work thus far on the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 223, 'end': 229, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 235, 'end': 243, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Douglas Allen: I'm sorry. I'm Douglas Allen from Santa Cruz County. My wife, Francisca Allen, is also a Deputy District Attorney from Santa Clara County. She's in the audience.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 62, 'end': 77, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Richard Zitrin: Good afternoon, my name is Richard Zitrin, I am a Professor of Legal Ethics of Hastings in College of the Law. I have the pleasure of speaking to a few of you at the Assembly, to the chair of Committee, including you, Mr. Chair. I want to focus on two things. The Assembly Committee Members of Judiciary all got this two-page 11 by 17 document. I'm happy to circulate it to all of you. I'm happy to circulate it to all of the members of the Assembly and the members of the Senate. Basically, what it does is it sets forth in multi-colored fashion, with red being debts, some of what Mr. Stone is talking about. Remington Rifle defects went back to 1946 and weren't uncovered until 2015. Auto seat back defects go back to 1968, and haven't been uncovered yet, except that Mercedes does safe seat backs. Cooper Tire defects go back to the mid-90s, all of that stuff is still secret. Jeep rear end accidents are still not acknowledged by Jeep to be faulty. And it's only because of public exposure of things, like the GM ignition cases because of leaked information, the Takata airbags because of press, that we even know those things existed. There are literally thousands of people at risk, thousands of people have died. Mr. Chase, to my right, has handled a lot of car seat back cases. A fatal analysis report done by NHTSA shows that probably 6 to 7,000 people have died since 1990 because of faulty seat backs and twice that number paralyzed or brain injured as some of Mr. Chase's clients have been. So, I'm happy to give this all to you or to your staff members, I can send it to you. I can circulate it, however Mr. Stone and Mr. Clark advise me to do it. I think it's important. And I wouldn't have taken the time to put the multi-colors in there, if I didn't. There's one other thing that I want to address, and that's the letter of the California Judges Association. I sent a five and a half page letter to Dan Pone, of the Judicial Council, explaining to him, apparently to his satisfaction and that of Karen, I don't want to get her name wrong, the chief lawyer for the chief, as to why judicial efficiency is going to increase with this bill. Right now, every time there's a new case, there's a new mountain to climb for the plaintiff's lawyer as he or she attempts to get discovery. With this bill, once, if there are smoking guns, if there are devastating defects, once they're out, they're out. And it's going to save the repetitive over and over again, judicial inefficiency of having to go through these discovery wars over and over. It's also going to save settlement time, because in the event that these products are truly dangerous, and they're not all, it's a case by case basis. But when they are and this information is out, such as the Takata airbag information and the acknowledgement that GM ignitions, if you jiggle them they go off, those cases are going to be settled. And in the Southern District of New York, thousands and thousands of GM ignition cases have been turned over to that mediator, Mr. Fineberg, and he's settling them left and right. So there's actually an enormous macro-judicial efficiency that will take place if this legislation is passed. But there are a few things that the CJA letter said that, I am sure entirely, innocently misunderstand the bill, and I need to tell you about them. The CJA letter says, first, it's not clear how without looking behind some of the thousands or even millions of pages of documents a court would know of the existence of a defective product or an environmental hazard. That's not the issue here. Because the legislation, as Mr. Stone has submitted it, makes a determination that if the pleading state facts that relate to that hazard or that defect, then the statute governs. And the only thing that a court needs to do is to acknowledge, that in fact the pleadings do state such facts, and then it's within the statute. It's for the trier of fact ultimately to decide whether there really is a defect, whether there really is a hazard. But no judge is going to have to look behind that because the statute covers that.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 587, 'end': 592, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1225, 'end': 1230, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1477, 'end': 1482, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1622, 'end': 1627, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1636, 'end': 1641, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1916, 'end': 1924, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2013, 'end': 2018, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3030, 'end': 3038, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3225, 'end': 3228, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3614, 'end': 3619, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brian Chase: Thank you. Mr. Chair and Members, good afternoon and thank you for having me here. My name is Brian Chase. I'm a past President of the Consumer Attorneys of California, and we are here in support of AB 889. AB 889 will reduce unneccessary and dangerous secrecy in litigation, and I'll give you a few examples in a moment, by preventing civil litigants from using overly broad protective orders or secrecy provisions in settlement agreements. Secrecy in litigation is sometimes necessary for protecting personal information and legitimate trade secrets, which is carved out on this bill and there are protections for that. However, it's not appropriate to shield dangers from public scrutiny. The seat back case, as the Professor talked about, I can't talk about. I've been doing them for over 20 years, and every agreement I've ever entered into is secret, so I can't discuss that. I can discuss generally, however, what's been brought up, and it's fairly common knowledge, the Takata airbag scandal. I've got clients where metal shrapnel has blown through the airbag and blinded them and maimed their faces. All those documents were, and many still are, confidential from the public. The only reason any of us can talk about it at all is because the federal government got involved, fined them $1 billion, and there was a criminal investigation. So, but before that, all that stuff would still be secret, and I've got a file cabinet full of documents that are secret, and if I settle that case before this bill goes through, those documents are never going to see the light of public. Also, the GM ignition scandal, we all talked about that. I had the first wrongful death case in the GM ignition scandal 10 years ago. It was the only death in the country. Everybody told me, well, it's just a one-off, so everything was kept secret. Had that been brought to light to the public, maybe all the other people that died after that before a recall would not be dead today. All that stuff had to be buried. And those are the only two general things I can talk about, because a lot of that is in the public domain. But there are a lot of examples I can not talk about. So I believe to ensure that evidence of a hazard is not shielded from public scrutiny in the future, AB 889 will prohibit any order or an agreement that conceals the danger of a health and safety threat, unless a court finds that the interest of secrecy outweighs the public disclosure. So the courts can get involved and they might say, no, I think that we want to keep that secret. It'll be decided, but the presumption is against secrecy. The bill also declares that a provision in the settlement agreement restricting disclosure of evidence of a danger shall be void as contrary to public policy, and therefore unenforceable. As Assemblymember Stone said, AB 889 is very narrowly tailored and applies only to information about a danger to health or public safety. So it's not all products liability cases, it's not all environmental cases. It's a small slice of the cases that are out there in the litigation domain. Frankly, when you think about business litigation, all kinds of other stuff, this is just a very, very small slice. And it's specifically limited to significant or substantial bodily injury or death. So I think it's efficiently narrow. Not to over burden anybody, I think the public has a right to know this stuff. I think we can save a lot of lives long after we're all gone if something like this passes. So thank you for your time, I appreciate it. And if you have any questions, I'd be happy to address them.
[{'start': 94, 'end': 105, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2812, 'end': 2817, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nikki Moore: thank you, members. nikki sean moore with the california newspaper publishers association here in support. when journalists can legally obtain documents, then we can report on hazards then inform the public and spur a change in the legislature. i wanted to point out two things. this is really providing a check on stipulated protective orders and confidentiality agreements. it's not prohibiting them, and it's putting the burden on the people who are trying to keep secret information that this bill is seeking to make public. it places the burden on them to show why that information could be kept secret. with respect to the standing issue and public access, it's consistent to allow anyone to access these records, whether it's the news media or any affected person, because similar to in the public records act, anyone has a right to seek records, court records, government records. and so, we think that's consistent and the harm that is being addressed in that provision is not the harm, generally it's more the harm to access as the committee analysis notes. also with respect to the opposition's concern that this is an entirely new thing for a judge to do, we disagree with that. there are the rule of court 2.550. it sets forth procedures for courts in sealing records and in sealing courtrooms and provides them an analysis that they're used to conducting with respect to whether information should be kept confidential. similarly, in the public records act litigation, courts are used to applying a balancing test. and we'll have to do in camera review sometimes, they're comfortable with doing that. and we don't think that this bill is going to require the review of every single record. a judge doesn't need to review the entire cache of records to make a determination with respect to protecting trade secret or personal, identifying information. and the last point is, there's already a method, through the code of civil procedure, to access deposition transcripts. and the courts are used to applying protective order in that context as well. so, those are discovery documents that the public does have a right to access, and we respectfully urge an aye vote.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Burrell: good afternoon, mr chair and members of the committee. jennifer on behalf of the california chamber of commerce and we are opposed to ab 889. i think there's two different issues that the bill is directing and so i'm going to, kind of, talk about those separately. one is with the use of protective orders during the course of discovery. once you get to trial, there's already a different standard that applies to accessing the courtroom and when a party puts on evidence to either support their case or defend their case, there's already a different standard that the courts apply as to whether there's public accessibility. so we're really talking about the discovery proceeding here. and this discover is supposed to be extremely broad, the discovery process supposed to be engage in an exchange information between parties to get to the merits of the case. and so the standard is anything related or maybe relevant, is subject to discovery and we want to continue with that preflow of information so you get to the merits of the litigation. protective orders are utilized to achieve that goal. protective orders are utilized to make sure that even though you may disclose trade secret information that could be relevant to the issues of the case, that it's not subject to public view and your competitors, especially. because, then it loses it's value as a trade secret. that confidential information such as the financial privacy of a company even is protected under protective order again to make sure that that information while it is given to the opposing party for purposes of determining the merits of litigation is not exposed to the public. under this proposal we totally disagree that the trade secrets and other corporate privacy information is carved out. it says that it's only not subject to the higher standard under which you could obtain a protective order if it's not related. to the allegation of public safety and harm and so that's our concern. all you have to do is alleged that it could be related and is now subject to the higher standard to protective order. so we do very much feel like confidential information such as trade secret, such as trade secret, such as the financial privacy of the company is that issue with regards to these protective orders. i feel like there's a disconnect. look, i'm a consumer myself, i have a family, i don't want any of my family members subject to defective products and i want to know about it as well. but i think there's some, from our perspective, a disconnect. the complaint, the civil complaint, that this bill says has to set forth facts relating to a public danger or safety in order for the standards to be triggered is never subject to a protective order.  that is always accessible to the public and it is always going to set forth the facts that suggest there is a product defect. from my perspective as a consumer, that's all i want to know, that there's a potential defect. how the item is made, what are the components of how that product is put together, the trade secret information, i don't need to know that? in order to be alerted that there's a potential defect out in the market that i need to be aware of. so again, i guess there's a disconnect how forcing the disclosure of a trade secret is going to help alert the public any more than already is necessary that there could be a potential defect. with regards to the settlement agreements. yes, there generally is confidentiality provisions in those settlement agreements. but the settlement agreements are also very contract specific in the sense that they don't disclose any facts. they don't have any specific mention about the product defect themselves and they don't give you any evidentiary information on whether or not there's a defect or not. it's a recitation of the case. it's a recitation of the claims. there's usually disclosure of some settlement amount, if any that this bill i appreciate prevents having us to disclose that. there's usually admission of no liability, and then there's contractual provisions with regards to severability, choice of form, etcetera. it doesn't alert the public to anything fact specific regarding a procedure or a potential defect or environmental hazard or danger to the public.etc. and so we're not exactly sure again how this achieves the goal of notifying anybody more in the public that there's a defect that exists. from our perspective, it will create an imbalance in litigation with leveraging a company to early settlement so that they're not forced to ultimately disclose this private information during the course of discovery and have it accessible to the entire public. and for those reasons, we are opposed.
[{'start': 55, 'end': 63, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Belode: and mr chair and members, mike for both the california judge's association and the california defense council. i'd like to talk about three issues in the bill on which we have a respectful disagreement with assemblymember stone and the proponents. the first is this question about judicial economy and efficiency. we spent decades here in sacramento trying to get the courts out of the discovery process. that is why for example we've enacted a meet and confer obligation before bringing a motion to compel discovery. we're trying to push that off. for lawyers to decide on their own about how discovery is going to be handled. and in some of these products liability cases, they do involve hundreds of thousands, even millions of pages of records. and months and months of back and forth with the very fine lawyer to my left, mr chase. how discovery is going to proceed. and we're going to agree on protecting this information, how it's stored, how it's returned, how it's used, who it's shared with, there may be redaction elements in these orders. that even if we're going to turn it over, we're going to redact certain information because it is so sensitive. these are very precisely crafted and now for the first time, we're going to say that a judge has an independent obligation to say wait, i don't, it doesn't matter that the two lawyers have stipulated how this discovery is going to unfold. the judge now has an independent obligation to apply the facts to the law and make sure that there is nothing in these documents which would violate the standard set forth in the bill. respectfully, we disagree with the professor. this does not contribute to judicial economy and efficiency. it boluxes up products liability cases because a judge has to say, the stipulation doesn't matter, i have to make an independent assessment here. now, i've thought a lot about the professor's argument in judiciary that well it will only have to be done once, was the good news. and i think that's true if the judge refuses to issue the order and if the facts on every case are identical. but these cases are not always identical. and what if the first judge issues the order. the next case not in sacramento, but in monterey county, the judge again is going to have to make an independent assessment. this idea that we're only going to climb the mountain once as it was indicated in the prior committee, i just don't think is true in the majority of cases. it's going to require a time, after time, after time assessment. and it's going to make it effectively impossible i think, not legally, mr. stone is right, to get a protective order. second, we're concerned on behalf of the defense bar about second-guessing by the state bar. the bill would subject a lawyer to potential discipline by the state bar if he or she for example demands that a settlement includes confidentiality i think it's a bad idea to subject lawyers to discipline for vigorously representing their clients, and having the state bar second guess. should the lawyer have known that this violated the standard set up by the bill is unpractical, and unfair so we're concerned about this second guessing by the state bar. finally the issue of standing was raised in the very fine analysis, but it hasn't been spoken to yet today. the bill effectively has unlimited standing for people to object after a settlement is reached because it says anyone affected by the settlement. well, on a products liability case, the seat backs that mr. chase is talking about or tires. who is an affected person? anyone who drives on the roads, anyone who owns a car, anyone who might buy a tire. it effectively empowers anyone to reach back and second guess the court's decision in entering the settlement. so, we understand the problem, we're willing to continue to talk to mr. stone and his proponents, but we think the bill has very large problems. moves away from this idea that in stipulations, we have pushed discovery out of the court, and it brings it back into the court. we think that's unwise, and for that reason we'd ask for a no vote.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 222, 'end': 227, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 830, 'end': 835, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2591, 'end': 2596, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3500, 'end': 3505, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3827, 'end': 3832, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Chris McKaley: Mr. Chair, Chris McKaley on behalf of the Computing Technology Industry Association and just three quick points. One is, we concur that while the bill doesn't prohibit outright protective orders, we think that the provisions of C2(a) through (e). That five part test makes it very, very difficult, and while one of the proponent witnesses indicated that trade secrets are carved out. If you look in C2(a), it mentions such as State of the art trade secrets from the technology industry. We have no idea what State of the art trade secrets means. But, as Ms. Barrell indicated, when you go further down to (d)3, it also says it's not applicable to trade secrets, but that it has to be unrelated to the danger to the public health or safety. So, it sort of sounds like it gives with one hand and takes with the other. We also concur with Mr. Belode's comment that subdivision e is going to have a chilling effect on defense counsel. While it's been tuned down a little bit, it still may be grounds for professional discipline, and again, that's going to have a chilling effect on Defense Council. Thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 558, 'end': 565, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 840, 'end': 846, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nicole Wordelman: Nicole Wordelman on behalf of the Personal Care Products Council in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jarrell Cook: cook, for the california manufacturers in technology association, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Britney Sitzer: sitzer, of the civil justice association of california, also opposed. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alyssa Stinson: Alyssa Stinson with the California Building Industry Association, also in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ken DeVore: Ken DeVore, The National Federation of Independent Business in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cliff Costa: Cliff Costa on behalf of California New Car Dealers, also in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maria Estrada: My name is Maria Estrada. And I am a mother and grandmother in Oakland. In 2015, my family rented a studio in Oakland from Mr. Yu. It was in a bad condition but it was all I could afford. Mr. Yu will not make repairs. He refused to replace a broken refrigerator for a month. He did not unclog the toilet for two months. And we have to use a bathroom in a restaurant. He never installed a lock on the back door or make the windows secure. He would also walk into my home without warning. A few times he walked in while my daughter was breastfeeding. When we complained to Mr. Yu, he will say you're fine, you're fine. We were very frustrated with Mr. Yu. And continue complaining to him about the bad conditions. After one year, he realized my daughter did not have Social Security number. And find out she was undocumented. He told my daughter and me, he was going to report us to Ides if we kept complaining. When we did not listen to him, he started calling and texting us angrily at night. He told our neighbors we were undocumented. We could not sleep because of the stress of our family breaking up. We could not afford to move even though we wanted too. All we have done was ask for repairs but Mr. Yu had found a tool to abuse us. We need this law to protect families with undocumented members from this type of abuse. No one should have to experience the fear, the pain and harassment which my family has suffered just because they are undocumented, thank you very much.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 127, 'end': 129, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 192, 'end': 194, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 575, 'end': 577, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 650, 'end': 652, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1205, 'end': 1207, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Debra Carlton: good afternoon mr. chairman, members, my name is carlton with the california apartment association. we represent approximately 50,000 rental owners and 2 million rental units in the state of california. we do not support the unscrupulous actions of some of these owners especially in situations where they change their policy after the fact. change their identification policies and attempt to evict tenants. just as california has created and adopted protected status for immigrants in the employment sector. we believe it's a reasonable to also adopt the same provisions here for the rental housing industry in ab 291. we request your aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 49, 'end': 56, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christian Brown: Thank you Mister Chair and members. Christian Brown with the California Federation of Teachers, in support. Secure homes make for great students, thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Harms: jennifer with the national association of social work, california chapter, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Renee Baroto: baroto, seiu california, also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kat New: Kat New on behalf of Asian Americans Advancing Justice California, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 3, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brian Guster: brian nikki guster with the california rural legal assistance foundation, pleased to co sponsor, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Pariset: Michelle Pariset with Public Advocates, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Baker: mr. chair and members, kevin from the american civil liberties union. good comments and sense bill, and very timely, thank you very much.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 94, 'end': 98, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ron Kingston: mr. chairman and members, ron representing four apartment associations southern cities, east bay, orange county and north valley property owners. this is a much improved bill from where it start out. like everyone at the table, proponents and opponents, we would never support unlawful activity. in fact, we were the original sponsors of the first immigration bill dealing with apartments 10 years ago. so we have been on this well before the trump administration even was a glimmer in anybody's eye. the only one issue i want to focus in on today and which causes us concern and we've asked the committee's input and that deals with on paragraph. actually it's section eight, addressing the issue of unlawful detainer, evictions if you will. the first paragraph on line 27 through 29 states that the landlord shall not cause a tenant to vacate based on their immigration status. we endorse that, we believe in it, and so does everyone here today involved in this bill. second paragraph, in an unlawful detainer action, an eviction, you have a new affirmative defense. we don't take issue with that. that affirmative defense is, that the landlord is bringing an action due to the person's immigration status, not for nonpayment of rent, illegal holdover, or for any other reason. the third paragraph, c, is being replaced, as noted by your committee analysis. and this is our concern. it gives, as we noted in paragraph b, affirmative defense for the tenant to respond to an unlawful detainer, let's say for the non payment of rent. in giving the person a rebuttable presumption that it was brought due to the immigration status, not to the underlying action which is non-payment of rent. our concern here is the way this is crafted, as proposed to be amended by mr. chiu's bill, is that the court would never get to the underlying action, which is the non-payment of rent. most every landlord that i know, when they bring an action, involves the non-payment of rent. sure, out of 39.4 million californians, there are going to be bad actors on both sides of the aisle, tenants and landlords. but in this case, we could never prove that the negative that in the rebuttable presumption that the landlord is bringing the action. not for the non payment of rent, which is actually true, but because of the immigration status. help us solve this particular issue. help us solve the wording at the very beginning of the new paragraph c, about the rebuttal assumption. the rest of the paragraph flows, that's fine. but how do we get the court to focus on why we brought the unlawful detainer. ron did not pay his monthly rent. and in the situation where the predominant reason or the reason for bringing the action was due to the person's immigration status, the bill solves that in paragraphs a and b. and we like everybody else, again, don't take issue with that. and in fact, we agree with that and its entirety. so we asked the committee's input about adequately addressing it. we would like to work with mr. chiu on this to resolve this issue before it gets to the assembly floor. it can't be resolved today, but it would be appropriate that it would be good to speak to this and see if we can get to this issue, thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1767, 'end': 1771, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2586, 'end': 2589, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3006, 'end': 3010, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Steve Carlson: Steve Carlson for the Apartment Association of Greater Los Angeles and the Santa Barbara Rental Property Association. We acknowledge all the work that has been done on this bill and it really has improved greatly. We continue to have some concerns on the rebuttable presumption. Obviously want to continue to work on it. Our concern is that in Los Angeles and other places there have been a lot of abuse of the unlawful container system coming from the other side. And we're kind of concerned that all of a sudden this may popup as sort of a check the box sort of a thing that we have run into elsewhere. I think there are ways to deal with it, and again, we have no problem obviously with the bill moving ahead. We think there's tremendous amount of work, we just wanted to register those concerns.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark Hertz: Thank you. My name is Mark Hertz, and I am a bookseller, and representing the Antiquarian Booksellers Association of America We're pleased to sponsor this legislation. Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee, thank you for having us today and hearing our testimony. And sincere thanks to your Committee staff who spent considerable time, attention, diligence and insight in helping Assemblymember Gloria craft constructive amendments. Thank you. I'm joined today by several other professional rare books sellers who've deferred to me to comment on their behalf and have traveled to be here today. The Antiquarian Booksellers Association of America is our nation's oldest Association of professional antiquarian book sellers. Our mission includes promoting ethical standards, and professionalism in the antiquarian book trade. More than 90 of our members are in California. More than 500 of our members and international colleagues do business in annual book fairs in California. I also have the privilege of representing a broad coalition of formal support for AB 228 from organizations representing literally thousands of businesses and collectors, both within and beyond California. Last year's AB 1570 was an attempt to protect California consumers from autograph fraud, which seems endemic to some sports and entertainment industry memorabilia. Unfortunately, as the Assembly Member referenced AB 1570 significantly over reached. And those unintentionally broad scope of AB 1570 created a perfect storm of owner's requirements, civil liability, and invasion of privacy for both small businesses and the thousands of California consumers who collect autograph material. The new law also threatens larger enterprises, such as Comic-Con and the International Antiquarian Book Fair. Regrettably, these unintended consequences were not understood by the author or brought to the attention of the Legislature until after AB 1570 was approved. As amended, under the guidance of your Committee consultant, the focus of AB 228 includes constructively refining what is considered an autographed collectible. And to which industries consumer protection should be targeted based on evidence of the problem. Clarifying who's considered a dealer on such collectibles, making sure consumers are provided with an express warranty without compromising legitimate privacy protections. And further bolstering consumer protection with a right of return. We appreciate your consideration, respectfully urge your support, and are happy to address any questions.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 399, 'end': 405, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mark Apreya: Mr. Chair and Members of the Committee, Mark Apreya. I'm here on behalf of a group of seven auction companies that operate in California. Some are based in California, some are based outside the state. I want to be clear at the beginning that we are not here in opposition to the bill, but we do want to bring to the Committee's attention some of the concerns that we've expressed to the author and to the sponsors. So first of all, we represent auction companies who like the others were unaware of the enactment of AB 1570 and so regrettably, we're all here before you today as opposed to last year. I want to thank Assembly Member Gloria and his staff for working on this measure. We all want to resolve the unintended consequences and the problems associated with it, but we want to bring to your attention a couple of items that we think as this measure moves forward, that would look to be addressed. First of all, it's the definitions of both sports collectibles and entertainment collectibles. And Mr. Chair as we discussed the other day, in those definitions is a phrase, included, but not limited to it. Our experienced with that phrase causes us to believe that there is going to be litigation that that phrase will create because of the lack of specificity and breadth. I provided an example of an Atari game set signed by the founder of Atari, Nolan Bushnell. Does that fall within the definition of entertainment collectible or not? And in conversations with the staffs of some of the members and with the Committee, there was an uncertainty about that. And so from a certainty standpoint, to allow a business to operate, to know that they are either in or outside the bounds of that statute, we think are important so that they can make informed decisions as to what risk they want to take and what they need to do in order to alleviate that risk. The second item is, and the Committee analysis addressed that, and I think speaks to the perspective of the measure. Certainly this is a measure sponsored by the book dealers, and to that extent, this measure I am sure satisfies their concerns. But there are others of us who are also in the potential position of selling these kinds of materials where it doesn't help us and in fact, causes some problems. We're happy that the Committee and the author have decided to move forward with modifying the recision provision so that it will not apply to auctioneers and we would ask that should you do so, or how you do that you make reference to the auctioneer statute that already exists. And that brings us to our last point. And that is there is an extensive body of law dealing with auction houses and auctioneers. I have circulated to the author's office, and to this Committee, and to the members, a side-by-side that portrays both the requirements under the auctioneer statute, and the provisions under the autographed collectible statute. And I would submit to you that there is a robust body of law that addresses these issues that are specific to auction houses. And that we believe in many instances is more protective of consumers than the autographed collectible statute. And so we would ask that as this measure move forward, that the author and the Legislature look to exclude from the coverage of the act, auctioneers and auction companies, by reference to the statute. We thank you for the opportunity to speak. And Mr Gloria, thank you, and your staff, and to the sponsors for the time that they have taken. And we look forward to working with them, because at the end of the day, we need to find one bill that resolves these unintended problems created by last year's legislation. Thank you.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 634, 'end': 640, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1357, 'end': 1371, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3395, 'end': 3401, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Hene Kelly: Yes, Hene Kelly from the California Alliance for Retired Americans. We represent over 1 million retired people in California. We are sponsoring this bill and we are so pleased that Kalra decided that he was going to bring it forward. Let me just tell you, I travel through the Central Valley a lot and I talk to people there. And I find that in some of the counties. And some of the cities, over 50% of the people living there are on Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid. This is very serious. If things are cut, it is going to hurt the entire state, not just these people, but the state. If they raise the age for Medicare it is going to absolutely bankrupt some counties and cities. We don't have even to look what the right thing is to do, we have to look what is the fiscally right thing is to do. But what am telling you is that, some of the plans, some of the things we have heard, the voucherizing cutting of the FICA. That might give somebody making $60,000 a year an extra $3,700. But that's not going to do anything for a pension. What it is going to do is to make the company they work for rich. Because they will get that $3,700 for each of the people. Basically what we need to do is to tell our legislators in Washington, that we do not want them to cut Medicare, Social Security, or Medicaid. Now, we wouldn't mind if they would help them and make them stronger. But we don't want any cuts. And that's a very important thing. Thank you.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 181, 'end': 186, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Gary Passmore: mr. chair, members of the committee, i'm gary. vice-president and congress of california seniors and we too strongly support this measure.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Angie Way: Chair members Angie Way California Labor Federation now more than ever these resolutions spare a strong meaning, we support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
C.T. Weber: C.T. Weber today, I'm wearing my Care Legislative Committee hat, so I support the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nadine Pambercane: Nadine Pambercane, American Federation Estate County Municipal Employees, District Council 57, and Chapter 57 Retirees, stand in support, urge you also.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dennis Hubbard: dennis jonah hubbard, california alliance for retired americans, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Elizabeth McArty: elizabeth retired nurse. i see great poverty and hurt in my work. i strongly support this bill for kalra.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 99, 'end': 104, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Trent Smith: Mr. Chair and members, Trent Smith on behalf of the State Association of County Retirement Systems, in support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Todd Thiesen: Todd Thiesen, President of the Law Enforcement Manager's Association. We are also in support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Audrey Durfor: Hi, Audrey Durfor on behalf of Sacramento County. We don't have an official position at this time. I know Assemblyman Cooper and his team have been working with the Board of Supervisors in the hopes of coming to some sort of resolution. As of this morning, that hasn't happen yet. So we wanted to make sure to let you know where the county is, although we don't have an official position or a letter. We do have some concerns similar to those raised Is last year and those echoed by Jolina from UCC.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 118, 'end': 124, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 483, 'end': 489, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jolina Voris: Yes, Mr. Chair and members. Jolina Voris on behalf of the Urban Counties of California also here representing CSAC. We do have an opposed position on this bill It does remove the local control from the South Sacramento County Board of Supervisors regarding this change in our operation of our county employees. And instead allows the retirement board to opt into a government structure already in statute. I would say that the other government structures that are in statute were agreed on at the local level first before they were brought to the Legislature and adopted. So all of the models that are in the bill that they could use, like San Bernardino's or Orange County, that was on the local level negotiated before they went to the Legislature for a bill. While notice is provided to the county board in the bill, it states that the parties have to meet in good faith and it doesn't provide any flexibility to the county. Related to change in any of the current agreements with employees, and locks in current levels of pension, healthcare, and accrued leave. So we believe this bill would increase administrative burden on the county, and restricts their ability to make changes, and may create an unlevel playing field for various county employees. Regarding the sponsor's indication that they want the retirement board to be in control of their employees, well if they really wanted that, then they should take everything. But they're wanting the contract with us to do a lot of different things and locking us into a point where we don't have any flexibility over those employees. So it's kind of an odd situation for us. So for those reasons we're opposed.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matthew Siverling: Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair and members, Matthew Siverling on behalf of the Association for Los Angeles Deputy Sheriffs, the Los Angeles Police Protective League. And Los Angeles County Professional Peace Officers Association, all in support, thank you.
[{'start': 45, 'end': 62, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Grace Alcantor: hi, my name is grace jonah alcantor. and as it was said, i am a substitute teacher. so my work is per diem, which means i don't get paid when school's in recess. i don't get paid for holidays. i don't get paid part of the summer when students are on vacation. so you can probably imagine how difficult that can be. and i always have to have some type of savings in my bank account. last year, bank of america levied my entire account. they levied a total of, i want to say it was more than $6,100 from my checking account, my personal account. it was really devastating, and i also want to add that i was a customer with bank of america for more than 10 years. so it was very surprising that they would do that to me. if i got into any debt in the first place, it was to pay off college. as we all know, college is very expensive, so my credit card debt was due to college expenses. and prior to my bank account levy, i did try to work with the bank. i told them that i could not afford my credit card payments. they were very high. and the bank did not work with me on that. i even wrote to their president, brian moynihan. i'm not sure if i'm saying his name correctly. but i had written a letter to let him know that i was having trouble paying my credit card debt, and nothing was resolved. but anyways, as i said, my account was levied, and it was really devastating. the same day that my bank account was levied, i suffered a severe panic attack for a couple hours. i couldn't really breathe, i couldn't move, i couldn't function. and i immediately had to resort to family's aid and especially my sister, who is also a low income worker. but somehow, my sister and my parents, who are seniors, who are also low income, at least were able to come up with money for my rent, because i was left with nothing. and so they came to my aid. and the other organization that also came to my aid was the east bay community law center, which is here today. they were able to tell me to file a claim of exemption, which i did, i filed that within 10 days after my bank account was levied. and after that, i went into court in december against bank of america. and the judge did find that the funds that were levied were, in fact, exempt. and so i was granted that exemption, and after that the funds were basically, well, the sheriff i should have said in the beginning. i'm sorry, i guess i just want to say overall that the effects are really devastating to me and left me in a worse economic hardship and that's why i'm here today, to support sb 298, just to say that it's very counter productive for a bank or a creditor to levy somebody's bank account. i mean, to this day i have no bank account.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1109, 'end': 1123, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Prasad Krishnamurthy: Hello. Thank you for Prasad Krishnamurthy, UC Berkeley. Thank you for letting me speak today. I'm speaking in support of SB 298, which would exempt a portion of a debtor's deposit account from enforcement of judgement. I have three broad points I want to make in support of this bill. One, is that it would to extend to the savings of poor and working class individuals and families, the same protections that are afford under existing California law to the savings of middle class families. California law exempts some portion of home equity, of equity in a vehicle, even of unmatured life insurance contracts from enforcement of judgement. It does not however directly protect what is the first form of liquid savings for poor households or really for any households and that is bank deposits. So that is the source of liquid savings that would be used for payments of expenditures for housing, for food and for health. So a reasonable or sensible policy of exemptions, in my view, would of course start with the wages, which we have under California law, but then would extend to deposits, before even getting to home equity, cars, life insurance, contracts. In some sense, this is a chance to fill in an existing hole in exemptions for California law. The second reason is that it would do so in a particularly effective way, through automatic exemption. I think, as was pointed out, it's difficult to, in a situation, as was faced by the person who just gave testimony. It's difficult in that situation to find legal aid and to go through the process of defending your rights against the Bank of America. So this is a right that might exist in theory, there are some hardship exemptions that can be filed by a debtor. But in practice, quite difficult for many households to do. Especially in the circumstances that they're facing. This automatic exemption is not unknown in California law, it already exists for payments that are made through a bank account that are for Social Security or for any kind of public benefit. Now, that's not a substitute for this law because that is creating basically a substitute for wage garnishment for people who get their wages.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Beverly Yu: Madam Chair and members Beverly Yu with UDW AFSCME local 3930 in strong support. Thank You.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sharon Jamal: Hi, Sharon Jamal with East Bay Community Law Center in strong support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susan Martindale: Susan Martindale with Consumers Union in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cliff Berg: Good afternoon, and I know it's late, I'll try to be brief, Cliff Berg here on behalf of the California Association of Collectors. First off, I want to thank the Chair, the Committee staff and the author for the amendments that were adopted, we do think that that is an improvement in the bill, dealing with a multiple account issue. However, I do want to talk briefly about the author's point, which is that, in essence, bank levies are a tool for enforcement of a judgment. So just to put this issue in context, in essence, a bank levy only happens after a creditor or a collection agency has gone through the entire process of going to court, and obtaining a judgement. So in a typical debt, like any of the examples given, or in any debt that you would imagine, a collection agency will in essence start the process after receiving the account, by contacting the consumer multiple times by both letter and phone call as required by law. It's only after the consumer fails to respond in any manner to the phone calls and the letters that a collector or a creditor would consider going to court. In making a decision and going to court, you have to evaluate the expense of bringing an action in California Civil Court today, including both filing fee's, legal costs, my clients, are assignees they're far from small claims court. So they have to go to court with a lawyer and obtain a judgement. In the hundreds and hundreds of thousands of accounts that the industry gets, something over 98% are resolved without any lawsuit. The resolve is that the consumer simply says in writing that I dispute the bill, and they have to drop it. The resolve because the consumer agrees to pay the bill or pay a payment plan or workout of debt. So when you go to court and essence the collector or the creditor is triaging the case and determining that, A, the debtor owes the money that its pretty clear that its worth the cost of going to court. And that the debtor has assets that's worth paying. Through out that process, the consumer is receiving multiple notices, when the case is filed in court the consumer received multiple notices and when the judgement is answered the consumer received multiple notices. So why do we wind up with the bank levy, the creditor has received a judgement which shows that it's a valid debt. The consumer owes it and then, restarts the entire process of re-contacting the consumer again and again trying to work out a payment plan. It's only when none of that happens that you go get a bank levy, and you go to court again to do that, and you have to get a writ from the court a second time, so you're back in court. So, where we wind up is in a very complex process that protects the consumer's rights throughout, so what does this bill do? It creates a new exemption of $4,800, we believe that $4,800 is extremely high that our average cases are well below that. This bill effectively eliminates bank levies and therefore, we remain opposed to the bill.
[{'start': 60, 'end': 70, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sonia Gibson: Good afternoon Madam Chair and Members of the Committee. My name is Sonia Gibson here in opposition on behalf of Encorer Capital Group, just to reiterate, the exemption amount is so high, $4,800. On average, consumer debt is roughly in the $2,000 balance range. So for example, our credit card accounts would simply never meet the amount of the exemption to exceed it in order to have a bank levy. You essentially might as well have a bill that states that bank levies are prohibited in the state. It goes so far that it's unprecedented in any other state. 16 other states allow for a blanket exemption, but 14 of those states require that it be an affirmative, as in the consumer has to apply for that exemption. So this is the first time that we are seeing a $4,800 amount that is no questions asked, no evaluation of the consumers State of financial ability to pay that bank levy. Additionally, there are already robust exemptions on the books. Just to read through, funds for basic necessities, 75% of wages paid into the bank account, veterans benefits, pensions, Social Security, disability, unemployment. It's a two page long list of exemptions that the consumer simply has to file a one page claim of exemption form. It's worked as a process. If there are concerns around the timelines to process the claim of exemption, the consumer not understanding it, there are other ways to address this problem. For example, we could, like we did with wage garnishment, provide more information to the consumer, give them the claim of exemption form. We could require that the courts expedite the hearing for a claim of exemption. But to just do a blanket $4,800 exemption is unprecedented. I want to also just reiterate that the proposal to have an ex parte motion as a way of resolution on which bank account is the one that gets the exemption. It's a very tedious, difficult costly process to have an ex parte motion that you're asking the consumer to essentially hire an attorney to do.
[{'start': 68, 'end': 80, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Reed: David Reed on behalf of the Receivables Management Association in opposition. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Courtney Jensen: courtney grace jensen of the california credit union league also in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cesar Diaz: good afternoon, madam chair and members, cesar courtney diaz on behalf of the state building trades. we represent 400,000 men and women in the construction field, have an executive board of about 45 members from different crafts. it is astonishing and also shocking to believe that most of them, throughout their careers, have been exposed to asbestos. many of them live day to day thinking that maybe someday they may be diagnosed. i have family members that worked in the shipyards, and when i find out more information about the shipyards, the construction industry. i often, too, if you remember those days when these family members would come home with their clothes, perhaps bringing in the asbestos to us as well and to the entire household. while many manufacturers have now phased out virtually every product that contains asbestos, contaminated building materials still exist at countless job sites throughout california and the nation. this continuously places workers at risk. in fact, many of our members are still suffering a diagnosis from asbestos. what we see here is a fairness bill about ensuring that workers who are dying from asbestos exposure win the race against the clock and have a chance, at least, to seek justice in court. sb 32 is about protecting them from harsh and drawn out depositions in their final days of life. a worker grasping for breath because of asbestos exposure should not be subjected to hours and hours of unnecessary questioning. a purposely lengthy deposition process, while some may claim is necessary, is also very much an abuse of human dignity and life and it needs to take into consideration the excruciating pain and suffering of these men and women. sb 32 isn't about giving anyone an advantage. it's about giving a dying worker who has been poisoned by asbestos a fighting chance for justice and fairness for themselves and their families and we strongly urge your support.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 60, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laurel Halbany: thank you madam chair and members. laurel cesar halbany, i have probably defended hundreds of depositions of dying asbestos victims. to dying asbestos victims, seven hours is not nine to five with lunch break of answering lawyer's questions, it's precious hours of the few remaining months that they have to live. where they're interrogated at length despite the fact they have a cancer in their chest that makes breathing and speaking difficult. these depositions get stretched over days and sometimes weeks because they can only go for an hour or a few hours a day. often the depositions have to be interrupted because the process is so wearing that they need a rest before they can continue. other states, federal courts, connecticut, district of columbia, hawaii, even texas set limits on deposition time to prevent abusive and incompetent questioning. it's really amazing that when courts have implemented limits such as the prior bill or case management orders, that lawyers are nonetheless able to complete their questioning within those allotted limits. without appropriate limits, the lawyers will fill the time that you give them, even if that means harming the asbestos victims that least have the time to give. the california case management orders protect defendants in asbestos litigation by giving them unprecedented amounts of written discovery. even before they get to a deposition, plaintiffs have to provide written authorizations for their medical and employment records. they have to answer pages and pages of standard interrogatories in every case to provide information that no other attorneys in other kinds of litigation get in order to expedite and make sure that the process is fair. so we would ask that members of the committee pass this bill in order to protect victims and allow a judge to give additional time only if the particular facts of a case make that a fair choice.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Meagan Subers: Thank you, Madam Chair and members. Meagan Subers on behalf of the California Professional Firefighters, in support.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 42, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Caitlin Vega: caitlin laurel vega for the california labor federation, also here in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Hene Kelly: hene, california alliance for retired americans, many of our members worked in the shipyards and on behalf of my father in law who died from mesothelioma, and had to go through hours and hours.
[]
Doug Parker: doug caitlin parker with worksafe, a nonprofit in california dedicated to stronger health and safety protections for workers in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alan Pierce: Alan Pierce, Heat and Frost Local Insulators 16 Retiree Club.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Belote: madam chair and members, mike doug belote for the civil justice association of california. who i represent just on the asbestos issues, both a bill in the assembly and this one. i'd like to start out by indicating that no one disputes the severity of asbestos disease. i had a very close friend die of mesothelioma. it is a vicious, nasty way to die, and no one deserves to die that way. what we are talking about here is undoing not only the bill passed several years ago, which was very carefully crafted and it resulted in ccp section 2025.290. but it departs from that very carefully crafted compromise in two ways. the analysis focuses primarily on the seven hour rule for cases designated as complex. but there's actually another provision in that bill, in that law, which also applies here. and that is cases which are subject to a case management order at a local court. around the state, courts that have had a lot of asbestos litigation, and it's primarily san francisco and los angeles. have, through judicial hearings, crafted case management orders to apply to the entirety of the asbestos litigation in their court. and they have rules on depositions. so this bill would override those decisions made by judges, where both plaintiff and defense participated, and they arrived and they testified. and the one in la took years to craft, and this bill would now preempt that case management order in los angeles. we understand the need, sometimes, to shorten the deposition time because of the physical disease suffering by the plaintiff. but at the same time, the defense deserves an ability to properly find out whether their client's product was the cause of the disease. the way asbestos litigation proceeds, as i understand it, it's really all about exposure. no one's disputing the disease or the causation. it's really about whose product was the plaintiff exposed to, and it is the deposition process that reveals that. the way these cases are often filed is that sometimes dozens of defendants will be named in an action. and it is the deposition process that allows the lawyers to figure out what ship did you serve on? where on the ship did you serve, what products were you exposed to? and so if you've named 40 defendants, you'd sure hate to have a situation where the first two defendants take five hours of the seven hours of deposition. now, 38 defendants get the final two hours. and the way it works is, it's sort of if we can show through the deposition process that it isn't likely you were exposed to our product, we're going to expect a dismissal. and often, these cases start with 40 defendants, and when they go to trial they have just a few. and it's that deposition process that does that. [thank you, mr.-] so we would argue that the current law, giving judges discretion- [thank you.] and using the case management orders, works, thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Faith Lane: hi, yes, hello, faith mike lane with the california association of joint powers authorities. i'd like to align our comments with those of mr. belote, respectfully opposed.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 142, 'end': 148, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
 : hello, faith my faith name faith is faith latoya faith johnson. faith and faith i faith live faith in faith oakland, faith california. faith my faith daughter faith amora faith was faith eight faith years faith old faith when faith she faith was faith sexually faith assaulted faith by faith three faith older faith boys faith at faith a faith boy faith scout faith run faith after faith school faith program faith in faith oakland.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 62, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Greg Bentley: thank you, madam chair and members, my name is greg  bentley, president of consumer attorneys of california and proud sponsor of sb 658. i learned a long time ago that if you're winning, don't buy it back, so we are pleased that there's no opposition. we've worked hard with the defense bar and with the judicial council, and i think we've made good strides in coming up with a bill that's going to give us a chance to pick a fair and impartial jury. and we think that the criteria that's in there is good, and will give both the plaintiff and the defense bar an opportunity to discuss the issues with the judge to make sure that the process is reasonable, and no arbitrary or unreasonable time limits are imposed, and we thank you for the time and consideration.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 59, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dan Pone: good afternoon, chair and members, dan greg pone for the judicial council, we don't currently have a formal position on the bill. as noted in the analysis, we've been part of a working group effort, working with the author's staff, and sponsors on amendments to try to meet the goals of the legislation, and do so in a way that's as workable as possible for the courts. as part of that working group, the honorable daniel j buckley, who's the presiding judge of the la superior court, has been a member of that working group, and is here with me today, and he has some very brief comments to make.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 415, 'end': 431, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Caitlin Vega: Madam Chair and members, Caitlin Vega for the California Labor Federation, also here in support. As noted in your analysis, there is a precedent for prevailing worker fee shifting, and there's a reason for this. We want to encourage employers to comply with the law, we want to make sure that workers are able to get access to council when they are not paid properly. And we want to encourage employers when they don't pay a worker properly to work it out with them and to make sure they are made whole rather than requiring a worker to go through litigation. These fee shifting statutes also traditionally are about giving the less powerful person in the interaction a little bit more power, a little bit access to their day in court to hold that employer responsible. So we think that that is fair and really is in line with other existing statutes protecting workers' rights through, the workers' rights to be paid for the hours they work. Thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Castle: Michelle Castle, the Service Employees' International Union, for the reasons stated by the two previous witnesses, in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Seth Bramble : Seth Bramble on behave of the California Teachers' Association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Derick Lennox: chair and members, my name is derick and i'm here representing the school employers association of california. we did hear about the amendments last night and so seac has not had an opportunity to adopt a new position on the bill, but i think what we can do is offer some comments about the amendments so that we can continue to move in a collaborative fashion on a bill that would be, perhaps, workable to everybody. we certainly think they're a step in the right direction, so we thank the committee for that. so aside from the one-sided nature of the fee shifting arrangement that was part of the original bill and remains today, we think that there's another issue that's raised by the new amendments, which is the mandatory nature of the fee shifting provision. the author's statement in the analysis notes that the intent of the bill is to quote, give courts the option of awarding reasonable attorney fees. as currently written, that fee shifting is mandatory. so we could have cases, the meritorious types of cases that the sponsor noted, where you have unique circumstances or complex set of facts where there might be a genuine disagreement about material facts or questions of law. now, clearly sb 550 is not intended to direct this type of fee shifting provision, which is supposed to be for the clear cut sort of cases.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 162, 'end': 166, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kathy Catano: Good afternoon, my name is Kathy Catano. I own two mobile home parks and an RV park. I recently had one of the worst experiences of my professional life. About four months ago, we were in the process of evicting residents for an assortment of poor behaviors. One of them, things were escalating, video security cameras taken, managers tires slashed. We could just see this train wreck. Called our attorney, we're about half way through the 60 day time frame. This guy was imploding. There really wasn't much that could be done. But it got stopped, because he murdered someone in his mobile who came to visit him. And that, I've never had anything like that in all of my years doing this. And talk about traumatic for the other park residence. Being on the news, it was beyond troubling. And at that time I kept thinking, why is it I have to wait 60 days when I have a situation where something is going to get way worse. Well, for someone's son that day got way worse because he didn't walk out of our park. And I agree with the gentleman behind me that we're not dealing with the substantial annoyance issues that we can use when someone is just not behaving well. People are at risk I feel responsible. Our park in Redding is kind of a low-end park, talk about affordable housing. Most of them on fixed incomes. And we do everything we can to keep it a safe, clean park, because everyone needs somewhere to live, even if it's not fancy. And as a mobile home park owner, we need help. This is just we're going down and we need a little more help from our regulations so that we can provide the type of living space with dignity that these people deserve.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ernie Schroer: thank you, my name is ernie. i'm a past president of the western manufactured housing association. i'm still a current director of that. i've also for the last two years been a member of the golden state mobile homeowner's league, western manufacturer housing best practices group where we try to find common cause for our industry. i'm also the owner of orange village mobile home park in the city of orange. my family has owned this mobile home park since 1977 and we have recently had our first and only case of a substantial annoyant tenant. and this process started in 2015, and kept escalating unfortunately, and we finally turned it over to an attorney in september of 2015. the tenant threatened a number of people in the park, one in particular was a retired chp officer who was told that if he ever talked to this tenant again that he would be put into the hospital for the rest of his life. i had a young couple, as managers on site managers in my park. he sexually harassed this young 30-something woman, who could be any one of our daughters,  and this is why i believe that they quit and left for the state of washington. we finally went to trial in february of this year. and it's very difficult in these situations to get any of our residents to even sign a complaint form. i had three residents volunteer to testify in court against this gentleman. two of the tenants lived on either side of him, and one was the retired california highway patrol officer. we need this was a two year process, i spent over $75,000 on it, and the reason i have done so is because my residents have repeatedly asked me. they said, why should i obey your rules and regulations if this particular tenant does not have to obey the rules and regulations? and i took this as a matter of principle. and we've continued to do this. but this process is certainly too lengthy and too expensive. and these are elderly, vulnerable people that we're trying to protect.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andy Carrey: Hello, Andy Carrey, with Stores management company, in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alicia Kelley: Alicia Kelley with Bamboo Tree mobile home park with support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katherine Borg: Katherine Borg with the Western Manufactured Housing Communities in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nancy Miller: nancy dan miller with centennial estates and i support this bill also.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Eichard: Jason Eichard with Edelstein, Gilbert, Robson&Smith on behalf of the California Mobile Home Park Owner's Alliance also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ed Barrons: Ed Barrons on behalf of the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eloy Garcia: Won't take that personally. Eloy Garcia, Madam Chair and Members, for the Western States Petroleum Association, again representing the State's major refiners. With policy concerns on the bill that we've shared with Mr. Muratsuchi, and others. Our concerns are that the monitoring requirements here may be redundant and may be inconvenient with the existing in existence of monetary requirement in place now. And propose to be enhanced at the regional higher quality district level. So we will continue to work with the author on refining the monitoring of refineries, but on the current bill we are concerned. And we'll continue to work on the bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 219, 'end': 229, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Cesar Diaz: Madam Chair and members, Cesar Diaz on behalf of the State Building Trades. Want to thank you assembly member for carrying this important bill. It's about transparency, identifying where there could be opportunities to work with the refineries to make them safer. The law was passed to specifically create a safer environment, not only for the employees at those facilities, but also for the surrounding community. So we believe this bill will actually save the state money in terms of wage and hour complaints that may be put forward to the DLSE or the DIR, as well as OSHA violations by making these facilities safer. For those reasons, we ask for your support.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 570, 'end': 574, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Caitlin Vega: Madame Chair, members, Caitlin Vega for the California Labor Federation, also here in support. This is about protecting worker's safety and the safety of the community. Thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eloy Garcia: madam chair members eloy jonah garcia for the western states petroleum association representing the state's major refineries. we find ourselves in the position of opposing the bill as it is in print today. it is a bit unprecedented to provide contracts to the state in this fashion. but we continue to be willing to work with the author, and with the sponsor to find, hopefully an alternative way to provide the information that the sponsor and the author seeks in a way that can be constructive. and we look forward to continuing towards that effort. thank you very much.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Lange: Good morning, Madame Chair and members. Karen Lange on behalf of the Yuba County Board of Supervisors that would benefit from the bill in support today, thank you.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kimberly Chen: madame chair and members, kimberly eloy chen on behalf of the california pan-ethnic health network, one of the co-sponsors on the bill. we think that the costs associated with this bill are modest and will help ensure that the state's transportation policies are reflecting the needs of the disadvantaged communities across the state, thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mark McDonald: Thank you, Chair and members. Mark McDonald, McCallum Group on behalf of the Foothill-De Anza Los Angeles, Peralta and San Francisco Community College Districts in support. This is a money saver, it simply extends the authority that K12 currently has to community colleges and we would request support for that, thank you.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sara Flocks: Madame Chair, members, Sara Flocks, California Labor Federation also in support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Megan Stubers: Thank you, Madame Chair and members. Megan Stubers on behalf of the California Professional Firefighters, and we are one of the sponsors of this bill. This will protect workers from being required to serve in temporarily upgraded positions for long periods of time. It has very minimal costs, and we respectfully ask for your aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cesar Diaz: Thank you, Madam Chair and members, Cesar Diaz on behalf of the State Building Trades. The building trades have about 66,000 apprentices, the state invests a significant portion to help with the education of those apprentices. This bill will help make sure that those programs are held accountable. We ask for your support.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roy Griffith: good morning member chair and members, thank you for very much for this opportunity, i want to recognize assembly member frazier for allowing us to authoring this very important bill. and i really want to thank the committee as well for the excellent amendments that are going to move this forward and providing them more opportunities for california's youth. my name is roy kimberly griffith, i'm a retired game warden from the california department of fish and wildlife, and now i'm representing california rifle and pistol association. my last 27 years with the department, last 12 of which i was captain for the hunter's education program for the state. during that time, time and time again, i had families coming to me telling me that they really would love the opportunity for elk in california but couldn't afford it. basically $500 for single income families is a lot of money. i was at a point in my life, and i'm a lot of you can reflect back in your earlier years, when you couldn't afford that tag either. ab 521 seeks to reduce that elk tag to $100 for adults and $20 for youth which will be a greater opportunity for our california youth. they would also remove the implicit price deflater which is caused this problem by making that tag go up year after year. this fluctuation a tag cost has made it very difficult for the state to track these fees and do consistent wildlife management. and since the big game management fund created in 2011, that fund is accumulated almost $10 million by the end of 2016. so the money is not being spent by the state. there's a $10 million surplus there. this reduction will just very insignificantly reduced that, input that amount and still increase that amount by $33,000 a year. additionally the application fee for these tags are none dedicated funds. those application fees go into the none dedicated fund which can be used for the many none-funded mandate that the department faces. so in the long run it could be making the department money with this. thank you very much and we really encourage your aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 121, 'end': 128, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 371, 'end': 392, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicole Riddleman: Nicole Riddleman on behalf of the San Bernardino County Board of Supervisors in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Murphy: Good morning Madam Chair and members. Jason Murphy, on behalf of the University of California. This is the culmination of a successful 10 year pilot program. It will save us money. I ask for an aye vote.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Robert Sumner: Yes, good morning, Robert Sumner here on behalf of Attorney General Xavier Becerra, sponsor of the legislation. I'm happy to answer any in depth follow questions about the fund balance appropriations and things of that nature. But the basic gist of the bill is the fact we were able a few years ago to create the Bureau of Children's Justice by triaging existing resources without requiring a new general fund appropriation. And through that we've been able to coordinate with other sections within the department, to launch a number of high profile state wide investigations that just otherwise wouldn't be happening within California. And now we're starting to see the benefits of those investigations in the forms of settlements and judgments. And we already have one settlement that earmarks a specific amount of $6 million to continue investigations and litigation on behalf of children. So this would merely, now that we can kind of Prop BCJ or the Bureau of Children's Justice up on its own. This would provide a mechanism and statute and in our budget for them to do that the same way that every other section within our public rights division currently operates.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 68, 'end': 82, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brandon Roberts: Thank you, Madam Chair and members. My name is Brandon Roberts. I'm with the Health Officers Association of California. We're the proud sponsors of AB 511. With the goal of implementing the latest evidence based guidelines from the CDC and other expert bodies, the goals of AB 511 are primarily policy focused. However, there are significant fiscal impacts and benefits as well with me is Dr. Louise Mignet, our technical expert who will speak more on these.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 62, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 393, 'end': 406, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Louise Mignet: good morning, madam chair and assemblymembers. my name is mignet. i'm a physician who specializes in preventative medicine and public health. i have been working in tb control for the past 10 years, and i am the incoming president of the california tb control association. in order to most effectively use our health care resources and provide the best care to our patients, it is essential that we base our health policies and practices on evidence. this bill implements evidence based screening for tb based on the risk of the individual having been exposed to tb, rather than continuing outdated universal testing. universal testing made sense when tb was a common disease. at the turn of the last century, it was the number one infectious disease killer in the us, but this is no longer the case. we still have tb, but it is concentrated in particular populations that have risk factors. it makes medical and physical sense to only test those who are at risk. you can see this principle at work in the way we screen for breast cancer. the best way to protect women against breast cancer isn't to test all women with mammograms. instead, mammograms are recommended only for women who are at risk for breast cancer due to their age or family history. we do this because we know that over testing can lead to false positive test results and false positive results lead to further testing and treatment that can cause harm to women who aren't ill in the first place. this approach saves health care resources, as well as saves women from unnecessary treatment and the anxiety of a misdiagnosis. in much the same way, we should avoid unnecessary tests for tb. numerous expert bodies agree that repeated testing of low risk populations is not the best use of our resources. it diverts resources from the people who actually need it, namely those who are truly infected with tb. even worse, testing of low risk populations leads to high rates of false positive test results. this leads to further testing and treatment, which can cause physical harm, increased costs, and unnecessary anxiety to someone who is not ill. tb costs millions to this state every year. my organization, the california tb controllers association, and the california department of public health believe we can eliminate tb. ab 511 is aligned with the california tuberculosis elimination plan, which has seven key recommendations. recommendation number 2 is to apply focused and effective strategies for tb testing by reducing tb testing in low risk population.
[{'start': 58, 'end': 64, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Gibbons: michelle roy gibbons with the county health executives association of california in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Evan Goldberg: Madame Chair and members, Evan Goldberg with State Controller and Evan Goldberg in support of the bill.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 66, 'end': 79, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Brian White: Yes, good morning Madame, Chair members. Brian White on behalf of the Mosquito Vector Control Association. We are the sponsors of the bill. We are in strong support of the bill, we support this bill for a variety of reasons, but the primary reason is we believe that this bill will improve public safety. As the author has stated, there are a lot of emerging technologies that are coming on the books, and there are reduced budgets that mosquito districts are having to deal with new challenges, with respect to new vectors. We believe this bill simply updates state law, so that we can distinguish between manned aircraft and unmanned aircraft while still complying with all the FAA regulations that will be required of mosquito districts. For those reasons, we wholeheartedly support the bill and ask for your aye vote. Thank you.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Elaine Howle: Thank you, Mr Chairman and members. For the record, my name's Elaine Howle, California State Auditor. With me is Kathleen Fullerton. Kathleen was the audit manager on this particular project, working with the audit team, who spent a fair amount of time in Oakland, California at headquarters. What I'd like to do, members, is step you through at a high level, the findings and issues we identified in the report. And then, again, at a fairly high level, discuss a few of the recommendations that we made. Not only to the University of California, the Office of the President, but to the Board of Regents and certainly legislative recommendations as well. So the first issue I'd like to discuss is exactly what you mentioned, Mr. Maratsuchi, is the determination that we have in the report that there is $175 million of fund balance, essentially funds that were available at the end of fiscal year 15, 16. So as of June 30th, 2016, the Office of the President had $175 million. Now, 83 million of that is in a restricted accounts, what they consider restricted funds, they may be restricted based on grants, based on appropriations, some type of specific restriction. However another $92 million was in what they call a discretionary fund, so those are funds that are available, have a lot of flexibility for the Office of the President to use those funds. When we looked at five year window that we are asked to look, again, this ending fund balance fluctuated, but the focus in the report is the 2015, 16. Now we decided to drill down and really look at the discretionary funds and see whether or not that was a consistent situation over time or whether that was just this one particular fiscal year. And what we found, I'm hopeful that the sergeant handed out the, do you all have the one page hand out? And there's a lot of numbers on this figure, but if you focus on the bar chart on the right hand side at the bottom, that shows you their discretionary fund balances as of the end of each of the fiscal years that we looked at. And as you can see, that amount has grown over time. So they are continuing to have money available at the end of the year, and that fund is growing. What is also important to note in there, the green shading is the campus assessment amount. And as I'm sure you're aware, members, the Office of the President, their central administrative function, their operations is essentially funded by this campus assessment. About 90% of their funding comes from the campus assessment. What was of concern to us is even though they have this available money at the end of each year, they were not disclosing this to the regents when they were sharing either a request for an increase in the campus assessment from one year to the next. They also weren't sharing with the regents the amount they had in restricted balances as well. But the discretionary was really of concern to us. Over those years, as I said, the campus assessment grew. There were at least two years where they hadn't spent all of the campus assessment monies they had received in that year. Yet they went back to the regents and asked for an increase. And that, again, was of concern to us because we felt they had those funds available to them and didn't necessarily need to ask the regents to approve an increase in the campus assessment. And as Mr. Muratsuchi said and Mr. McCarty said, those monies could have remained at those respective campuses and been used by those campuses for other purposes to support students, faculty, etc. That's why we raised that as a particular concern. As I indicated, the restricted funds, there's $83 million now, there is some discussion or has been since the audit was released that those monies are not available at all for any kind of redistribution. We would disagree with that. The reason we disagree with that is in discussions with the Office of the President, there are over 340 funds that make up that restricted balance. Over 100 of those, 114 of those funds are actually restrictions that the University Office of the President self imposed. So these are restrictions that they could potentially reverse, depending upon what the priorities are. For example, the Searle's fund is a fund that the Office of the President had considered a restricted fund up until fiscal year 11, 12. It's about an annual amount of $7 million. That has been shifted to the discretionary pot, essentially. So that is no longer a restricted fund. So that's why we believe it's necessary to go back and look at some of those 114 to see if there are some funds available in that balance that perhaps could be redirected or returned to the campus, as used for other purposes. More flexibility and the discussion, again, that's been out there is this $92 million in the discretionary amount. And as I'm sure you've heard, you've seen in our report where the Office of the President is asserting that $54 million of that has been committed for future projects that are occurring during this current fiscal year of 16, 17. Therefore, they really only have $38 million in reserve. And what I wanted to discuss with you today as we disagree with that particular conclusion, first of all, the calculations were ours. We came up with the 175 and then sat down with the Office of the President and got the amount that is in restricted funds and then the discretionary. Then we asked them, well, what are you going to do with all this discretionary money? And they came up with the 54 million, and then ultimately, you end up with 38, which now they're asserting is their reserve. First of all, the Office of the President has acknowledged in the response to the report, and I think they will acknowledge today, they don't have a reserve policy. They've never established a reserve amount. They've never had discussions, to our knowledge, with the regents about what their reserve should be. So that's really, that 38 million ultimately resulted from a mathematical calculation. Going from the 92 that we identified, they came up with commitments of 54 and are suggesting that their reserve is 38. What I'd like to demonstrate with the handout that we gave is, it's our belief that many of those commitments, they are able to handle those with their existing budget. And the reason our office has reached that conclusion is if we look back at history. So if you look at the table at the top of the report, you will see there is a line item that says planned commitments. So I'm going to take you to the right hand side, there's the $54 million that the Office of the President asserts they need that money for specific projects, things that are ongoing, etc. So they only have 38 million in Reserve. Well if we go back to fiscal year 15, 16, they were suggesting and had planned on $30 million in commitments. So we'd expect their fund balance to go down, but if you go up to the yellow line, you see their fund balance in 15, 16 started at $97 million. At the end of the year, it was $92 million. So they met those $30 million in commitments, but they didn't have to use what they consider their reserve. And the same thing is true in prior years, where they're committing $37 million in 14, 15. Their fund balance actually went up by $18 million, so they were able to meet those commitments, yet their surplus continued to grow. And this is at the same time they're asking for increases to the campus assessment. So essentially, what this is telling you, as you can see on the bottom left, the regents have consistently been approving budget increases for the office of the President. So what this is telling us is they've continually gotten budget increases. So this surplus that has been building up in a discretionary account is money in our belief that is available for consideration. Either send some of this assessment money back to the campuses, make some modifications going forward and certainly I will talk about the recommendation that we've made to the Legislature. Not only based on this information, but based on other information that I'm going to discuss as far as other issues we've identified in the report. But what I'm trying to demonstrate here, and I hope I am clear is, there is sufficient funds available within the Office of the President's budget to be able to pay for these very important programs that they speak of and that they discussed with us. And certainly, we share some of that in the audit report itself. So we feel very confident in our conclusions related to this discretionary money. So another area that we were asked to actually look at is their budgeting practices. And we really walked away quite surprised at how weak their practices are. They're ineffective, and they preclude accountability. And we actually present a table in the report that talks about best practices, and those that the University of California does not follow. They don't include in their budget presentations to the regents, those prior year expenditures so the regents would see. Well, the campus assessment was $288 million last year, but you only spent 260, where's the other 28? Well, it's in this reserve. But if the regents don't know that, they can't make a fully informed decision as to whether or not that campus assessment should be increased. That's just one example of why those prior year expenditures are very important to share certainly with the finance Committee, with the regents and certainly with the entire group of the regents. They don't provide sufficient detail regarding their source of funding, all of the restricted funds that they receive monies for. The funding sources, their endowment, etc. As I indicated early, they do not have a specific reserve policy. They need to have a conversation with the regents. They really need to determine what an appropriate reserve should be. We're not arguing that they shouldn't have a reserve, but they certainly need to go through the process of coming up with a methodology and determining what that Reserve should be, what it should be used for, how it should be adjusted from year to year. Stakeholder input. There is not a lot of stakeholder input with respect to preparation and decision-making with respect to the budget. Longterm forecasting. There are budgets that we've seen that are being presented to the regents that essentially show two years. Prior year and the budget year coming up. Again, it doesn't include expenditures. It just says this is what you gave us last year in budget. This is what we're asking for this year in the budget. We do not think that's sufficient and certainly doesn't follow best practices. The other two concerns that we had that we talk in the report and other areas, but certainly falls within the best practices area is monitoring your expenditures. What the Office of the President asserted to us. They monitor a couple of times a year, at midpoint. Now their divisions within the Office of the President may be monitoring, but at the budget officer level, we're not seeing that. We're seeing it once or twice a year and they're not necessarily looking at variances between budget and actual throughout the year so that they could make some adjustments and make some determinations. The other area is the oversight of expenditures and approval of decision making, and approval of these expenses. We actually tested about $42 million in expenditures looking for the appropriate approval, the appropriate documentation $34 million, we were not able to find adequate documentation for those particular expenditures. That doesn't mean they were inappropriate expenditures. It means we could not find specific documentation to justify that particular expenditure. So really a record keeping issue. They really need to tighten that up as far as oversight and what is expected before an expenditure is approved in their budget. Another really important area, certainly as the members who spoke earlier talked about. The system wide initiatives, very important initiatives that the office of the President administers and certainly many of the campuses administer. Our concern here, really again, is similar to the budget issues. We ask the Office of the President, tell us how many initiatives that basically the Office of the President administers and manages. They came back to us with a list of 32 initiatives. My staff went out to their budget data, went out to their web site and identified 79 system wide initiatives. So they gave us a list of 32, we came up with a list of 79. Then we ask them, okay, so how much are you budgeting for each of these initiatives? And they tried to give us some of that information. They weren't able to give us all of that information, so then we asked for expenditure. How much is being spent on these initiatives? And some of that, there actually had to be estimates, because some of those initiatives are administered at the campus level. That's not necessarily a problem, but if you are going to provide a funding to a particular campus or series of group of campuses to administer these programs. You need to understand how much you send out there and get reports back from the campuses as to what we are doing with this money and what benefits are we deriving as a state or as a system from these particular initiatives that are being funded. No different than a state agency providing funding to district offices or federal money coming into California and going out to the local level and the state departments are responsible for getting progress reports from those respective district offices, etc. So we really had concerns about that. The initiatives where they weren't able to give us a dollar amount we looked at expenditures, and it's about $98 million. The total for the 79 initiatives, we were able to identify a little over about $434 million being spent. So this is a significant amount of money that's being spent by the University and the campuses on these initiatives. So we believe the University needs to do a better job of tracking them, tracking their costs. And certainly, the other area we looked at was the evaluation of these initiatives. What was the original intent? What was the University hoping to accomplish by funding this particular initiative? Is that being accomplished? If it is, is it an initiative we need to continue to add funding to? Is it an initiative that essentially is self supporting now? We talked about that in our report a year ago. Actually looking at some of the budget documents over the weekend. I saw some of these initiatives in their budget documents that they provide to the Finance Committee. They're actually suggesting that some of these initiatives are almost entirely self-supporting. So if there's an initiative that is succesful. And one example in their budget documents is UC Press. And they essentially said in their budget documents to the finance Committee, this thing is almost entirely self-supporting, very successful initiative. Well does that mean essentially some of that funding could be freed up for other purposes? That certainly is a question when I saw that information that I asked. And those are the kinds of things that we believe the University needs to do. It needs to have that comprehensive list. It needs to understand what the intent is. How much is being spent, and what benefits the University deriving from these initiatives? Important, not just for the success of the initiatives, but some of the executives for some of the campuses said funding for these initiatives sometimes crowds out the amount of money that we have available, as a campus. To spend on students and other purposes on our campus. We don't have anything against initiatives. They're very important. But let's make sure that, as a system, we are making good, informed decisions about our spending, and the benefit of that spending. So those were the issues related to budget, system-wide initiatives, etc. Mr Muratsuchi, as you indicated, we looked at staffing. That was a question that the requestors had for us. And we certainly found that we believe the office of the President needs to do a better job of justifying its staff and the cost of it's staff. Certainly the staffing levels have increased. They've increased about 11% over the last five years. Growing from 1,496 employees that work for the office of the President to 1,667. And when we looked at this and compared it some other University systems, their staff size dwarfs some of those other systems. Significantly higher than the CSU system. Now I have to be fair and acknowledge the UC as they indicated to us. And we describe in the report, they have some responsibilities. They manage the retirement system, they have additional responsibilities perhaps than CSU where their retirement system is managed by the state. But still, there's a huge difference in the numbers. What we suggest to the office of the President, we describe in the report, is they haven't really conducted a workforce plan. And essentially what that is is to come up with a strategic plan, identify what your mission is. What you need to do to complete that mission. And then assess your staffing levels and determine where you have weaknesses, where you have gaps perhaps. Where you have duplication between what is occurring at the office of the President and what functions are occurring at the campuses. So we've made some suggestions to the office of the President to respect to that. Now credit to President Napolitano, in 2014 she put out a directive and asking the Office of the President to look at its size, shape, role, mission. And really wanting to try to identify internal redundancies and any overlap. Unfortunately we didn't see any results of that particular analysis. We do believe the analysis was done, but we didn't really see any significant change as a result of that directive that she put out. in fact staffing increased, but if you don't have a workforce plan and you don't have information that justifies why you believe your staffing needs increase that's a problem. And looking at salaries, certainly there are executives at the Office of the President make significantly more than state employees. Or employees in the public sector. And in many cases higher education. We don't take an issue with that, because as we all know. Higher education's very competitive, we want the best and the brightest to work for the University of California. In our system here in California. However, we also looked at administrative staff who performed functions that are not that different than administrative staff working for the State of California. Working for local government, etc. And, we really felt that there was a big, big difference there. And that the Office of the President could take a harder look at some of their administrative salaries. The salary ranges are significantly different than state employees. We use a few examples in the report, where the Director of human resources for the system, that works at the Office of the President. Compared it to our Department of Human Resources, here in California. The Director of an agency that's responsible for over 200,000 state employees. We felt that the salaries were significantly different. So that's an area we believe the office of the President really needs to take a hard look at. With respect to employees as well, we looked at benefits. Many of the benefits that they provide are comparable, but there certainly are some that are much more generous. For the executives, they not only pay part of their retirement as an employer would. But they also pay a supplemental retirement, either three to 5% for their executives enter their supplemental retirement plan. This is over and above what they already provide as an employer. So we felt they needed to take a look at that, and determine whether that's really reasonable based on the high salaries these individuals receive. In the first place. We looked at reimbursement for mails, certainly higher than state employees, higher than CSU. Reimbursements for business meetings, entertainment expenses, those types of things, those are not provided of allowed for state employees. So,we had some concerns with that. And again, these are areas where we feel the Office of the President could really rein in some of their costs. And then the last thing was spending on bonuses and stipends. And again the concerns we raised here is really are these justified based on the salaries these individuals are already receiving? Do you need to give someone a stipend on top of the salary that they are getting, from the Office of the President. The other issue that we tried to address in the report, is really looking at redundancies. I know the members who request this audit were very interested in determining, is there any duplication between functions that are occurring at the Office of the President. And functions that are occurring at the campuses? This is the area unfortunately where the office of the President based on the evidence that we have interfered with that process. When we sent the survey out to the campuses we sent two surveys. One, to assess the services that the office of the President provides. So we have a conversation with the office of the President. We need to know all the services that you provide the campuses. And then when we provided the survey to the campuses there was language on on those surveys. You need to keep this information confidential within your campus community. Communicate with us. My staff have verbal communication with liaison with the Office of the President suggesting if you have logistical questions, that's not an issue. But if there are specific questions that the campuses should be communicating with staff at the Auditor's office. We really wanted the campuses to have the opportunity to provide an independent voice. And tell us what services they use, what services they find very valuable, what services perhaps they don't use. And perhaps reasons why. Maybe they're a large campus, they don't need certain services. But we were really trying to get a handle on all of the services that the Office of the President provides. The satisfaction from the campuses perspective of the value of those services. And hopefully we're going to identify perhaps some services that could've been eliminated. Or If there was duplication, perhaps to eliminate the duplication at one end or the other. Either at the campus level or at the Office of the President. Unfortunately what we found out is that prior to those surveys being submitted to my office. The Office of the President reached out to all the campuses held a conference call and had a discussion about the surveys. We were later able to determine based on information the Office of the President gave to us, that some of those surveys were modified. So we've got copies of the draft surveys that the campuses sent to the Office of the President. When we got the final survey, some of those answers had been changed. Language as we explained in the report we showed some examples language had been modified or eliminated. In fact when we reconciled, some information in the last few days we've also determined that the Office of the President did not give us all of the draft surveys that they received from campuses. They gave us, I think 11 out of 16. Some of the campuses didn't send draft to the Office of the President. They just sent it directly to us and perhaps just had a conversation with the Officer of the President over the phone. But we did see evidence and it's our responsibility under audit standards. Because now, two things. When the Office of the President set up the conference call and suggested that these surveys needed to be sent to the Office of the President Immediate chilling effect in our minds, that these campuses now knew, we're going to send the survey to the Office of the President, how truthful can we be? With all due respect, to the Office of the President, and the campuses, there's always that concern. And then certainly when we saw evidence of some surveys having been changed that raised the concern in our minds and we just felt that that information was no longer reliable. We published in a report but as I am required by the order standard my office is required to follow I had to point out of the fact that there was interference with respect to that situation, disappointing. The other issues that we ran into with respect to access. There were some circumstances where the Office of the President delayed access. We were trying to get access to information about. What we refer to in the report as this undisclosed budget, the budgeting that they did with those surplus funds and actually there's a process that has been in the past pretty informal. I have to give, again give credit President Napolitano, she established a process where she wanted decision memos, while we tried to get access to that information. And we were really, they didn't necessarily obstruct but they really made it extremely difficult for us to get that information. When we eventually got access to these documents after the attorneys had discussions about our statute and how strong our statute is, we were given access to that information, but it was redacted. And our statute is very clear. We have access to the information, we have to be very careful about what we disclose. We will work with the agency that we're auditing to not disclose anything that's confidential. But redaction's are not appropriate, and as we mentioned in the report. It was, in some cases surprising to us because when we ultimately saw the unredacted version, we saw that President Napoletano had been questioning some of the requests. And now we're not going to spend this much, I'm going to reduce this, I'm not going to allow this. So it was, again, a process for us that took longer than we would have liked. Ultimately they gave us access to the information, but unfortunately we had to go through several steps and it took us several weeks to get access to that information. The final issue is we asked for expenditure information related to travel, lodging, meals, etc. We got that information, we put a schedule together, presented it. And then when we were going through our final QC process in march looking at their budget, we realized they had left out a substantial amount of those expenditures, mostly foreign travel, catering, hospitality, travel outside of California, etcetera. They gave us $10 million worth of expenditures, the ultimate amount we saw in the budget was $35 million. So they had left out about $25 million. So again, another situation where, we weren't given access to all the information that we felt was necessary for us to do our jobs. So, with that I'm going to go through the recommendations at a very high level. Two key recommendations that we have made to the Legislator. first is to appropriate funds directly to the office of the President through an annual budget process, this would ultimately eliminate the need to there to be a campus assessment. So if the Legislature decides to direct appropriate funds for the office of the President, now we're not talking about the University system as a whole, I know there is been concerns raised about constitutional autonomy. And certainly, when I met with President Lozano, I mean Regent Lozano, and a couple other regents, they did that raise that as a concern. As they noted in the report, their letter to me is in the report and we considered their concerns. I had my attorneys look at this, because we certainly don't want to make a recommendation that legally would be a problem. Our attorneys looked at, they've look at court decisions, they've look at other states that are structured similar to the University of California in our state. So, we do not think that our recommendation to suggest that Legislator directly appropriate an amount specifically for the Office of the President is any concern with respect to constitutional autonomy. The Office of the President's the administrative arm of the system. The other recommendation that we made to the Legislature is with respect to the regents. And we're suggesting that the regents use some of that appropriation to contract with an independent third party. We think that's necessary because what we have suggested and throughout the audit report is a three year plan. So we want to give the Office of the President the opportunity over the next three years to really right the ship as far as their budgeting practices, disclosure of information Information related to the initiatives. And that's going to take some time, certainly issues related to their staffing, and their staffing costs. So we have specific elements of that we've identified that we think need, and can be achieved over the next three years. But we think the regents need to provide oversight. They certainly have that responsibility. And we believe an independent third party would provide great assistance to the regents in monitoring how the Office of the President is doing in implementing that corrective action plan. We certainly think the Legislature has an oversight role, much like the hearing today. Our suggestion is that Legislature could have oversight hearings and have the Office of the President, the independent third party, present their progress as they're working their way through the three year corrective action plan. Quickly, the high level recommendations of the Office of the President related to their budgeting, implement best practices. Do a lot of the things that I discussed earlier, that they're not doing, present your actual expenditures. When you're building your next year's budget, present that information to the regents. If you have a Reserve or surplus funds at the end of the year, the regents need to understand that so that they can make informed decisions. Not only with respect to the campus assessment, if that continues to exist, with other decisions. Develop a Reserve policy, make sure you have policies with respect to approval and justification of your expenditures. Any savings reallocate one consideration or suggestion send some of that money back to the campuses they can use it for the students or for other purposes that are important at the campus level. The system wide initiatives, develop a clear definition of each of those initiatives. Understand the purpose intent, how much is being spent. Conduct an assessment of each of those. Are those initiatives meeting their intent? Do they need to be continued or perhaps eliminate some of the initiatives? We did not suggest specific initiatives because at this point, I think it's up to the University. To get a handle on all of those initiatives, really understand the intent purpose, do the analysis and then decide with the regents as to what they need to do moving forward. Staffing costs align, make sure that they align with the needs of the campuses, implement a method for weighing their salaries, using public sector. One thing I didn't mention is in the budget act of 16, the Legislature directed the Office of the President. To compare their salaries with state employees to the extent they could. They did that for some but not for all. They felt they couldn't find comparable, this recommendation is pushing them to do more we think they can do more. Setting some targets with respect to salary amounts. That workforce planning model similar to one that the Department of Human Resources suggests for state agencies we think is a good place for the Office of the President to start in looking at ways they can develop a workforce planning model. Finally to the Board of Regents, same recommendation contract with an independent third party. That third party can be reporting to the regents on progress, challenges, issues that the Office of the President is running into with respect to implementing the corrective action plan. Have a public meeting to discuss all the initiatives, to discuss all of these points. And then certainly exercise their responsibility and authority, and I'm sure they will. As far as oversight of the Office of the President, making sure that the Office of the President implements our recommendations. My final comment is, in the audit report, the Office of the President has suggested that they embraced our recommendations and they intend to implement them. So, I think it will be very important for the regents. My office certainly has a follow up process with any entity that we audit. But I think it's very important that the regents have a process where they're following up with the Office of the President to make sure that these recommendations are ultimately implemented. With that, members, I will stop and allow you to ask us any questions. Thank you.
[{'start': 62, 'end': 74, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 113, 'end': 131, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 133, 'end': 141, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 729, 'end': 739, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3345, 'end': 3355, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3369, 'end': 3376, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 15955, 'end': 15965, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 17502, 'end': 17512, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 24886, 'end': 24896, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 25733, 'end': 25743, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 27408, 'end': 27414, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 27430, 'end': 27436, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kathleen Fullerton: Good afternoon, Kathleen Fullerton, State Auditor's Office. Yes, those funds would have come from the discretionary side. We did some testing on the campus assessment portion of that. So, a lot of those funds were paid from the campus assessment, which is discretionary. And like you said, Senator Lara, yes, it is more generous than what's offered to state employees. They're offered $174 a day to be reimbursed for these types of expenses. State employees are not offered that benefit, except in very, very limited circumstances.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 298, 'end': 302, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Paul Medved: good evening. my name is paul jonah medved. i am an alum of uc davis and i to have some concerns about ucop's behavior. very briefly, in november of 2015 i filed a whistleblower complaint alleging misuse of student fees and fraudulent behavior by the administration of uc davis chancellor linda katehi. after two in-depth sessions with ucop's ethics compliance staff in oakland, i was hopeful that uc's whistleblower system might actually work. in the spring of 2016, i was told my complaint would be investigated. but by august that hope was replaced with a punch in the stomach. not that linda katehi wasn't found to be responsible for numerous ethical lapses and violations of uc policy, she was. but despite confirming the misuse of approximately $3 million in student fees, the independent investigative team from orrick pronounced that misuse quote inadvertent, apparently harmless, and not a violation of uc policy. and just like that, ucop accepted orrick's findings and considered my complaint closed, end of story. inadvertent, harmless, not a violation of uc policy? how on earth could that be? well it turns out ucop has limited the orrick teams investigation to only one of my four allegations, and i suspect provided them only a fraction of the available evidence. and despite an invitation to do so, orrick oddly didn't even see fit to interview me, the whistleblower. when i asked ucop, why my entire complaint wasn't investigated? i was told by executive vice president and chief operating officer rachel nava, that the rest of my allegations had been investigated and dismissed back in 2010. i responded that i was familiar with the 2010 investigation of a related grievance filed by uc davis students, and that, that assertion was not even possibly true. for one thing, much of the evidence i presented, including the university's own financial reports, was not even available until much later. for another, the 2010 investigation had to rely on the seemingly reasonable assumption that chancellor katehi and other top officials, none of them are presently still at uc davis. we're telling the truth. and remember, we're talking about linda katehi here. [sir, i'm going to ask you to try to wrap it.] i will wrap it up. still ms nava refused to reopen the investigation of my complaint. and so in january of this year, i filed a second complaint. this time alleging ucop itself mishandled my first complaint, and very likely deliberately. why, why would they seek to prevent orrick from connecting any dots? i believe to hide their own complicity, and avoid making their desperate attempt to get katehi to resign, and to be made anymore difficult than it already was. ucop dismissed that complaint too, ironically suggesting i contact the state auditor. and therefore, so i'm here, without one iota of personal gain at stake, to both agree with ms hall that ucop is in serious need of some form of effective oversight. and to ask that ucop's handling of both my whistleblower complaints, the copy of which i will leave with the state auditors office, to be reviewed by the state auditor and her attorneys. thank you very much.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 289, 'end': 301, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 590, 'end': 602, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1124, 'end': 1128, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1145, 'end': 1151, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1315, 'end': 1321, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1397, 'end': 1401, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1515, 'end': 1526, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2017, 'end': 2023, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2154, 'end': 2166, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2248, 'end': 2252, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2385, 'end': 2389, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2494, 'end': 2500, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2615, 'end': 2621, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2687, 'end': 2691, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2867, 'end': 2871, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2877, 'end': 2881, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2954, 'end': 2958, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Elizabeth Ortega: good afternoon, members. my name is elizabeth. i'm representing afscme 3299, the largest union at the university of california, representing over 24,000 members. so, ucops interference in the state auditors investigation is like trying to keep two sets of books, and reflects the continuing pattern of deception towards the legislature, in order to justify tuition hikes. skyrocketing executive pay, and continued exploitation of low-wage workers. we're grateful for the state auditor for exposing ucop's disgraceful conduct and financial mismanagement. and join her in demanding real reform, increased legislative oversight, our students, our patients, our workers deserve better. thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Elaine Howle: thank you, mr chairman and members. for the record, my name's elaine, california state auditor. with me is kathleen fullerton. kathleen was the audit manager on this particular project, working with the audit team, who spent a fair amount of time in oakland, california at headquarters. what i'd like to do, members, is step you through at a high level, the findings and issues we identified in the report. and then, again, at a fairly high level, discuss a few of the recommendations that we made. not only to the university of california, the office of the president, but to the board of regents and certainly legislative recommendations as well. so the first issue i'd like to discuss is exactly what you mentioned, mr. maratsuchi, is the determination that we have in the report that there is $175 million of fund balance, essentially funds that were available at the end of fiscal year 15, 16. so as of june 30th, 2016, the office of the president had $175 million. now, 83 million of that is in a restricted accounts, what they consider restricted funds, they may be restricted based on grants, based on appropriations, some type of specific restriction. however another $92 million was in what they call a discretionary fund, so those are funds that are available, have a lot of flexibility for the office of the president to use those funds. when we looked at five year window that we are asked to look, again, this ending fund balance fluctuated, but the focus in the report is the 2015, 16. now we decided to drill down and really look at the discretionary funds and see whether or not that was a consistent situation over time or whether that was just this one particular fiscal year. and what we found, i'm hopeful that the sergeant handed out the, do you all have the one page hand out? and there's a lot of numbers on this figure, but if you focus on the bar chart on the right hand side at the bottom, that shows you their discretionary fund balances as of the end of each of the fiscal years that we looked at. and as you can see, that amount has grown over time. so they are continuing to have money available at the end of the year, and that fund is growing. what is also important to note in there, the green shading is the campus assessment amount. and as i'm sure you're aware, members, the office of the president, their central administrative function, their operations is essentially funded by this campus assessment. about 90% of their funding comes from the campus assessment. what was of concern to us is even though they have this available money at the end of each year, they were not disclosing this to the regents when they were sharing either a request for an increase in the campus assessment from one year to the next. they also weren't sharing with the regents the amount they had in restricted balances as well. but the discretionary was really of concern to us. over those years, as i said, the campus assessment grew. there were at least two years where they hadn't spent all of the campus assessment monies they had received in that year. yet they went back to the regents and asked for an increase. and that, again, was of concern to us because we felt they had those funds available to them and didn't necessarily need to ask the regents to approve an increase in the campus assessment. and as mr. muratsuchi said and mr. mccarty said, those monies could have remained at those respective campuses and been used by those campuses for other purposes to support students, faculty, etc. that's why we raised that as a particular concern. as i indicated, the restricted funds, there's $83 million now, there is some discussion or has been since the audit was released that those monies are not available at all for any kind of redistribution. we would disagree with that. the reason we disagree with that is in discussions with the office of the president, there are over 340 funds that make up that restricted balance. over 100 of those, 114 of those funds are actually restrictions that the university office of the president self imposed. so these are restrictions that they could potentially reverse, depending upon what the priorities are. for example, the searle's fund is a fund that the office of the president had considered a restricted fund up until fiscal year 11, 12. it's about an annual amount of $7 million. that has been shifted to the discretionary pot, essentially. so that is no longer a restricted fund. so that's why we believe it's necessary to go back and look at some of those 114 to see if there are some funds available in that balance that perhaps could be redirected or returned to the campus, as used for other purposes. more flexibility and the discussion, again, that's been out there is this $92 million in the discretionary amount. and as i'm sure you've heard, you've seen in our report where the office of the president is asserting that $54 million of that has been committed for future projects that are occurring during this current fiscal year of 16, 17. therefore, they really only have $38 million in reserve. and what i wanted to discuss with you today as we disagree with that particular conclusion, first of all, the calculations were ours. we came up with the 175 and then sat down with the office of the president and got the amount that is in restricted funds and then the discretionary. then we asked them, well, what are you going to do with all this discretionary money? and they came up with the 54 million, and then ultimately, you end up with 38, which now they're asserting is their reserve. first of all, the office of the president has acknowledged in the response to the report, and i think they will acknowledge today, they don't have a reserve policy. they've never established a reserve amount. they've never had discussions, to our knowledge, with the regents about what their reserve should be. so that's really, that 38 million ultimately resulted from a mathematical calculation. going from the 92 that we identified, they came up with commitments of 54 and are suggesting that their reserve is 38. what i'd like to demonstrate with the handout that we gave is, it's our belief that many of those commitments, they are able to handle those with their existing budget. and the reason our office has reached that conclusion is if we look back at history. so if you look at the table at the top of the report, you will see there is a line item that says planned commitments. so i'm going to take you to the right hand side, there's the $54 million that the office of the president asserts they need that money for specific projects, things that are ongoing, etc. so they only have 38 million in reserve. well if we go back to fiscal year 15, 16, they were suggesting and had planned on $30 million in commitments. so we'd expect their fund balance to go down, but if you go up to the yellow line, you see their fund balance in 15, 16 started at $97 million. at the end of the year, it was $92 million. so they met those $30 million in commitments, but they didn't have to use what they consider their reserve. and the same thing is true in prior years, where they're committing $37 million in 14, 15. their fund balance actually went up by $18 million, so they were able to meet those commitments, yet their surplus continued to grow. and this is at the same time they're asking for increases to the campus assessment. so essentially, what this is telling you, as you can see on the bottom left, the regents have consistently been approving budget increases for the office of the president. so what this is telling us is they've continually gotten budget increases. so this surplus that has been building up in a discretionary account is money in our belief that is available for consideration. either send some of this assessment money back to the campuses, make some modifications going forward and certainly i will talk about the recommendation that we've made to the legislature. not only based on this information, but based on other information that i'm going to discuss as far as other issues we've identified in the report. but what i'm trying to demonstrate here, and i hope i am clear is, there is sufficient funds available within the office of the president's budget to be able to pay for these very important programs that they speak of and that they discussed with us. and certainly, we share some of that in the audit report itself. so we feel very confident in our conclusions related to this discretionary money. so another area that we were asked to actually look at is their budgeting practices. and we really walked away quite surprised at how weak their practices are. they're ineffective, and they preclude accountability. and we actually present a table in the report that talks about best practices, and those that the university of california does not follow. they don't include in their budget presentations to the regents, those prior year expenditures so the regents would see. well, the campus assessment was $288 million last year, but you only spent 260, where's the other 28? well, it's in this reserve. but if the regents don't know that, they can't make a fully informed decision as to whether or not that campus assessment should be increased. that's just one example of why those prior year expenditures are very important to share certainly with the finance committee, with the regents and certainly with the entire group of the regents. they don't provide sufficient detail regarding their source of funding, all of the restricted funds that they receive monies for. the funding sources, their endowment, etc. as i indicated early, they do not have a specific reserve policy. they need to have a conversation with the regents. they really need to determine what an appropriate reserve should be. we're not arguing that they shouldn't have a reserve, but they certainly need to go through the process of coming up with a methodology and determining what that reserve should be, what it should be used for, how it should be adjusted from year to year. stakeholder input. there is not a lot of stakeholder input with respect to preparation and decision-making with respect to the budget. longterm forecasting. there are budgets that we've seen that are being presented to the regents that essentially show two years. prior year and the budget year coming up. again, it doesn't include expenditures. it just says this is what you gave us last year in budget. this is what we're asking for this year in the budget. we do not think that's sufficient and certainly doesn't follow best practices. the other two concerns that we had that we talk in the report and other areas, but certainly falls within the best practices area is monitoring your expenditures. what the office of the president asserted to us. they monitor a couple of times a year, at midpoint. now their divisions within the office of the president may be monitoring, but at the budget officer level, we're not seeing that. we're seeing it once or twice a year and they're not necessarily looking at variances between budget and actual throughout the year so that they could make some adjustments and make some determinations. the other area is the oversight of expenditures and approval of decision making, and approval of these expenses. we actually tested about $42 million in expenditures looking for the appropriate approval, the appropriate documentation $34 million, we were not able to find adequate documentation for those particular expenditures. that doesn't mean they were inappropriate expenditures. it means we could not find specific documentation to justify that particular expenditure. so really a record keeping issue. they really need to tighten that up as far as oversight and what is expected before an expenditure is approved in their budget. another really important area, certainly as the members who spoke earlier talked about. the system wide initiatives, very important initiatives that the office of the president administers and certainly many of the campuses administer. our concern here, really again, is similar to the budget issues. we ask the office of the president, tell us how many initiatives that basically the office of the president administers and manages. they came back to us with a list of 32 initiatives. my staff went out to their budget data, went out to their web site and identified 79 system wide initiatives. so they gave us a list of 32, we came up with a list of 79. then we ask them, okay, so how much are you budgeting for each of these initiatives? and they tried to give us some of that information. they weren't able to give us all of that information, so then we asked for expenditure. how much is being spent on these initiatives? and some of that, there actually had to be estimates, because some of those initiatives are administered at the campus level. that's not necessarily a problem, but if you are going to provide a funding to a particular campus or series of group of campuses to administer these programs. you need to understand how much you send out there and get reports back from the campuses as to what we are doing with this money and what benefits are we deriving as a state or as a system from these particular initiatives that are being funded. no different than a state agency providing funding to district offices or federal money coming into california and going out to the local level and the state departments are responsible for getting progress reports from those respective district offices, etc. so we really had concerns about that. the initiatives where they weren't able to give us a dollar amount we looked at expenditures, and it's about $98 million. the total for the 79 initiatives, we were able to identify a little over about $434 million being spent. so this is a significant amount of money that's being spent by the university and the campuses on these initiatives. so we believe the university needs to do a better job of tracking them, tracking their costs. and certainly, the other area we looked at was the evaluation of these initiatives. what was the original intent? what was the university hoping to accomplish by funding this particular initiative? is that being accomplished? if it is, is it an initiative we need to continue to add funding to? is it an initiative that essentially is self supporting now? we talked about that in our report a year ago. actually looking at some of the budget documents over the weekend. i saw some of these initiatives in their budget documents that they provide to the finance committee. they're actually suggesting that some of these initiatives are almost entirely self-supporting. so if there's an initiative that is succesful. and one example in their budget documents is uc press. and they essentially said in their budget documents to the finance committee, this thing is almost entirely self-supporting, very successful initiative. well does that mean essentially some of that funding could be freed up for other purposes? that certainly is a question when i saw that information that i asked. and those are the kinds of things that we believe the university needs to do. it needs to have that comprehensive list. it needs to understand what the intent is. how much is being spent, and what benefits the university deriving from these initiatives? important, not just for the success of the initiatives, but some of the executives for some of the campuses said funding for these initiatives sometimes crowds out the amount of money that we have available, as a campus. to spend on students and other purposes on our campus. we don't have anything against initiatives. they're very important. but let's make sure that, as a system, we are making good, informed decisions about our spending, and the benefit of that spending. so those were the issues related to budget, system-wide initiatives, etc. mr muratsuchi, as you indicated, we looked at staffing. that was a question that the requestors had for us. and we certainly found that we believe the office of the president needs to do a better job of justifying its staff and the cost of it's staff. certainly the staffing levels have increased. they've increased about 11% over the last five years. growing from 1,496 employees that work for the office of the president to 1,667. and when we looked at this and compared it some other university systems, their staff size dwarfs some of those other systems. significantly higher than the csu system. now i have to be fair and acknowledge the uc as they indicated to us. and we describe in the report, they have some responsibilities. they manage the retirement system, they have additional responsibilities perhaps than csu where their retirement system is managed by the state. but still, there's a huge difference in the numbers. what we suggest to the office of the president, we describe in the report, is they haven't really conducted a workforce plan. and essentially what that is is to come up with a strategic plan, identify what your mission is. what you need to do to complete that mission. and then assess your staffing levels and determine where you have weaknesses, where you have gaps perhaps. where you have duplication between what is occurring at the office of the president and what functions are occurring at the campuses. so we've made some suggestions to the office of the president to respect to that. now credit to president napolitano, in 2014 she put out a directive and asking the office of the president to look at its size, shape, role, mission. and really wanting to try to identify internal redundancies and any overlap. unfortunately we didn't see any results of that particular analysis. we do believe the analysis was done, but we didn't really see any significant change as a result of that directive that she put out. in fact staffing increased, but if you don't have a workforce plan and you don't have information that justifies why you believe your staffing needs increase that's a problem. and looking at salaries, certainly there are executives at the office of the president make significantly more than state employees. or employees in the public sector. and in many cases higher education. we don't take an issue with that, because as we all know. higher education's very competitive, we want the best and the brightest to work for the university of california. in our system here in california. however, we also looked at administrative staff who performed functions that are not that different than administrative staff working for the state of california. working for local government, etc. and, we really felt that there was a big, big difference there. and that the office of the president could take a harder look at some of their administrative salaries. the salary ranges are significantly different than state employees. we use a few examples in the report, where the director of human resources for the system, that works at the office of the president. compared it to our department of human resources, here in california. the director of an agency that's responsible for over 200,000 state employees. we felt that the salaries were significantly different. so that's an area we believe the office of the president really needs to take a hard look at. with respect to employees as well, we looked at benefits. many of the benefits that they provide are comparable, but there certainly are some that are much more generous. for the executives, they not only pay part of their retirement as an employer would. but they also pay a supplemental retirement, either three to 5% for their executives enter their supplemental retirement plan. this is over and above what they already provide as an employer. so we felt they needed to take a look at that, and determine whether that's really reasonable based on the high salaries these individuals receive. in the first place. we looked at reimbursement for mails, certainly higher than state employees, higher than csu. reimbursements for business meetings, entertainment expenses, those types of things, those are not provided of allowed for state employees. so,we had some concerns with that. and again, these are areas where we feel the office of the president could really rein in some of their costs. and then the last thing was spending on bonuses and stipends. and again the concerns we raised here is really are these justified based on the salaries these individuals are already receiving? do you need to give someone a stipend on top of the salary that they are getting, from the office of the president. the other issue that we tried to address in the report, is really looking at redundancies. i know the members who request this audit were very interested in determining, is there any duplication between functions that are occurring at the office of the president. and functions that are occurring at the campuses? this is the area unfortunately where the office of the president based on the evidence that we have interfered with that process. when we sent the survey out to the campuses we sent two surveys. one, to assess the services that the office of the president provides. so we have a conversation with the office of the president. we need to know all the services that you provide the campuses. and then when we provided the survey to the campuses there was language on on those surveys. you need to keep this information confidential within your campus community. communicate with us. my staff have verbal communication with liaison with the office of the president suggesting if you have logistical questions, that's not an issue. but if there are specific questions that the campuses should be communicating with staff at the auditor's office. we really wanted the campuses to have the opportunity to provide an independent voice. and tell us what services they use, what services they find very valuable, what services perhaps they don't use. and perhaps reasons why. maybe they're a large campus, they don't need certain services. but we were really trying to get a handle on all of the services that the office of the president provides. the satisfaction from the campuses perspective of the value of those services. and hopefully we're going to identify perhaps some services that could've been eliminated. or if there was duplication, perhaps to eliminate the duplication at one end or the other. either at the campus level or at the office of the president. unfortunately what we found out is that prior to those surveys being submitted to my office. the office of the president reached out to all the campuses held a conference call and had a discussion about the surveys. we were later able to determine based on information the office of the president gave to us, that some of those surveys were modified. so we've got copies of the draft surveys that the campuses sent to the office of the president. when we got the final survey, some of those answers had been changed. language as we explained in the report we showed some examples language had been modified or eliminated. in fact when we reconciled, some information in the last few days we've also determined that the office of the president did not give us all of the draft surveys that they received from campuses. they gave us, i think 11 out of 16. some of the campuses didn't send draft to the office of the president. they just sent it directly to us and perhaps just had a conversation with the officer of the president over the phone. but we did see evidence and it's our responsibility under audit standards. because now, two things. when the office of the president set up the conference call and suggested that these surveys needed to be sent to the office of the president immediate chilling effect in our minds, that these campuses now knew, we're going to send the survey to the office of the president, how truthful can we be? with all due respect, to the office of the president, and the campuses, there's always that concern. and then certainly when we saw evidence of some surveys having been changed that raised the concern in our minds and we just felt that that information was no longer reliable. we published in a report but as i am required by the order standard my office is required to follow i had to point out of the fact that there was interference with respect to that situation, disappointing. the other issues that we ran into with respect to access. there were some circumstances where the office of the president delayed access. we were trying to get access to information about. what we refer to in the report as this undisclosed budget, the budgeting that they did with those surplus funds and actually there's a process that has been in the past pretty informal. i have to give, again give credit president napolitano, she established a process where she wanted decision memos, while we tried to get access to that information. and we were really, they didn't necessarily obstruct but they really made it extremely difficult for us to get that information. when we eventually got access to these documents after the attorneys had discussions about our statute and how strong our statute is, we were given access to that information, but it was redacted. and our statute is very clear. we have access to the information, we have to be very careful about what we disclose. we will work with the agency that we're auditing to not disclose anything that's confidential. but redaction's are not appropriate, and as we mentioned in the report. it was, in some cases surprising to us because when we ultimately saw the unredacted version, we saw that president napoletano had been questioning some of the requests. and now we're not going to spend this much, i'm going to reduce this, i'm not going to allow this. so it was, again, a process for us that took longer than we would have liked. ultimately they gave us access to the information, but unfortunately we had to go through several steps and it took us several weeks to get access to that information. the final issue is we asked for expenditure information related to travel, lodging, meals, etc. we got that information, we put a schedule together, presented it. and then when we were going through our final qc process in march looking at their budget, we realized they had left out a substantial amount of those expenditures, mostly foreign travel, catering, hospitality, travel outside of california, etcetera. they gave us $10 million worth of expenditures, the ultimate amount we saw in the budget was $35 million. so they had left out about $25 million. so again, another situation where, we weren't given access to all the information that we felt was necessary for us to do our jobs. so, with that i'm going to go through the recommendations at a very high level. two key recommendations that we have made to the legislator. first is to appropriate funds directly to the office of the president through an annual budget process, this would ultimately eliminate the need to there to be a campus assessment. so if the legislature decides to direct appropriate funds for the office of the president, now we're not talking about the university system as a whole, i know there is been concerns raised about constitutional autonomy. and certainly, when i met with president lozano, i mean regent lozano, and a couple other regents, they did that raise that as a concern. as they noted in the report, their letter to me is in the report and we considered their concerns. i had my attorneys look at this, because we certainly don't want to make a recommendation that legally would be a problem. our attorneys looked at, they've look at court decisions, they've look at other states that are structured similar to the university of california in our state. so, we do not think that our recommendation to suggest that legislator directly appropriate an amount specifically for the office of the president is any concern with respect to constitutional autonomy. the office of the president's the administrative arm of the system. the other recommendation that we made to the legislature is with respect to the regents. and we're suggesting that the regents use some of that appropriation to contract with an independent third party. we think that's necessary because what we have suggested and throughout the audit report is a three year plan. so we want to give the office of the president the opportunity over the next three years to really right the ship as far as their budgeting practices, disclosure of information information related to the initiatives. and that's going to take some time, certainly issues related to their staffing, and their staffing costs. so we have specific elements of that we've identified that we think need, and can be achieved over the next three years. but we think the regents need to provide oversight. they certainly have that responsibility. and we believe an independent third party would provide great assistance to the regents in monitoring how the office of the president is doing in implementing that corrective action plan. we certainly think the legislature has an oversight role, much like the hearing today. our suggestion is that legislature could have oversight hearings and have the office of the president, the independent third party, present their progress as they're working their way through the three year corrective action plan. quickly, the high level recommendations of the office of the president related to their budgeting, implement best practices. do a lot of the things that i discussed earlier, that they're not doing, present your actual expenditures. when you're building your next year's budget, present that information to the regents. if you have a reserve or surplus funds at the end of the year, the regents need to understand that so that they can make informed decisions. not only with respect to the campus assessment, if that continues to exist, with other decisions. develop a reserve policy, make sure you have policies with respect to approval and justification of your expenditures. any savings reallocate one consideration or suggestion send some of that money back to the campuses they can use it for the students or for other purposes that are important at the campus level. the system wide initiatives, develop a clear definition of each of those initiatives. understand the purpose intent, how much is being spent. conduct an assessment of each of those. are those initiatives meeting their intent? do they need to be continued or perhaps eliminate some of the initiatives? we did not suggest specific initiatives because at this point, i think it's up to the university. to get a handle on all of those initiatives, really understand the intent purpose, do the analysis and then decide with the regents as to what they need to do moving forward. staffing costs align, make sure that they align with the needs of the campuses, implement a method for weighing their salaries, using public sector. one thing i didn't mention is in the budget act of 16, the legislature directed the office of the president. to compare their salaries with state employees to the extent they could. they did that for some but not for all. they felt they couldn't find comparable, this recommendation is pushing them to do more we think they can do more. setting some targets with respect to salary amounts. that workforce planning model similar to one that the department of human resources suggests for state agencies we think is a good place for the office of the president to start in looking at ways they can develop a workforce planning model. finally to the board of regents, same recommendation contract with an independent third party. that third party can be reporting to the regents on progress, challenges, issues that the office of the president is running into with respect to implementing the corrective action plan. have a public meeting to discuss all the initiatives, to discuss all of these points. and then certainly exercise their responsibility and authority, and i'm sure they will. as far as oversight of the office of the president, making sure that the office of the president implements our recommendations. my final comment is, in the audit report, the office of the president has suggested that they embraced our recommendations and they intend to implement them. so, i think it will be very important for the regents. my office certainly has a follow up process with any entity that we audit. but i think it's very important that the regents have a process where they're following up with the office of the president to make sure that these recommendations are ultimately implemented. with that, members, i will stop and allow you to ask us any questions. thank you.
[{'start': 62, 'end': 68, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 107, 'end': 125, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 127, 'end': 135, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 723, 'end': 733, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3339, 'end': 3349, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3363, 'end': 3370, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 15949, 'end': 15959, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 17496, 'end': 17506, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 24880, 'end': 24890, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 25727, 'end': 25737, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 27402, 'end': 27408, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 27424, 'end': 27430, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kathleen Fullerton: good afternoon, kathleen jonah fullerton, state auditor's office. yes, those funds would have come from the discretionary side. we did some testing on the campus assessment portion of that. so, a lot of those funds were paid from the campus assessment, which is discretionary. and like you said, senator lara, yes, it is more generous than what's offered to state employees. they're offered $174 a day to be reimbursed for these types of expenses. state employees are not offered that benefit, except in very, very limited circumstances.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 304, 'end': 308, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Paul Medved: Good evening. My name is Paul Medved. I am an alum of UC Davis and I to have some concerns about UCOP's behavior. Very briefly, in November of 2015 I filed a whistleblower complaint alleging misuse of student fees and fraudulent behavior by the administration of UC Davis Chancellor Linda Katehi. After two in-depth sessions with UCOP's ethics compliance staff in Oakland, I was hopeful that UC's whistleblower system might actually work. In the spring of 2016, I was told my complaint would be investigated. But by August that hope was replaced with a punch in the stomach. Not that Linda Katehi wasn't found to be responsible for numerous ethical lapses and violations of UC policy, she was. But despite confirming the misuse of approximately $3 million in student fees, The independent investigative team from Orrick pronounced that misuse quote inadvertent, apparently harmless, and not a violation of UC policy. And just like that, UCOP accepted Orrick's findings and considered my complaint closed, end of story. Inadvertent, harmless, not a violation of UC policy? How on earth could that be? Well it turns out UCOP has limited the Orrick teams investigation to only one of my four allegations, and I suspect provided them only a fraction of the available evidence. And despite an invitation to do so, Orrick oddly didn't even see fit to interview me, the whistleblower. When I asked UCOP, why my entire complaint wasn't investigated? I was told by Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer Rachel Nava, that the rest of my allegations had been investigated and dismissed back in 2010. I responded that I was familiar with the 2010 investigation of a related grievance filed by UC Davis students, and that, that assertion was not even possibly true. For one thing, much of the evidence I presented, including the University's own financial reports, was not even available until much later. For another, the 2010 investigation had to rely on the seemingly reasonable assumption that Chancellor Katehi and other top officials, none of them are presently still at UC Davis. We're telling the truth. And remember, we're talking about Linda Katehi here. [Sir, I'm going to ask you to try to wrap it.] I will wrap it up. Still Ms Nava refused to reopen the investigation of my complaint. And so in January of this year, I filed a second complaint. This time alleging UCOP itself mishandled my first complaint, and very likely deliberately. Why, why would they seek to prevent Orrick from connecting any dots? I believe to hide their own complicity, and avoid making their desperate attempt to get Katehi to resign, and to be made anymore difficult than it already was. UCOP dismissed that complaint too, ironically suggesting I contact the State Auditor. And therefore, so I'm here, without one iota of personal gain at stake, to both agree with Ms Hall that UCOP is in serious need of some form of effective oversight. And to ask that UCOP's handling of both my whistleblower complaints, the copy of which I will leave with the state auditors office, to be reviewed by the State Auditor and her attorneys. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 283, 'end': 295, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 584, 'end': 596, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 937, 'end': 941, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1118, 'end': 1122, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1139, 'end': 1145, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1309, 'end': 1315, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1391, 'end': 1395, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1509, 'end': 1520, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2011, 'end': 2017, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2148, 'end': 2160, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2242, 'end': 2246, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2379, 'end': 2383, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2488, 'end': 2494, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2609, 'end': 2615, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2681, 'end': 2685, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2861, 'end': 2865, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2871, 'end': 2875, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2948, 'end': 2952, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Elizabeth Ortega: Good afternoon, members. My name is Elizabeth Ortega. I'm representing AFSCME 3299, the largest union at the University of California, representing over 24,000 members. So, UCOPs interference in the state auditors investigation is like trying to keep two sets of books, and reflects the continuing pattern of deception towards the Legislature, in order to justify tuition hikes. Skyrocketing executive pay, and continued exploitation of low-wage workers. We're grateful for the State Auditor for exposing UCOP's disgraceful conduct and financial mismanagement. And join her in demanding real reform, increased legislative oversight, our students, our patients, our workers deserve better. Thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Elaine Howle: thank you, mr chairman and members. for the record, my name's elaine jonah howle, california state auditor. with me is kathleen fullerton. kathleen was the audit manager on this particular project, working with the audit team, who spent a fair amount of time in oakland, california at headquarters. what i'd like to do, members, is step you through at a high level, the findings and issues we identified in the report. and then, again, at a fairly high level, discuss a few of the recommendations that we made. not only to the university of california, the office of the president, but to the board of regents and certainly legislative recommendations as well. so the first issue i'd like to discuss is exactly what you mentioned, mr. maratsuchi, is the determination that we have in the report that there is $175 million of fund balance, essentially funds that were available at the end of fiscal year 15, 16. so as of june 30th, 2016, the office of the president had $175 million. now, 83 million of that is in a restricted accounts, what they consider restricted funds, they may be restricted based on grants, based on appropriations, some type of specific restriction. however another $92 million was in what they call a discretionary fund, so those are funds that are available, have a lot of flexibility for the office of the president to use those funds. when we looked at five year window that we are asked to look, again, this ending fund balance fluctuated, but the focus in the report is the 2015, 16. now we decided to drill down and really look at the discretionary funds and see whether or not that was a consistent situation over time or whether that was just this one particular fiscal year. and what we found, i'm hopeful that the sergeant handed out the, do you all have the one page hand out? and there's a lot of numbers on this figure, but if you focus on the bar chart on the right hand side at the bottom, that shows you their discretionary fund balances as of the end of each of the fiscal years that we looked at. and as you can see, that amount has grown over time. so they are continuing to have money available at the end of the year, and that fund is growing. what is also important to note in there, the green shading is the campus assessment amount. and as i'm sure you're aware, members, the office of the president, their central administrative function, their operations is essentially funded by this campus assessment. about 90% of their funding comes from the campus assessment. what was of concern to us is even though they have this available money at the end of each year, they were not disclosing this to the regents when they were sharing either a request for an increase in the campus assessment from one year to the next. they also weren't sharing with the regents the amount they had in restricted balances as well. but the discretionary was really of concern to us. over those years, as i said, the campus assessment grew. there were at least two years where they hadn't spent all of the campus assessment monies they had received in that year. yet they went back to the regents and asked for an increase. and that, again, was of concern to us because we felt they had those funds available to them and didn't necessarily need to ask the regents to approve an increase in the campus assessment. and as mr. muratsuchi said and mr. mccarty said, those monies could have remained at those respective campuses and been used by those campuses for other purposes to support students, faculty, etc. that's why we raised that as a particular concern. as i indicated, the restricted funds, there's $83 million now, there is some discussion or has been since the audit was released that those monies are not available at all for any kind of redistribution. we would disagree with that. the reason we disagree with that is in discussions with the office of the president, there are over 340 funds that make up that restricted balance. over 100 of those, 114 of those funds are actually restrictions that the university office of the president self imposed. so these are restrictions that they could potentially reverse, depending upon what the priorities are. for example, the searle's fund is a fund that the office of the president had considered a restricted fund up until fiscal year 11, 12. it's about an annual amount of $7 million. that has been shifted to the discretionary pot, essentially. so that is no longer a restricted fund. so that's why we believe it's necessary to go back and look at some of those 114 to see if there are some funds available in that balance that perhaps could be redirected or returned to the campus, as used for other purposes. more flexibility and the discussion, again, that's been out there is this $92 million in the discretionary amount. and as i'm sure you've heard, you've seen in our report where the office of the president is asserting that $54 million of that has been committed for future projects that are occurring during this current fiscal year of 16, 17. therefore, they really only have $38 million in reserve. and what i wanted to discuss with you today as we disagree with that particular conclusion, first of all, the calculations were ours. we came up with the 175 and then sat down with the office of the president and got the amount that is in restricted funds and then the discretionary. then we asked them, well, what are you going to do with all this discretionary money? and they came up with the 54 million, and then ultimately, you end up with 38, which now they're asserting is their reserve. first of all, the office of the president has acknowledged in the response to the report, and i think they will acknowledge today, they don't have a reserve policy. they've never established a reserve amount. they've never had discussions, to our knowledge, with the regents about what their reserve should be. so that's really, that 38 million ultimately resulted from a mathematical calculation. going from the 92 that we identified, they came up with commitments of 54 and are suggesting that their reserve is 38. what i'd like to demonstrate with the handout that we gave is, it's our belief that many of those commitments, they are able to handle those with their existing budget. and the reason our office has reached that conclusion is if we look back at history. so if you look at the table at the top of the report, you will see there is a line item that says planned commitments. so i'm going to take you to the right hand side, there's the $54 million that the office of the president asserts they need that money for specific projects, things that are ongoing, etc. so they only have 38 million in reserve. well if we go back to fiscal year 15, 16, they were suggesting and had planned on $30 million in commitments. so we'd expect their fund balance to go down, but if you go up to the yellow line, you see their fund balance in 15, 16 started at $97 million. at the end of the year, it was $92 million. so they met those $30 million in commitments, but they didn't have to use what they consider their reserve. and the same thing is true in prior years, where they're committing $37 million in 14, 15. their fund balance actually went up by $18 million, so they were able to meet those commitments, yet their surplus continued to grow. and this is at the same time they're asking for increases to the campus assessment. so essentially, what this is telling you, as you can see on the bottom left, the regents have consistently been approving budget increases for the office of the president. so what this is telling us is they've continually gotten budget increases. so this surplus that has been building up in a discretionary account is money in our belief that is available for consideration. either send some of this assessment money back to the campuses, make some modifications going forward and certainly i will talk about the recommendation that we've made to the legislature. not only based on this information, but based on other information that i'm going to discuss as far as other issues we've identified in the report. but what i'm trying to demonstrate here, and i hope i am clear is, there is sufficient funds available within the office of the president's budget to be able to pay for these very important programs that they speak of and that they discussed with us. and certainly, we share some of that in the audit report itself. so we feel very confident in our conclusions related to this discretionary money. so another area that we were asked to actually look at is their budgeting practices. and we really walked away quite surprised at how weak their practices are. they're ineffective, and they preclude accountability. and we actually present a table in the report that talks about best practices, and those that the university of california does not follow. they don't include in their budget presentations to the regents, those prior year expenditures so the regents would see. well, the campus assessment was $288 million last year, but you only spent 260, where's the other 28? well, it's in this reserve. but if the regents don't know that, they can't make a fully informed decision as to whether or not that campus assessment should be increased. that's just one example of why those prior year expenditures are very important to share certainly with the finance committee, with the regents and certainly with the entire group of the regents. they don't provide sufficient detail regarding their source of funding, all of the restricted funds that they receive monies for. the funding sources, their endowment, etc. as i indicated early, they do not have a specific reserve policy. they need to have a conversation with the regents. they really need to determine what an appropriate reserve should be. we're not arguing that they shouldn't have a reserve, but they certainly need to go through the process of coming up with a methodology and determining what that reserve should be, what it should be used for, how it should be adjusted from year to year. stakeholder input. there is not a lot of stakeholder input with respect to preparation and decision-making with respect to the budget. longterm forecasting. there are budgets that we've seen that are being presented to the regents that essentially show two years. prior year and the budget year coming up. again, it doesn't include expenditures. it just says this is what you gave us last year in budget. this is what we're asking for this year in the budget. we do not think that's sufficient and certainly doesn't follow best practices. the other two concerns that we had that we talk in the report and other areas, but certainly falls within the best practices area is monitoring your expenditures. what the office of the president asserted to us. they monitor a couple of times a year, at midpoint. now their divisions within the office of the president may be monitoring, but at the budget officer level, we're not seeing that. we're seeing it once or twice a year and they're not necessarily looking at variances between budget and actual throughout the year so that they could make some adjustments and make some determinations. the other area is the oversight of expenditures and approval of decision making, and approval of these expenses. we actually tested about $42 million in expenditures looking for the appropriate approval, the appropriate documentation $34 million, we were not able to find adequate documentation for those particular expenditures. that doesn't mean they were inappropriate expenditures. it means we could not find specific documentation to justify that particular expenditure. so really a record keeping issue. they really need to tighten that up as far as oversight and what is expected before an expenditure is approved in their budget. another really important area, certainly as the members who spoke earlier talked about. the system wide initiatives, very important initiatives that the office of the president administers and certainly many of the campuses administer. our concern here, really again, is similar to the budget issues. we ask the office of the president, tell us how many initiatives that basically the office of the president administers and manages. they came back to us with a list of 32 initiatives. my staff went out to their budget data, went out to their web site and identified 79 system wide initiatives. so they gave us a list of 32, we came up with a list of 79. then we ask them, okay, so how much are you budgeting for each of these initiatives? and they tried to give us some of that information. they weren't able to give us all of that information, so then we asked for expenditure. how much is being spent on these initiatives? and some of that, there actually had to be estimates, because some of those initiatives are administered at the campus level. that's not necessarily a problem, but if you are going to provide a funding to a particular campus or series of group of campuses to administer these programs. you need to understand how much you send out there and get reports back from the campuses as to what we are doing with this money and what benefits are we deriving as a state or as a system from these particular initiatives that are being funded. no different than a state agency providing funding to district offices or federal money coming into california and going out to the local level and the state departments are responsible for getting progress reports from those respective district offices, etc. so we really had concerns about that. the initiatives where they weren't able to give us a dollar amount we looked at expenditures, and it's about $98 million. the total for the 79 initiatives, we were able to identify a little over about $434 million being spent. so this is a significant amount of money that's being spent by the university and the campuses on these initiatives. so we believe the university needs to do a better job of tracking them, tracking their costs. and certainly, the other area we looked at was the evaluation of these initiatives. what was the original intent? what was the university hoping to accomplish by funding this particular initiative? is that being accomplished? if it is, is it an initiative we need to continue to add funding to? is it an initiative that essentially is self supporting now? we talked about that in our report a year ago. actually looking at some of the budget documents over the weekend. i saw some of these initiatives in their budget documents that they provide to the finance committee. they're actually suggesting that some of these initiatives are almost entirely self-supporting. so if there's an initiative that is succesful. and one example in their budget documents is uc press. and they essentially said in their budget documents to the finance committee, this thing is almost entirely self-supporting, very successful initiative. well does that mean essentially some of that funding could be freed up for other purposes? that certainly is a question when i saw that information that i asked. and those are the kinds of things that we believe the university needs to do. it needs to have that comprehensive list. it needs to understand what the intent is. how much is being spent, and what benefits the university deriving from these initiatives? important, not just for the success of the initiatives, but some of the executives for some of the campuses said funding for these initiatives sometimes crowds out the amount of money that we have available, as a campus. to spend on students and other purposes on our campus. we don't have anything against initiatives. they're very important. but let's make sure that, as a system, we are making good, informed decisions about our spending, and the benefit of that spending. so those were the issues related to budget, system-wide initiatives, etc. mr muratsuchi, as you indicated, we looked at staffing. that was a question that the requestors had for us. and we certainly found that we believe the office of the president needs to do a better job of justifying its staff and the cost of it's staff. certainly the staffing levels have increased. they've increased about 11% over the last five years. growing from 1,496 employees that work for the office of the president to 1,667. and when we looked at this and compared it some other university systems, their staff size dwarfs some of those other systems. significantly higher than the csu system. now i have to be fair and acknowledge the uc as they indicated to us. and we describe in the report, they have some responsibilities. they manage the retirement system, they have additional responsibilities perhaps than csu where their retirement system is managed by the state. but still, there's a huge difference in the numbers. what we suggest to the office of the president, we describe in the report, is they haven't really conducted a workforce plan. and essentially what that is is to come up with a strategic plan, identify what your mission is. what you need to do to complete that mission. and then assess your staffing levels and determine where you have weaknesses, where you have gaps perhaps. where you have duplication between what is occurring at the office of the president and what functions are occurring at the campuses. so we've made some suggestions to the office of the president to respect to that. now credit to president napolitano, in 2014 she put out a directive and asking the office of the president to look at its size, shape, role, mission. and really wanting to try to identify internal redundancies and any overlap. unfortunately we didn't see any results of that particular analysis. we do believe the analysis was done, but we didn't really see any significant change as a result of that directive that she put out. in fact staffing increased, but if you don't have a workforce plan and you don't have information that justifies why you believe your staffing needs increase that's a problem. and looking at salaries, certainly there are executives at the office of the president make significantly more than state employees. or employees in the public sector. and in many cases higher education. we don't take an issue with that, because as we all know. higher education's very competitive, we want the best and the brightest to work for the university of california. in our system here in california. however, we also looked at administrative staff who performed functions that are not that different than administrative staff working for the state of california. working for local government, etc. and, we really felt that there was a big, big difference there. and that the office of the president could take a harder look at some of their administrative salaries. the salary ranges are significantly different than state employees. we use a few examples in the report, where the director of human resources for the system, that works at the office of the president. compared it to our department of human resources, here in california. the director of an agency that's responsible for over 200,000 state employees. we felt that the salaries were significantly different. so that's an area we believe the office of the president really needs to take a hard look at. with respect to employees as well, we looked at benefits. many of the benefits that they provide are comparable, but there certainly are some that are much more generous. for the executives, they not only pay part of their retirement as an employer would. but they also pay a supplemental retirement, either three to 5% for their executives enter their supplemental retirement plan. this is over and above what they already provide as an employer. so we felt they needed to take a look at that, and determine whether that's really reasonable based on the high salaries these individuals receive. in the first place. we looked at reimbursement for mails, certainly higher than state employees, higher than csu. reimbursements for business meetings, entertainment expenses, those types of things, those are not provided of allowed for state employees. so,we had some concerns with that. and again, these are areas where we feel the office of the president could really rein in some of their costs. and then the last thing was spending on bonuses and stipends. and again the concerns we raised here is really are these justified based on the salaries these individuals are already receiving? do you need to give someone a stipend on top of the salary that they are getting, from the office of the president. the other issue that we tried to address in the report, is really looking at redundancies. i know the members who request this audit were very interested in determining, is there any duplication between functions that are occurring at the office of the president. and functions that are occurring at the campuses? this is the area unfortunately where the office of the president based on the evidence that we have interfered with that process. when we sent the survey out to the campuses we sent two surveys. one, to assess the services that the office of the president provides. so we have a conversation with the office of the president. we need to know all the services that you provide the campuses. and then when we provided the survey to the campuses there was language on on those surveys. you need to keep this information confidential within your campus community. communicate with us. my staff have verbal communication with liaison with the office of the president suggesting if you have logistical questions, that's not an issue. but if there are specific questions that the campuses should be communicating with staff at the auditor's office. we really wanted the campuses to have the opportunity to provide an independent voice. and tell us what services they use, what services they find very valuable, what services perhaps they don't use. and perhaps reasons why. maybe they're a large campus, they don't need certain services. but we were really trying to get a handle on all of the services that the office of the president provides. the satisfaction from the campuses perspective of the value of those services. and hopefully we're going to identify perhaps some services that could've been eliminated. or if there was duplication, perhaps to eliminate the duplication at one end or the other. either at the campus level or at the office of the president. unfortunately what we found out is that prior to those surveys being submitted to my office. the office of the president reached out to all the campuses held a conference call and had a discussion about the surveys. we were later able to determine based on information the office of the president gave to us, that some of those surveys were modified. so we've got copies of the draft surveys that the campuses sent to the office of the president. when we got the final survey, some of those answers had been changed. language as we explained in the report we showed some examples language had been modified or eliminated. in fact when we reconciled, some information in the last few days we've also determined that the office of the president did not give us all of the draft surveys that they received from campuses. they gave us, i think 11 out of 16. some of the campuses didn't send draft to the office of the president. they just sent it directly to us and perhaps just had a conversation with the officer of the president over the phone. but we did see evidence and it's our responsibility under audit standards. because now, two things. when the office of the president set up the conference call and suggested that these surveys needed to be sent to the office of the president immediate chilling effect in our minds, that these campuses now knew, we're going to send the survey to the office of the president, how truthful can we be? with all due respect, to the office of the president, and the campuses, there's always that concern. and then certainly when we saw evidence of some surveys having been changed that raised the concern in our minds and we just felt that that information was no longer reliable. we published in a report but as i am required by the order standard my office is required to follow i had to point out of the fact that there was interference with respect to that situation, disappointing. the other issues that we ran into with respect to access. there were some circumstances where the office of the president delayed access. we were trying to get access to information about. what we refer to in the report as this undisclosed budget, the budgeting that they did with those surplus funds and actually there's a process that has been in the past pretty informal. i have to give, again give credit president napolitano, she established a process where she wanted decision memos, while we tried to get access to that information. and we were really, they didn't necessarily obstruct but they really made it extremely difficult for us to get that information. when we eventually got access to these documents after the attorneys had discussions about our statute and how strong our statute is, we were given access to that information, but it was redacted. and our statute is very clear. we have access to the information, we have to be very careful about what we disclose. we will work with the agency that we're auditing to not disclose anything that's confidential. but redaction's are not appropriate, and as we mentioned in the report. it was, in some cases surprising to us because when we ultimately saw the unredacted version, we saw that president napoletano had been questioning some of the requests. and now we're not going to spend this much, i'm going to reduce this, i'm not going to allow this. so it was, again, a process for us that took longer than we would have liked. ultimately they gave us access to the information, but unfortunately we had to go through several steps and it took us several weeks to get access to that information. the final issue is we asked for expenditure information related to travel, lodging, meals, etc. we got that information, we put a schedule together, presented it. and then when we were going through our final qc process in march looking at their budget, we realized they had left out a substantial amount of those expenditures, mostly foreign travel, catering, hospitality, travel outside of california, etcetera. they gave us $10 million worth of expenditures, the ultimate amount we saw in the budget was $35 million. so they had left out about $25 million. so again, another situation where, we weren't given access to all the information that we felt was necessary for us to do our jobs. so, with that i'm going to go through the recommendations at a very high level. two key recommendations that we have made to the legislator. first is to appropriate funds directly to the office of the president through an annual budget process, this would ultimately eliminate the need to there to be a campus assessment. so if the legislature decides to direct appropriate funds for the office of the president, now we're not talking about the university system as a whole, i know there is been concerns raised about constitutional autonomy. and certainly, when i met with president lozano, i mean regent lozano, and a couple other regents, they did that raise that as a concern. as they noted in the report, their letter to me is in the report and we considered their concerns. i had my attorneys look at this, because we certainly don't want to make a recommendation that legally would be a problem. our attorneys looked at, they've look at court decisions, they've look at other states that are structured similar to the university of california in our state. so, we do not think that our recommendation to suggest that legislator directly appropriate an amount specifically for the office of the president is any concern with respect to constitutional autonomy. the office of the president's the administrative arm of the system. the other recommendation that we made to the legislature is with respect to the regents. and we're suggesting that the regents use some of that appropriation to contract with an independent third party. we think that's necessary because what we have suggested and throughout the audit report is a three year plan. so we want to give the office of the president the opportunity over the next three years to really right the ship as far as their budgeting practices, disclosure of information information related to the initiatives. and that's going to take some time, certainly issues related to their staffing, and their staffing costs. so we have specific elements of that we've identified that we think need, and can be achieved over the next three years. but we think the regents need to provide oversight. they certainly have that responsibility. and we believe an independent third party would provide great assistance to the regents in monitoring how the office of the president is doing in implementing that corrective action plan. we certainly think the legislature has an oversight role, much like the hearing today. our suggestion is that legislature could have oversight hearings and have the office of the president, the independent third party, present their progress as they're working their way through the three year corrective action plan. quickly, the high level recommendations of the office of the president related to their budgeting, implement best practices. do a lot of the things that i discussed earlier, that they're not doing, present your actual expenditures. when you're building your next year's budget, present that information to the regents. if you have a reserve or surplus funds at the end of the year, the regents need to understand that so that they can make informed decisions. not only with respect to the campus assessment, if that continues to exist, with other decisions. develop a reserve policy, make sure you have policies with respect to approval and justification of your expenditures. any savings reallocate one consideration or suggestion send some of that money back to the campuses they can use it for the students or for other purposes that are important at the campus level. the system wide initiatives, develop a clear definition of each of those initiatives. understand the purpose intent, how much is being spent. conduct an assessment of each of those. are those initiatives meeting their intent? do they need to be continued or perhaps eliminate some of the initiatives? we did not suggest specific initiatives because at this point, i think it's up to the university. to get a handle on all of those initiatives, really understand the intent purpose, do the analysis and then decide with the regents as to what they need to do moving forward. staffing costs align, make sure that they align with the needs of the campuses, implement a method for weighing their salaries, using public sector. one thing i didn't mention is in the budget act of 16, the legislature directed the office of the president. to compare their salaries with state employees to the extent they could. they did that for some but not for all. they felt they couldn't find comparable, this recommendation is pushing them to do more we think they can do more. setting some targets with respect to salary amounts. that workforce planning model similar to one that the department of human resources suggests for state agencies we think is a good place for the office of the president to start in looking at ways they can develop a workforce planning model. finally to the board of regents, same recommendation contract with an independent third party. that third party can be reporting to the regents on progress, challenges, issues that the office of the president is running into with respect to implementing the corrective action plan. have a public meeting to discuss all the initiatives, to discuss all of these points. and then certainly exercise their responsibility and authority, and i'm sure they will. as far as oversight of the office of the president, making sure that the office of the president implements our recommendations. my final comment is, in the audit report, the office of the president has suggested that they embraced our recommendations and they intend to implement them. so, i think it will be very important for the regents. my office certainly has a follow up process with any entity that we audit. but i think it's very important that the regents have a process where they're following up with the office of the president to make sure that these recommendations are ultimately implemented. with that, members, i will stop and allow you to ask us any questions. thank you.
[{'start': 62, 'end': 80, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 119, 'end': 137, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 139, 'end': 147, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 735, 'end': 745, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3351, 'end': 3361, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3375, 'end': 3382, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 15961, 'end': 15971, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 17508, 'end': 17518, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 24892, 'end': 24902, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 25739, 'end': 25749, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 27414, 'end': 27420, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 27436, 'end': 27442, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kathleen Fullerton: good afternoon, kathleen elaine fullerton, state auditor's office. yes, those funds would have come from the discretionary side. we did some testing on the campus assessment portion of that. so, a lot of those funds were paid from the campus assessment, which is discretionary. and like you said, senator lara, yes, it is more generous than what's offered to state employees. they're offered $174 a day to be reimbursed for these types of expenses. state employees are not offered that benefit, except in very, very limited circumstances.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 305, 'end': 309, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Paul Medved: Good evening. My name is Paul Medved. I am an alum of UC Davis and I to have some concerns about UCOP's behavior. Very briefly, in November of 2015 I filed a whistleblower complaint alleging misuse of student fees and fraudulent behavior by the administration of UC Davis Chancellor Linda Katehi. After two in-depth sessions with UCOP's ethics compliance staff in Oakland, I was hopeful that UC's whistleblower system might actually work. In the spring of 2016, I was told my complaint would be investigated. But by August that hope was replaced with a punch in the stomach. Not that Linda Katehi wasn't found to be responsible for numerous ethical lapses and violations of UC policy, she was. But despite confirming the misuse of approximately $3 million in student fees, The independent investigative team from Orrick pronounced that misuse quote inadvertent, apparently harmless, and not a violation of UC policy. And just like that, UCOP accepted Orrick's findings and considered my complaint closed, end of story. Inadvertent, harmless, not a violation of UC policy? How on earth could that be? Well it turns out UCOP has limited the Orrick teams investigation to only one of my four allegations, and I suspect provided them only a fraction of the available evidence. And despite an invitation to do so, Orrick oddly didn't even see fit to interview me, the whistleblower. When I asked UCOP, why my entire complaint wasn't investigated? I was told by Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer Rachel Nava, that the rest of my allegations had been investigated and dismissed back in 2010. I responded that I was familiar with the 2010 investigation of a related grievance filed by UC Davis students, and that, that assertion was not even possibly true. For one thing, much of the evidence I presented, including the University's own financial reports, was not even available until much later. For another, the 2010 investigation had to rely on the seemingly reasonable assumption that Chancellor Katehi and other top officials, none of them are presently still at UC Davis. We're telling the truth. And remember, we're talking about Linda Katehi here. [Sir, I'm going to ask you to try to wrap it.] I will wrap it up. Still Ms Nava refused to reopen the investigation of my complaint. And so in January of this year, I filed a second complaint. This time alleging UCOP itself mishandled my first complaint, and very likely deliberately. Why, why would they seek to prevent Orrick from connecting any dots? I believe to hide their own complicity, and avoid making their desperate attempt to get Katehi to resign, and to be made anymore difficult than it already was. UCOP dismissed that complaint too, ironically suggesting I contact the State Auditor. And therefore, so I'm here, without one iota of personal gain at stake, to both agree with Ms Hall that UCOP is in serious need of some form of effective oversight. And to ask that UCOP's handling of both my whistleblower complaints, the copy of which I will leave with the state auditors office, to be reviewed by the State Auditor and her attorneys. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 283, 'end': 295, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 584, 'end': 596, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 937, 'end': 941, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1118, 'end': 1122, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1139, 'end': 1145, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1309, 'end': 1315, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1391, 'end': 1395, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1509, 'end': 1520, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2011, 'end': 2017, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2148, 'end': 2160, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2242, 'end': 2246, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2379, 'end': 2383, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2488, 'end': 2494, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2609, 'end': 2615, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2681, 'end': 2685, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2861, 'end': 2865, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2871, 'end': 2875, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2948, 'end': 2952, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Elizabeth Ortega: Good afternoon, members. My name is Elizabeth Ortega. I'm representing AFSCME 3299, the largest union at the University of California, representing over 24,000 members. So, UCOPs interference in the state auditors investigation is like trying to keep two sets of books, and reflects the continuing pattern of deception towards the Legislature, in order to justify tuition hikes. Skyrocketing executive pay, and continued exploitation of low-wage workers. We're grateful for the State Auditor for exposing UCOP's disgraceful conduct and financial mismanagement. And join her in demanding real reform, increased legislative oversight, our students, our patients, our workers deserve better. Thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maurice Emsellem: Thank you, Chair Thurmond, Members of the Committee. My name is Maurice Emsellem, I'm the Director of the National Employment Law Projects, Access and Opportunity program. We're a proud sponsor of AB 1008, together with Legal Services for Persons with Children, All of Us or None, and the Time for Change Foundation. AB 1008 builds on the remarkable Ban the Box movement launched over a decade ago by our co-sponsor, All of Us or None. Today roughly one in five people live in one of the nine states or city, that has extended the policy not just the public sector employers but the private actor employers as well. AB 1008 incorporates the best practices that have been adopted in California and across the nation. The bill incorporates the background check standards prescribed in 2012 by the EEOC. The new California Fair Employment and Housing Council regulations and the Fair Chance Ordinance in Los Angeles and San Francisco. To be clear, AB 1008 doesn't prevent employers from conducting a background check or deciding which applicant should or shouldn't be hired, it just delays the background checks until the conditional offer stage of the hiring process. And ensures that applicants receive a copy of the record to verify its accuracy. And offer evidence of rehabilitation before the final hiring decision. Studies show the fair chance reforms boost the number of people with records interviewed and hired. And San Francisco's annual survey of over 5,000 employers documents that they are overwhelmingly compliant with and supportive of the 2014 San Francisco ordinance, with small businesses leading the way. Given the positive response around the country to the laws that are now on the books, we are committed to working with the employer community to address their concerns. Thus we've amended the bill to address the chamber and CSAT's concern that it would expose employers to liability. The amendment clarifies that there's no mandate to hire anyone who's submitted mitigating information. While employers must allow the applicant to offer evidence of rehabilitation, they are not required to hire the individual. Certainly AB 1008 creates no special exposure to negligent hiring liability, since the employer may continue to conduct a full background check. Second, the bill now clearly exempts employers when a federal or state background check law prohibits hiring or licensing certain individuals in jobs, like banking, child care, elder care, school construction, and other industries. Thank you again for your consideration, and we respectfully ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 17, 'end': 25, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 64, 'end': 80, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dorsey Nunn: My name's Dorsey Nunn, I'm the Executive Director of Legal Services for Prisoners with Children, co-founder and proud member of All of Us or None. And the bill that you're considering for me is not just a short march. I've been at this since 2003, and what we were asking for is an opportunity to actually come back into society, where we can be a benefit instead of a liability. At a certain point where people talk about reentry, it's impossible for us to reenter society, while you have structural discrimination firmly in place, in regards to employment, housing and public benefits. We decided to pursue the question of employment first. Recently in September, we had a gathering of approximately 700 people from 36 states that comprised the largest gathering of formerly incarcerated people in the history of the country. And we surveyed 200 of them to ask them what was the most difficult thing to obtain? And it was a job. What was the thing that led back to crime because many of them had been back and forth to prison. And what they expressed was that crime wasn't the first choice, it was generally the last option. So we surveyed that population. I brought with me a report that we had comprised for that particular conference that I'd like to share with everybody up here. But I think it's a paramount importance that we actually allow people even when they sitting in prison to dream that they eventually will be employed when they get out. And I think that it could save a whole bunch of people headaches. People getting out of prison and society in general. Thank you.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dominique Lofton: Okay, Dominique Lofton, on behalf of the California Association of Local Conservation Corps in support, thank you.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lizzie Beacon: Thank you. Lizzie Beacon with the ACLU of California, in support.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joseph Johnson: yes, joseph jonah johnson from legal services for prisoners with children. i had the same experience, got out of prison and decided to go back to school and got a degree and went out to get a job, and there's things came up. and the thing is that once i can be able to get my foot halfway in the door, that i can be vital asset, not only to my family, but to my community.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ashley Martinez: mr chairman, committee members, ashley joseph martinez on behalf of seiu local 1000, in strong support.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roger White: Roger White Local 1000 SEIU in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Harriet Davis: hi, my name is harriet. and i work for legal services for prisoners with children. i'm with oliver sinan. i'm the grandmother of nine and a mother of three, and i'm a registered nurse. but i'm also formerly incarcerated. and when i was trying to get my nursing license in the state of california after more than four years of college. i got out on a probationary status, because of my conviction. and when i would go to apply for jobs, people would offer me the job. but because the probationary status, i had to self-disclose why i was on probation with my license. and i was always turned down, always, until a group that i was working with was able to give me a job. once i got my license, at the time, no one asked me if i was formerly incarcerated. or it was like, have you been convicted in the last seven years which now has been over 30 years, 35 to be exact. i'm a registered nurse, i worked for 15 years as a registered nurse, after i did not have to disclose. so i just want you to know it's made a big difference in the life of myself and my family, and my community. i urge you to vote yay.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 92, 'end': 104, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Harms: jennifer with the national association of social work, california chapter, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sandra Johnson: Hi, my name is Sandra Johnson and I'm the first policy fellow at Legal Services for Prisoners with Children. I'm also formerly incarcerated, I am a paratransit driver, that was fired after six years, and I am formerly incarcerated, after six years of working for that company, very hard and giving it my all. I was employee of the month, and now it's really hard for me to get a job because of this band in the box, I mean because of this question box on this forum. I am a very good employee, I am faithful, I'm loyal. And it would mean the world if you vote yes on this bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Melissa Emmel: mr chair and members, melissa ashley emmel on behalf of los angeles mayor eric garcetti, here in support.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 74, 'end': 87, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Adele White: adele melissa white in support of this bill. last month, the united states senate passed a unanimous resolution declaring april second chance month. so let's continue the movement.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jamie Kaiser: my name's jamie adele kaiser, i'm with the anti-recidivism coalition, and i'm in support.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrea Richardson: hi i'm andrea jamie richardson, i'm the policy director at legal services for prisoners with children. we're a proud co-sponsor of the bill and we would really urge your aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Brown: Assemblymember, Mr. Chair and Committee Members, Jennifer Brown on behalf of the California Chamber of Commerce. And we have an oppose unless amended position on this proposal. We totally understand what the author is attempting to do with giving people a second chance. And in fact, a lot of our employers already have existing hiring programs in which they do offer these individuals a second chance. Our concern is basically maintaining a balance between providing a second chance to these individuals and still maintaining safety in or work place for our employees, consumers, and others. Where there maybe potential risk and we want to make sure that their in the appropriate position. And mitigate any risks on that issue. And so, we are working with the author to try and address and provide amendments, in which we think that creates the balance. And we're also concerned, although I do appreciate that the amendments that were taken to try and address some of our concerns about litigation, there's still a concern with the existing language that we could obviously take a chance in some of these individuals and yet at the same time be head up for negligence hiring negligence retention last year on the back end for taking a chance on some of these. And so I think some of those concerns need to be mitigated to make sure that employers are definitely willing to engage in this discussion. And give the individuals who should have a second chance an opportunity. So we look forward to continuing to work with the author on this. And until that time, we're opposed unless amended, thank you.
[{'start': 49, 'end': 63, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ken Worth: Thank you, chair and members, Ken Worth with the National Federation of Independent Business on behalf of small businesses. And I commend the author on his huge heart. And we actually, I mean, a conviction should not be a life conviction. Every conviction shouldn't be a life conviction we agree with that. We agree with the important role that public safety for ex-offenders to be able to find employment. However, a small business owner puts everything that they have into creating their business. They put all of their capital, all of their reputation, all of their time and we believe that it should be their right to know who they're hiring. And sometimes and the burdens placed by this bill, I mean taking 10 days to hire somebody. You can't fill the position, you have to go through this whole process. Small business owners don't have a lot of time to do all this. We believe strongly in ex-offenders being able to find a job. But there's an easy fix for that. All the Legislature has to do is provide a hiring credit for every ex-offender that has hired to small businesses. They put their name, their reputation, their capital on the line. And they're willing to take that risk give them Be up front about it. Say if you hire him, here's a tax credit for it and I guarantee you'll see a lot of people get employed under this. So, until that, we are opposed to this bill thank you.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dorothy Johnson : Good afternoon Mr. Chairmembers, Dorothy Johnson with the California State Association of Counties and also on behalf of the RCRC. And we are respectfully opposed to this measure as currently written. We really do appreciate the time at the author's office and the sponsors to go over our concerns. And the one amendment that does address that one single issue. But again, because of the expansiveness of this measure, because of the cost of public agencies, and because of the one size fits all approach that unfortunately even goes above and beyond what some local agencies have adopted, we do remain respectfully opposed at this time.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 48, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Scott Governor: Mr Chair and members, Scott Governor of Construction Employers Association, the amendments don't quite resolve those situations where state law Prevents us from hiring certain people.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Courtney Jensen: Mr Chair and members, Courtney Jensen with the California Credit Union League. We are in an oppose unless amended position. Also we have very strict state and federal guidelines and the way that the exemption's currently written doesn't quite get there. But we're looking forward to working with the author's office on continued amendments.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pat Zenzillo: mister chair committee members, zenzillo with kp public affairs, i'm here on half of the california mortgage bankers association. and we have very strict requirements with respect to mortgage loans, and mortgage loan originators. and all we've asked for is for this bill to reflect the requirements that have been put on us by policy makers to protect consumer's. so we hope we can work out an agreement with the author.
[{'start': 32, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joanne Bettencourt: Joanne Bettencourt representing SIFMA, the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association. We too are in oppose unless amended, I want to align my comments with the bankers and the credit unions and so we still have some issues with the bill so we are still opposed unless amended, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Margaret Gladsey: margaret andrea gladsey on behalf of the california community banking network, i echo the comments of the california credit union league. we too are opposed unless amended. position look forward to working with the author.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matthew Owen: Good afternoon, Matthew Owen with Western Growers Association. We're also opposed unless amended. I would echo the previous comments but also say that we are concerned about other state requirements that have been placed upon. For instance farm labor contractors and their hiring. And they are barred from employing folks that have been convicted of sexual harassment. So we're concerned about how this interplays with this bill.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tyler Blackie: tyler margaret blackie with the wine institute. just to echo the comments to the chamber of commerce and matthew with western guards and we're opposed unless amended but look forward to looking to working with the author, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 105, 'end': 112, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Amber King: Amber King with the Association of California Healthcare Districts. We're concerned about the impact on our small rural hospitals, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Faith Lane: faith with the california association of joint powers authorities. we'd like to align our comments with those made by the counties respectfully opposed.
[]
Till Givens: Till Givens with the California Special Districts Association and also on behalf of the League of California Cities. Like to align our comments with the counties as well in opposition.
[]
Richard Marcuson: mr chairman and members, richard tyler marcuson, pacific advocacy group on behalf of the american petroleum and convenience store small business owners throughout california and my construction clients we're opposed.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Todd Bloomstine: Thank you Mr. Chair, Todd Bloomstine for the Southern California Contractors Association respectfully oppose as well.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Robinson: hi, i'm mike richard robinson here on behalf of the american staffing association. i actually don't have an oppose position on it. i just have a very specific amendment that i've shared with the author to ensure that the deposition of conditional offer means that in the staffing context that when you put somebody into your pool. you may not actually have an assignment for them right then, but they're in your employment pool, and at the point, you can make the inquiry into their background. and so thank you.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matthew Owen: we'll go back and take another look at that. matthew mike owen at western growers association. we'll go back and take another look at that language. it still caused concern for us because of the process that the farm labor contractors have to go through to make sure that there are no problems or hiccups there, and they work very closely with the labor commissioner through this process and their license. so we'll go back and take another look. our fear was it just not clear enough in the language and lack of clarity is the cause for concern for us.
[{'start': 45, 'end': 62, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Desmond Lee: good afternoon, may it please the subcommittee, desmond, attorney for the southwest regional council of carpenters. ab 1701 is a bill that holds general contractors jointly and severely liable for the wage debts of its subcontractors. one very important thing to note is that this joint and several liability is a long standing doctrine recognized in american and california law. for instance, labor code section 1743, which is a statute that regulates public works projects. holds general contractors and sub-contractors jointly and severally liable for prevailing wage and public works obligations on public works projects. and in fact, it states in its statute that very, very doctrine. in addition, general contractors that are signatory to the council are jointly and severely liable for fringe benefit contributions under the collective bargaining agreements. they maintain with the southwest regional council of carpenters. and so these show that this is not something that's breaking any new ground. the second thing i'd like to point out, is the fact that existing remedies like, mechanic's liens, are ineffective in terms of vindicating the wage debts that are owed to these employees of sub contractors. the mechanic's liens remedies are very, very technical. they have a lot of technical deadlines to meet, and they're very, very short. the claimants can miss deadlines, for instance, because they cannot figure out when a project is completed. which is one of the triggers for triggering one of these very, very short deadlines in which they have to file and record a mechanic's lien at a county recorder's office. the other is that, a lot of times, the employee or a trust fund will often look to a subcontractor first, because they have, at that particular time, a sufficient remedy against the subcontractor. but what happens in that particular case, is that the subcontractor can then become insolvent. and when that happens at that point in time the employee or the claimant for the mechanic's lien, has the deadlines for filing those mechanic liens lapsed. the overarching substantive policy goal here is to make general contractors responsible for managing their projects. general contractors are already under an obligation to deliver a project confidently to their owners and part of this should be a project free of a wage violations. they have more support self-health measures in which to manage and to control these joint and several obligations that they normally have through these other laws or through these other collective bargaining agreements such as the general contract that we have with the council. part of these, for instance, a general contractor can require a subcontractor to report payroll data. and other wage compliance efforts that the subcontractor's taking so that the general contractor's aware of what's going on on the project. they can also like some awarding agencies on a public works project.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Scott Littlehale: good afternoon, mr. chair, honorable members of the committee. my name is scott matthew littlehale, i'm a senior policy analyst for the northern california carpenters regional council. nationwide, roughly one-quarter of 1 million construction firms go out of business annually on average, according to the census bureau. now, it's safe to assume or estimate that the number of firms in california that are in the construction industry going out of business annually number in the tens of thousands. most of those are probably specialty contractor firms. now, with billions in approved infrastructure funding in the offing, we can then inspect an influx of thousands of new subcontractors in coming years. ab 1701 is important in that it will help to ensure that tens of thousands of california construction workers will have a much greater likelihood of receiving all of the pay and fringe benefits that they earned whether those fringe benefits are administered by the state or by private funds. we sent a complete letter explaining our support. i want to focus here today on one key point. despite, 110% effort on the part of the labor commissioner and her deputies, the labor commissioner's office simply has limited resources and capacity to investigate, obtain judgments, and collect on judgments in the realm of private construction work. labor commissioners, deputies in fiscal year 14-15, were able to only investigate a limited number of private construction wage theft cases and they only found $364,000 due in back wages for the entire state for the entire industry. for comparison purposes, the total construction worker payroll in 1 year in the state of california is in the range of $30 billion. so that means that 1/1000th of 1% of california construction worker wages were identified as only the workers, which is clearly at odds with common knowledge among construction industry players about magnitude of subcontractors failure to pay or outright wage staffed. workers must, i want to emphasize the direct contractor liabilities far more effective than existing remedies that focus on subcontractor liability and private construction work. public works projects account for only 1 out of every 4 construction industry dollars spent in california, however, the labor commissioners office finds 50 times more wages due on public works projects than they do in private land projects. workers must not be left bearing most of the risk of subcontractor malfeasance, incompetence or simple bad luck. an environment of direct contractor liability will help subcontractors that have superior business practices and labor management systems thrive. meanwhile, subcontractors with poor practices will see their market share shrink. that will be a positive outcome for purchasers of construction services, for workers, and for the health of the private and public elements of california social safety net. thank you, be happy to field your questions.
[{'start': 74, 'end': 98, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cesar Diaz: Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and members, Cesar Diaz on behalf of the State Building and Construction Trades Council, also in strong support.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Kersten: David Kersten with the Carpenters Contractors Cooperation Committee, also in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Scott Governor: understood, chairman. scott scott governor here for the construction employers association. my member actually negotiates the northern california collective bargaining agreement with the carpenters, so we are union builders. the fundamental problem with this measure is it establishes liability on a general contractor for which the contractor has no way to mitigate that liability. today, we will ask the trust fund, we do on every project. is this subcontractor current? the response is generally we don't know. during the project we will ask, have they been making their payments? the response is, we don't know. unless we have a way to verify their status, we have no way to protect ourselves. it would be helpful, for example, if the trust fund has a deadbeat, someone who has not paid, if they would be removed from the union. otherwise they are simply passing that entity onto us and going after us for money we have already paid. there's this concept of enrichment, please understand. we will have paid the sub-contractor, an expectation that they paid their trust fund and their workers. so we are not being enriched by this. what this is bill is seeking to do is ask us to pay twice. as it relates to wages, california law actually prevents third parties from obtaining payroll records from other employers. we can do it through subpoena, or we can do it with the consent of the employee who is apparently being underpaid, which won't happen. so we have no way to verify if they are being paid the correct wage, we don't even know what the correct wage is, because under california law and private jobs, that need only be the minimum wage. we don't know what agreement they will had with their workers on this project again except for our carpenters and our affiliated subcontractors. as it relates to other trades, we don't have an agreement with the electricians, plumbers, mechanical workers, those are separate subcontractor unions. we have no standing to ask them for their trust fund status. so again, this measure seeks to put all this liability on us without having any way to protect ourselves. and that's the fundamental problem here. if you want to kind of protect these workers and protect the trust fund, we have to have ways to mitigate that risk, and under this bill we do not, and that's why we oppose it.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 33, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nick Cammarota: nick scott cammarota, with the california building industry association and speaking on behalf of the home builders in california and the home buyers and renters. our concern is very much aligned with what mr. governor was just saying, but i want to point out a couple of details that i think are important for you to keep in mind as you consider this bill. this is a bill that would impose liability on a general contractor for multiple tiers of subcontractors. tiers, parties that we don't even know are on the job sites, and it appears that because they want to jump over those intermediary parties, the first person that they're going to go after is the general contractor. we would like to see them exhaust those tiers going up first, because as mr. governor was saying, we've paid those costs, we don't want to pay them twice. we have an affordability crisis here in california for home buyers and for renters. that's not necessary. we need to be efficient about the way we pursue people who haven't paid. we've paid the subcontractor that we know is on the job. if they turn around and hire somebody else that we don't even know is there, then that becomes a problem for us. more over the bill has language in it that to us looks like we can not pursue indemnification against the subcontractor we're under an agreement with, but even their subcontractors. and when you do that you create immunity for those parties, you are more likely to have situations where they aren't going to pay their employees, because they know that the parties that are owed that money, are going to go over their direct employers to the general contractor. and the general contractor is going to be without a remedy to seek compensation from the party that they've actually already paid. with the interest of time, i will conclude my remarks there, and simply say that we remain opposed to the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 210, 'end': 218, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 755, 'end': 763, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Richard Markuson: Mr. Chairman and members, Richard Markuson representing the San Diego Southern California and Central Valley Chapters of Associated Builders and Contractors who include both general contractors and subcontractors. The California chapters of the American Fire and Sprinkler Association, the Independent Roofing Contractors of California, Plumbing, Heating, Cooling Contractors of California and Western Electrical Contractors Association all with similar concerns. In fact, our concern goes further. We think that with the enactment of this bill and with the problems that both Mr. Cammerota and Mr. Governor described that you will actually see a decline in the use of general contractors in private construction. Because there is nothing that will allow them to protect themselves from this. And what we will eventually see in California is an expansion of the use of construction managers. And then that construction manager will contract directly with eight or 10 different subcontractors, because there's virtually no opportunity for general contractors under this bill to remain viable. Despite what the proponents claim, we would further note that in the testimony supported the measure, that the labor Commissioner seems to have been able to discover very little instance of wage step. And although there is anecdotal evidence that is substantially higher than that with the police powers that the State and the Labor Commissioner enjoys, giving this responsibility over to the general contractor or putting this ownness on the general contractor makes no sense to us. That's the reason that we have a Department of Industrial Relations and a State Labor Commissioner to ensure that these bad practices, that no one at this table appreciates our countenances or wants to see continued. Whether you're supporting the bill or opposing it, they're the ones that should ultimately be responsible for enforcing the law, thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 581, 'end': 590, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 599, 'end': 607, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michele Minor: thank you for the opportunity to appear for you today. my name is michele jonah minor. i've worked in corrections for over 30 years. i began my career as a youth correctional officer and then i moved through the ranks. and actually, retired in 2012 as the deputy director of rehabilitative programs and the department of corrections and rehabilitation. i've worked on both the juvenile corrections and also adult corrections. i've been with the board of parole hearings since 2014. it is my honor to be appointed by governor brown the second time, and i welcomed any questions you may have.
[{'start': 66, 'end': 85, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 525, 'end': 530, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Peter LaBahn: thank you, my name is peter michele labahn. i've served on the parole board for about six and half years. my path to this board was somewhat circuitous i suppose. i graduated from cal poly, san luis obispo, and was fortunate enough to receive a graduate internship at atascadero state hospital, which was my first corrections-related eye opener. worked as a paid deputy sheriff in santa barbara county through graduate school, taught school in palm springs. joined the riverside county sheriff's department and 26 years later, after varied assignments in field and administration, retired as assistant sheriff in 2009, after which i received my first appointment to this board. and, i thank you for considering me for reappointment today.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cynthia Fritz: Thank you, good afternoon. I'm Cynthia Fritz, I've been a Commissioner with the board for six years. I was a deputy Commissioner for two years. Previous to that, I worked for the Department of Justice representing CDCR and the board in various class actions and individual cases. I've done over 1,600 hearings since I've been with the board. Throughout this process, I strived to have fair, professional, impartial hearings, respect the rights of others, and most importantly, keep public safety in mind. I am thankful for the third appointment from Governor Brown, and I'm happy to be here. I'm happy to answer any questions, and I do have my husband and my two kids toward the back.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 559, 'end': 564, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Vanessa Nelson-Sloan: I will. My name is Vanessa Nelson-Sloan, I'm the Director of Life Support Alliance. We're a prisoner efficacy organization focused on assisting and educating life term prisoners and their families. [INAUDIBLE]. That's why I gave you a written copy. I would invite all of the Senators to any of our seminars that we hold up and down the state where we explain the parole process to family members and other members of the public. You're welcome at any time. We can give you a good snapshot of how the parole process works. Our positions here today are not arrived at after just looking at the grant numbers or percentages, but as a result of research and consideration, including attending many parole hearings personally and reviewing any verbal transcripts. We are in support of Commissioner LaBahn, who we find to be a thoughtful and perceptive Commissioner. He is courteous and respectful to all parties at the hearing yet books no nonsense from anybody. Commissioner LaBahn is able to move through emotion to find the relevant facts with humanity and compassion yet always focused on upholding the law, which is his duty. He understands the unlikely is not the same as the impossible and is meticulous in making sure that all elements germane to suitability or lack thereof, whether visual or spoken are in the record. He is astute and discerning in evaluating individuals and information before him, focused on fairness. In fact, many of his decisions we disagree with, and of the three commissioners before you here today, he has given the least grants in the past year. We can ask for nothing more but fairness and consideration. We also support Commissioner Minor, who we find to be fair-minded and professional in her actions. She is, by and large, mindful of youthful offender factors and ability perhaps enhanced by her previous experience in juvenile justice. We also appreciate her efforts to go beyond just establishing effective communication and speaking to those before her as more than numbers and C files. Our greatest concern at her decision lies in the area of reliance on confidential information in an inmate's file, accusations the inmate and counsel are not privy to, but commissioners can and do use to deny parole. Commissioner Minor is not alone in using these, but her incidents of reliance on confidential information concerns us. We cannot support Commissioner Fritz. We find our observations of Ms. Fritz's actions are supported and reinforced by inmates and council who appear before her. She is often accusatory and denigrating with inmates, habitually calling them liars and dishonest. And while this may be the general public's perception of prisoners, we expect parole commissioners who deal with inmates daily to be not only more nuanced in their perceptions but civil to all parties concerned. Ms. Fritz derision often extends to inmate counsel, many of whom report she is rude and disparaging to them during their comments and should they be so brash as to put forth objections. This is an attitude we have both witnessed and discerned in reading transcripts. She takes few pains to be certain that slower learning inmates, those with the tape scored that indicates they are not well-educated, to understand her questions or comments. She's often willing to discount the comprehensive risk assessment, a tool that the board as a whole sets great stock in, when it disagrees with her own assessment and often disregard use offernder factors and what we call a Yeah-But. Yeah, he's a use offender, but his crime makes it irregardless. Lastly, while these concerns may be evocative and nothing more than personalities, in over 3,000 hearings held in 2016, there are only five times when there was a tie vote. A disagreement between the Commissioner and the deputy Commissioner, Ms. Fritz alone participated in three of those tie votes, which says to us that other people may be questioning her decisions as well. Ms. Fritz is also late to first hearings of the day often enough so that the staff at several institutions have made this a topic of conversation. We bring these concerns to the Senate, to the attention of the BPAs, and to the Commissioners in the hope that they will be mindful of these areas in the future, thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 793, 'end': 799, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 971, 'end': 977, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1666, 'end': 1671, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2255, 'end': 2260, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2392, 'end': 2397, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2431, 'end': 2436, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2837, 'end': 2842, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3819, 'end': 3824, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3954, 'end': 3959, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Robert Callahan: Thank you, Chair. Robert Callahan with the Internet Association, pleased to be a sponsor of Senate Bill 182 This bill is timely for several reasons. First, amidst the ongoing debate in this capital about sharing economy workers, and if and how the state can help this workforce. SB 182 provides a straightforward and immediate answer. The bill benefits the worker, the driver of the TNC platforms. As you'll hear it is the driver who in the absence of this bill could face significant new obstacles to accessing economic opportunities afforded by ride sharing. Obtaining a business license in every jurisdiction a driver might conceivably drive through while providing rides on the app is a daunting prospect. Both administratively for the worker. Application processes can vary and are not necessarily simple. And financially as well, these licenses can be somewhat expensive and certainly that would be true when combined in the aggregate. The bill also benefits drivers by providing important privacy protection so that their personal information submitted to local jurisdiction cannot just be posted publicly on a website for everyone to see. Second, this bill is timely because the State Legislature has the opportunity to get in front of this before it becomes a real problem for drivers. Currently, only a handful of jurisdictions have attempted to require any driver driving in their jurisdiction to obtain their specific business licence. But that list is likely to grow, resulting in a untenable patchwork of business license for drivers. Now SB 182 is certainly improved with the language accepted today, and we would submit that the goal of the bill is simple and it's laudable. Drivers should not be discouraged to drive for TNC platforms because of threat of fines or retroactive fees. Or for an unrealistic requirement of getting a business license in every single jurisdiction they might be in, in a single trip which was mentioned, could be many. One of the reasons this is true and important is because drivers are becoming ubiquitous and available in almost all areas of the state. These drivers are mobile and can choose to drive one place today and another place tomorrow based upon supply and demand or simply where they are. They can go on vacation with their family to Southern California and choose to drive for a few hours when they have some down time. The Internet has created that flexibility and that mobility which benefits drivers and it certainly benefits riders as well. But it's also led to the issue before us today where a traditional business licensing approach would result in an awkward and undesirable result. So we thank the Committee for working with us and with the author on the amendments to the bill. As the analysis notes, we've been working closely with the cities and counties on how the single business license law would be applied in the most effective and equitable way. We belive the domicile based approach makes sense. As it's an objective and easy to apply standard for drivers to follow and for cities to enforce. Our sensitivity to the needs of local governments here is what made us draft the approach to this bill. In a way that maintains local control rather than a state wide business license regime that would remove it. So committed to continue working with them and I urge an aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Carlene Ross: Okay, thank you so much. Good afternoon, Chair McGuire and Committee Members. Thank you for allowing me to speak today. My name is Carlene Ross, and I am a driver for Lyft in the Bay Area, in Sacramento, all over. I have been driving for Lyft for the past, almost a year. In doing so, I have seen first hand the positive impact ride sharing has had on my community. For example, people who aren't able to get to work or just in need of a kind word, entering my car crying. As I drive, I have the opportunity to earn extra income when I need it, and work as much or as little as I want. Instead of my car being a financial drain every month, it's now an asset that pays for itself and more. As I drive in the diverse cities and neighborhoods in the Bay Area, I also hear from many of my passengers about how much ride sharing has improved their lives. For those that live in areas that don't have as many transportation options, if you don't have car the ability to request Lyft and you know that the driver will take you anywhere you need to go, it has given them freedom peace of mind. That is why is so important that the SB 182 becomes law. Under current law, I can be subject to a different local business license requirement in every jurisdiction I drive. For instance I have heard people getting my car in Sacramento and tell me that they're going to San Francisco and be on a time schedule. And if I were to deny the ride they would miss their appointment. It is impossible for me to know whether my next ride will want to go to Richmond, San Mateo or anywhere between. In fact in the Bay Area, I could be subject to business license requirements and fees in as many as 77 different jurisdictions. The fees associated with acquiring multiple business licenses would make it impossible for me to continue to earn an income as a ride share driver. As a part time driver, I simply would not be able to keep up with different And complex requirements. If I happen to drive into a new city or county, I could be forced to pay hundreds of dollars in unexpected business license fees, some of which can applied retroactively. Without SB 182, I would be forced to decline rides going to any jurisdiction where I don't hold a required business license. If I hold a valid license in my home city, or more likely I would have to stop driving altogether and lose out on much-needed income. And I'm also concerned that under current law, when I applied for a business license, my personal information, including my home address, can then be posted online. SB 182 removes this threat to my privacy and protects drivers' personal information. SB 182 is critical to ensure that Californians continue to have access to ride-sharing and all of the benefits that it brings to both drivers and riders, and I urge you to support.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 54, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 131, 'end': 143, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrea Devough: good morning, chair and committee. andrea jonah devough on behalf of technet in strong support. respectfully ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Will Gonzales: Mr Chairman and members, Will Gonzales on behalf of Uber in strong support. Practical method to compliance, quite frankly. Thank you.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 38, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Juan Garra: Morning, my name's Juan Garra, me too.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chandula Spencer: good morning. my name is chandula andrea spencer, me too.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Eli Love: morning, sorry to stall this train of repitidity. my name's eli chandula love, i'm chief of staff at cal innovates, a coalition of technology leaders and entrepreneurs that serve as bridge between the tech communities and public policy communities in sacramento and washington dc. cal innovate champions growth and innovation across california, we work on a variety of new economy issues. facing californians, including the personal enterprise economy, ride and home sharing and neutrality, the digital divide, and the access to the internet. and with that said, we're here to strongly support senate bill 182. ride sharing has provided californians across the state with more transportation options, while at the same time offering hardworking folks in our state work opportunities help them make ends meet.
[{'start': 60, 'end': 77, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Moggum: amy eli moggum on behalf of the california chamber of commerce in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Rosa: rosa on behalf of the silicon valley leadership group in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dan Carrigg: thank you. mr. chairman and members, carrigg on behalf of the league of california cities. we do agree with the author and the sponsor that this is a problem that we should try to begin to figure out a solution because we know that the folks that are out there driving tncs are kind of hard-working people. and i'm pleased to clarify in the regulatory environment for those individuals is worth working on. and so we did sort of go slow on this bill when it was introduced. we did meet with the sponsors and had a number of conversations with our cities about the problem because this is obviously, as this business evolves you'll have to craft and maybe improve solutions for the problems that exist. however, with the amendments that are going into the bill today, we're regrettably going to move to opposition. when we've been approaching this issue, what we've understand of the problem is that they've argued that there shouldn't be confusion where a driver would have to potentially get a business license in five cities or something like that, if they're operating in different places. but the nexus with a business license is that they're actually doing business in the community. so, as we were approaching this issue, it seemed like, number one, you ought to get a business license in the community where you're doing a proportionate amount of your business. and how we handle some of the the regional other things that may happen in a region. maybe there were some ways we could work on that. this bill goes completely the other direction as it's currently amended. to somehow say where you live is now where the business license is going to occur, it doesn't make any sense. there's no nexus with business activity. it may be that where you live is where you actually drive your vehicle. you may work 60 miles away from where you live. secondly, i think most of you around the agenda are aware that one of the companies filed a lawsuit, basically arguing that the data on where people live, their drivers live, is private. so, okay, the bill says you're going to get a business license where you live. but then the companies are arguing that that data is actually private. we understand there's a problem. we think we ought to work on some sort of solution, but moving away from the idea that a business license should not have any nexus with where you're actually doing business, we just don't think makes any sense. locally our taxes, if we try to impose a business license on somebody that's not doing any business in our community, i'm sure at some point we're going to get hit with a lawsuit because that just does not make any sense. so for those reasons we regretfully oppose the bill in it's current form.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ben Fay: thank you, honorable chair and members of the committee, my name is ben amy fay. i'm an attorney that specializes in local government revenues for about 25 years. i represent and advise cities all over the state. i also do with the league and muni services. and first, i'd like to commend the amendment to require drivers to get their business license in the location where the domiciled. in that it doesn't start addressing the problem of the race to the bottom. where the previous version you would have, drivers would look for a city that has almost no tax. there's still i see some significant problems from a purely legal perspective. and the big one, which mr carrigg alluded to is apportionment. there's a legal principle that city has to portion the amount of tax, a business license tax, that a business pays to the amount of business they conduct in that jurisdiction. so i'll give you an example. say a driver's domiciled in city a, but they only drive 5% of the time there. will they then be able to argue that they only have to pay 5% of the tax? if that's the case, you've ended up with the drivers avoiding having to pay a fair amount of tax for the jurisdictions they're working in. so that's an important legal principle i think needs to be looked into before it moves forward. can this be cured in this bill? is there a way of saying, it has to all be apportioned to that jurisdiction and you can't make an apportionment argument. and to be honest i haven't researched that yet because is that something that the legislature has the power or is that a constitutional requirement? it's something we'd have to look into. but i would foresee in this form, a lot of litigation coming out of this with drivers getting a business license and then saying i only have to pay a small percentage. or frankly, if they don't drive in that jurisdiction saying, i don't have to get one at all.
[{'start': 68, 'end': 79, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 666, 'end': 673, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dorothy Johnson : Good morning Mr. Chair and members, Dorothy Johnson with the California State Association and Counties and also speaking on behalf of my colleague from RCRC. We get notified the author and sponsors of our concerns, and we appreciate the opportunity to sit down with them. So we're not listed in the analysis as having a formal position. Unfortunately, with the amendments, for the reasons stated by the other opponents, we will be taking an oppose position. Again, because of the nexus problem and the lack of information sharing opportunities between jurisdictions. In addition to the numerous other items that were raised, thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 51, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Hannah-Beth Jackson: noon. this is the time set for the senate select committee on women, work, and families. we are going to do a hearing today. the first of this select committee on the life benefits of equitable family leave policy. we're scheduled to go from 1:30 to 3:30. we've got a full schedule of activities, so we will see start now. and i want to start by welcoming everyone here and those who are listening or watching and thank you for taking the time to be here with us today. i am senator jackson. i am the chair of the senate select committee on women, work and families. today's hearing is the first of our newly created select committee and, before we begin, i'd like to thank the organizations who contributed to the planning of this hearing including legal aid at work, the california work and family coalition and the small business majority. i also wanted to thank megan layne at the senate office of research for drafting the research brief background paper for today's hearing. i was actually kind of surprised there hasn't been a great deal of research done on this, although we will be hearing from some of our speakers and particularly anne o'leary on some of this work, but this is an area that now has become a focus. we're now seeing the klieg lights, if you will, being placed on the subject of women, work, and families, because this is an issue whose time really has come. and we have, as i was alluding to, an incredible lineup of speakers today who i know we are looking forward to hearing from and i want to thank all of them for taking their time out of busy, hectic schedules of work and family and those other things that remind us of why we're here today. the purpose of this select committee is to identify policy issues specific to women's traditional and changing roles in our state and our society and to bring awareness to the myriad ways workplace and economic structures and practices impact women as employees, caregivers, primary breadwinners, and leaders. our select committee will explore policies to raise awareness on issues such as family leave, child care, pay equity, and women on corporate boards and in executive leadership, because this is a movement that has to come not just from the ground up, but also from the top down. today's focus, though, is on family leave and, in particular, the life benefits of equitable family leave. now, why family leave is such an important and essential topic right now and why is it so important that we make it accessible to all? simply because we're in the midst of one of the most significant societal shifts our modern culture has experienced, which is the permanent entry of women in the workforce in large numbers and the impacts this is having in our work places and our families. it's an economic necessity in most california households that both parents, where you have two parents, that both of those parents work. and, in fact, approximately 71% of american women with children today are in the workforce. 71, it is far different than i was a little kid growing up back in the neanderthal era and my mom was able to stay at home and care for her three children, but the cost of a house was about $10,000, so the world has changed dramatically. for those of us who were lucky enough to be able, back in those days, to have parents at home and in an era where, actually, we didn't give women too much of a choice. today, we're seeing more and more women graduating college, actually we have a majority now, i believe it is of women graduating college, from when compared to their male counterparts. and yet, in our country our workplaces and employment have failed to keep pace with these seismic changes and failed to provide adequate job-protected maternity, paternity, and family caregiving leave for far too many of our families. and i want to make it clear that we are talking about family leave policies that are accessible to both women and men, mothers and fathers, so that both parents can share equitably in caregiving responsibilities, and enjoy the fruits of caring for family and bonding with newborns, although it was brought to my attention the other day by a mother of three children under six that she would like would have liked her husband to have been able to have more family leave time so he could have enjoyed changing diapers for three children all at the same time. and there's a little chuckle here which means that most of the men don't know what we're talking about and should. and certainly if we do expand and encourage family leave by fathers as well as mothers, we know that there are enormous benefits both to the dads and to the children by having the ability to bond with that parent as well. you know, most developed nations throughout the world recognize the right to take time off to care for a newborn, among other family responsibilities, as a basic social right and economic necessity. now, what's interesting is that the united states stands out as being the only industrialized nation in the world that does not guarantee paid maternity leave. that is a shocking statistic. so, we took on the lead 10 years ago with my dear friend and then colleague, senator sheila kuehl, now supervisor sheila kuehl, and created the nation's first paid family leave program, which was entirely worker funded. and what we're talking about today, and what we're going to be hearing about both nationally and through the state of california, is that most of these programs are paid for by the employee. and if they're not able to access what they have already paid into, they are essentially paying money into a program that they will never be able to use. so, family leave is not only to care for a seriously ill parent, child, spouse, or registered domestic partner, but also for an ill sibling, grandparent, grandchild or parent in law. and last year, the governor signed an important bill authored by assembly member jimmy gomez that increases the wage replacement rate for those who take family leave. from a, it's a six week guarantee, that has now gone from 50 to 60%, i believe, up to, in some instances, 75% of the weekly salary that has been displaced. but we are now falling behind. nine states and the district of columbia, when it comes to job protected paternal leave laws for employees who have smaller businesses. so we have paid family leave, but now when we focus on job-protected parental leave, we are now well behind nine other states. new york just passed a robust family leave law last year to provide job-protected parental leave to all employees, regardless of the size of their employer. regardless of the size of the employer here in california, under sb 63, we're simply talking about employers of 20 to 49 employees. so, without further ado, i will pass it along to my colleagues for brief remarks. we have a time constraint because our first speaker and ann o'leary, our keynote, has got to take her children to the doctor. so is this a real situation, or what? so without further ado, senator wiener if you'd like to make a couple remarks, and then senator skinner and senator mitchell and we have now senator nguyen with us. go ahead.
[{'start': 483, 'end': 490, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 866, 'end': 877, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1142, 'end': 1154, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5185, 'end': 5197, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5214, 'end': 5226, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5929, 'end': 5940, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 6892, 'end': 6903, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7032, 'end': 7038, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7096, 'end': 7103, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7116, 'end': 7124, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 7149, 'end': 7155, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Adam Rochon: well, thank you very much senator jackson and thank you to the committee for having me here. and as you stated, my name's adam. i get to wear two hats today. i am the owner of sequoia employee benefits and insurance solutions based out of a small central valley town of exeter. we provide benefits and hr consulting to small businesses. so not only am i a small business owner, i work all day with small business owners, and i speak with them and get to see firsthand issues that affect their work and business life. and so i'm fortunate to also be representing the small business, majority small business council, and help provide some of the data that they have recently come out with in regards to how that's just not true. that it really doesn't, the sky doesn't fall when someone needs to step out for a little while. i support the expansion of the paid family leave that provides protected leave for maternity and paternity, for taking care of family and childcare, for small businesses with 20 or more employees. because the way i see it, it levels the playing field for small businesses. sort of the opposite approach that it's going to harm us. the way we see it is that larger firms have the ability, and someone spoke earlier about senator weiner's ability for the city of san francisco to offer 100% paid leave because they had the resources to do it. a lot of small businesses don't have the resources to do it. so programs like this allow them to help with that economic hardship of providing subsidies towards their wages. and then possibly allow the company to then produce the rest of those wages. i have personal experience in doing that with my firm and i think i'm in good company. my company has 10 employees. we've been able to ensure that our employees can take that off. so i see no reason why a company with 20 or more employees couldn't do that. the opinion poll produced by the small business majority, which i think was available to anyone that came here, shows that 71% of small businesses nationwide support legislation like sb 63 because they want to see a federal law that protects the job status of employees who take family or medical leave at firms with more than 50 employees, expanded to protect those working for businesses with 20 or more employees. so 71% of businesses do it. also in this packet, they state that 72% of small businesses already have a formal or written policy that's consistent to a type of family leave program. it's not always the same program across the board, but 72% of businesses are already doing this. so it shows that we are able and we're willing, as small businesses, to provide leave to our employees. i, as a small business owner, i know the hardships that small employers face when they are not able to compete with larger corporations and one bigger business can offer that many small business cannot is generous paid family medical leave. i also understand the hardship of losing an employee, i only have 10 employees, when one of them goes out, they are all critical employees, it's the operation of my business, i can't afford to lose any of them. but when you really look at, once you take away that initial shock of you're going to lose someone for a while, the reality is, and in my personal experience, i was able to let an employee leave for leave, which i'll share her experience in a moment. but she was able to go out, she took her leave, the rest of the employees were able to take on that workload. they were excited to do it because they wanted to help out their their fellow employee. they were happy to take on that workload. i didn't feel like our productivity suffered, i did not feel like the workload hurt. and when the employee came back, she was motivated, she was happy to be there, she is loyal to my company and not going anywhere because she feels thankful that she was able to take that time off, was able to have her pay kept the same, we were able to utilize the program through the state. and we were able to provide the leave for her while she was away. and i think that small firms believe it's important for employees who need to balance their work and family responsibilities, to have reasonable options for doing so, options that also meet the needs for employers. that's why small businesses strongly support state administered, paid family leave insurance pools like california's paid family leave program, which ensures that more employees don't have to make a difficult choice between financial security and caring for a new child or sick family member. i also, in my practice, speak to other small business owners every day and i encourage them to take advantage of this program. and what i see is, and that's been mentioned before, it's a lot of times, it's a lack of education. i think the pushback that you see is that they think that, or even if they know that this program exists, they don't understand it and they don't know how to access it, and they don't know how to help their employees access it. and that's one of the things that i do. and it's not the primary role of my business, but as a consultant to hr, they often ask me what to do in a paid family leave situation, and i'm able to help provide both the employee and the employer the ability to access that program. and a lot of times, once you sort of map out how it works and how they can, the employee can get that leave, i encourage the employer to give them whatever time off that they need, show them the experience of other, my other clients and myself. the sky doesn't fall anywhere, they kind of look at it and they say, this isn't so bad, their pay is pretty much taken care of. the employer portion of their health bill they were going to pay anyway. oftentimes they can either hire a temp worker or just absorb the workload amongst the firm that they have. and by the time they're out, most of the time those employers are happy that they were able to provide that to their employees. but it's always that initial fear of what's there, or i've heard that there's a program out there but i don't know that it's for companies of my size, or how long it is, or that they could take advantage of it. and by alleviating that, if we could get more of that education, that is where i feel like we have the ability to take more advantage of it. because when it's all said and done, once over that hump of that, i'm losing a critical force, it can really be made okay by the programs that already exist that we have. so expanding that to provide it for employees to companies of 20 employees or more definitely makes sense to ensure that employees are able to take advantage of that and they're not left behind, because the employees shouldn't have to suffer because the business owner doesn't understand how it works. so thank you for the opportunity to share my thoughts with you. and i think it makes sense for small businesses and i think it would be a victory for entrepreneurs, their employees, and their families.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 41, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 122, 'end': 126, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1251, 'end': 1257, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Will Lightbourne: good afternoon, chair, committee members. will jonah lightbourne with the california department of social services. mr bland who leads our division that oversees calworks will go into much of the details today. but i wanted to take just a few minutes to sort of bookend the calworks program as i've known it. there were probably a handful of people in the room today who were involved in the process in 1997, following federal welfare reform, of enacting what became calworks. and designing its implementation and seeing to its implementation. i think i'm probably the only county welfare director who was there then who is still active in the field now. and although the concept of transforming the old federal afdc entitlement into a time-limited federal block grant that was time-limited for people on a lifetime basis remains controversial to this day, particularly when it's viewed from a national perspective. at that time, in california i think, we sort of laid out four core principles that we were going to embed in calworks. and i'm happy to say that through many crises, federal changes in legislative approach, the great recession, et cetera, the four are still in place. the first, and it speaks to mr. abramovsky's comment about helping people move up an income ladder was that we were committed to the notion that people should be incentivized to work. they should benefit from working while in the program. and so the earned income disregard was created in california. and we are one of a relatively small number of states that utilized the concept. so that as people are getting earnings they retain percentages of those earnings until they reach the absolute maximum allow in the program. the second thing that we did was we committed that unlike most states we would not impose what are called full family sanctions. so that if the parent in a household was not participating in employment activities, et cetera, and therefore was sanctioned, the minor children in the household would still be aided. we made that as a commitment and that's been continued. similarly if the adult in the household, the parent, reached their time limit under tanf the children would still be aided. and we also committed that for those children in households where the parent was never eligible for the program, usually because of immigrant status, that the children would be aided. and those are commitments that california's been able to keep. i would say unapologetically california probably has the most robust and the most recession-sensitive tanf program in the country. during the great recession caseloads did not rise and in fact continued to fall across the country as a whole. in california they did what they're supposed to do, which is increase significantly because need increased. the program has evolved quite a lot since its starting. sometimes in response to crises, during the great recession, the federal recovery act funding sort of fueled the beginning of our work with subsidized employment. but at the same time, some of those crises have also had negative effects on grant levels where we've seen reductions or suspensions of colas, et cetera. so the evolution has not been all positive from my perspective. some has been based just on learning interventions and services that work. some has been based on the fact that the population served has changed over these 20 years. we've evolved deliberately from what was originally essentially a strictly work first model to a much more mixed model with flexibility in the first years of participation. and investment of resources in barrier remediation services. in subsidized employment, and housing support, homeless housing assistance. and mr. abramovsky noted this past january we finally sort of ended the maximum family grant condition on assistance which many of us found objectionable for a host of reasons. so we come to this week and i want to tell you just a little brief story. this is sunday morning at about 7:15. i did not see it until about 8:30. i got a email from someone, i shan't mention their name because they are a client. good morning my name is, i found your information online. my seven-year-old son and myself have found ourselves completely homeless for the past several weeks, are in desperate need of any and all assistance. we've run out of our 16 days of housing assistance vouchers in the motel. i have a lead on a job, but we have nowhere to stay, no transportation. i would appreciate any help. i emailed back and i asked what county are you in? and she said which town she was presently in in the county of san diego. i emailed back and i said i'll try to get something in the works. i contacted official in the san diego county human services department. he got back to me right away and he said, i'll call her because she had a cell number. and that night he arranged for her to be in a homeless shelter for one night. yesterday when i was getting on a plane last night in baltimore to come back, i got the email from the county. will, customer assisted and housed by a homeless support program, calworks, is in process of procuring sanction. she will start her job next week. and i just, i wanted to share the story, because in the role i'm now in, the only time normally i ever hear a specific client story is because something has gone wrong. sometimes it's gone desperately wrong. and i looked at this, and i thought these were all the moving pieces that you, the legislature, the administration, et cetera, and our county partners have been putting in place over these years. and i feel very badly that she and her six-year-old were in that position to start with. as mr. abramovsky pointed out, there are many reasons why that shouldn't happen. but, at least, i had a sense that we've started to develop the ability to respond quickly, effectively, with what the person needs. and, i hope in a way, that she found supportive and dignified. so with that, mr. bland.
[{'start': 47, 'end': 64, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 119, 'end': 124, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1216, 'end': 1226, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3719, 'end': 3729, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5687, 'end': 5697, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 5974, 'end': 5979, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Todd Bland: Good afternoon, Mr Chair and members. I'm Todd Bland, Deputy Director of the soon to be Family Engagement and Empowerment Division at CDSS. Currently we're called the Welfare to Work Division. Our division has done a whole lot more than Welfare to Work for many years now. Term is dated and we're excited about a more comprehensive look at serving our clients, and the way we've organized our division. I will touch, give you a very brief overview, because you have a lot on your agenda today. I am happy to take more questions and more detail. I only have one actual exhibit to share with you. It builds on what Mr. Ambrovsky said and also what Director Lightbourne said about sort of not cutting folks off as their income advances. Stepping back for a moment, CalWORKS is California's version of the federal TANF program, providing income maintenance and welfare to work services for low income families with children. Federal funding, as was mentioned, comes in the form of an overall block grant. And although there are many conditions that go with it, the primary condition is that the state meet an overall work participation rate. In California, the program is budgeted with a mixture of funds. These include general fund, mostly federal TANF funds, and various realignment funds. Your agenda did a very nice job of kind of laying that out. The total was about 5.1 billion for the current year, and the budget year, similar in the budget year. The largest cost area, single cost area is grants accounting for 58% of expenditures. The program serves about 460,000 families in 2016-17, and about 900,000 there's about 900,000 children in those families. As Mr Lightbourne indicated, CalWORKS, unlike some other states TANF programs is cyclical. It is designed to respond in times of recession, when incomes fall, when assets fall. For clients to be able to come on to aid. The caseload peaked, and around June, its most recent peak was around June of 2011, following in during and the recovery from the great recession. And since then, has fallen to about 460,000 cases, mostly due to the improving economy. I'll turn for just a moment to just the chart that I had the sergeant pass out. The chart essentially shows, for a family of three, what happens if they have no earnings. That's the far left hand side of the chart. And as the chart shows, and as Mr. Ambrovsky said, those bars, the 1,300 and 1,700, that's well below the poverty level. And that's even mixing in the CalFresh on nationally the supplemental nutrition program, and some other benefits, it's still only 1,300, well below. And in this chart, I'll call this the promise and the challenge. The challenge is that half the case load, or more is on that left hand bar. But the good news in the chart is all the bars on the right that, essentially, if we engage clients, if we cure barriers, but for clients who need less than that are able to move into employment without those, but whatever the client needs. If we're able to engage them and they can can obtain employment, possibly subsidized employment first, they can move up that ladder, and even with. Partial income in the range of 800 to 1,000. The total supports rise above not only the official poverty measure, but the supplemental poverty measure. And I'd also finally point out that again to commend this Legislature and the Governor over the years. The orange bars in the middle there, towards the top, those are the state Earned Income Tax Credit, which is very much focused on low income families, and actually plays kind of a critical role in kind of pushing that additional additional income support, as clients work their way. because we would agree, we don't, as clients move up the income ladder, we don't want to, we want to gently phase down the benefits, not create cliffs and barriers. As it's been touched on in your agenda, there have been a lot of changes in the past years. Several changes, dating to the SB 1041 changes, largely creating the flexible 24 month clock time period, where essentially clients can focus on any activity, burial removal education, anything not necessarily having to comply with the federal, somewhat more stringent federal requirements. Then after 24 months, essentially complying with the federal. There are also the ability to count additional time, there is for education. So, 24 is not necessarily a strict number. There's also the ability to do extensions. Following on that, there were the changes made in AB 74, adding the family stabilization program, where we look to say, there's a lot of clients who can succeed in the program, but their not going to concede if they're in crisis mode. We need to stabilize them. Stabilize their housing. Look at the whole family and get them ready to work, in welfare to work. If they're not ready for, and if they're not given an exemption and really can participate. We also developed the online CalWORKS Appraisal tool designed to give us statewide assessment data on what a clients needs, so we could work with that. Counties would be able to work with that. And we created the Housing Support program. More recently has been touched on, we repealed the maximum family grant. Those are just some of the most recent significant changes. I know you may have questions about those, I'd be happy to answer those in a moment. And lastly, I'd just like to close my opening by mentioning the work participation rate and penalties. The work participation rate is not a great measure of performance of a program. It looks at sort of, how busy are clients doing at a moment in time, rather than looking at, are clients getting the services they need? Are they progressing? Is child well being improving? What is happening to the families. That said, it is the measure that essentially the federal government holds the stakes to most strictly. And over the years due to the high required rates, and changes made in the Deficit Reduction Act of 2006 California Essentially built up potential penalties from 2008 through 2014 that added up to potentially 1.8 billion. But through really good work of our county partners, and our clients. And my staff, we've been able to work through various program changes, such as the subsidized employment and other programs, such as providing supplements to those on CalFresh who are also families. We've been able to raise the work. Participation rate to 60%. And that, essentially, largely solves that $1.8 billion liability, pushing it down to an estimated, about $100 million. That $100 million is essentially tied to the two parent family. There's a separate rate much rated with 90%, and we are still working on solutions to that, but, I think, it's worth commending the clients and the counties for all the work to get us there. That concludes my overview. In the introduction, I also asked for some thoughts about grants. I could give those now, or take questions.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 617, 'end': 626, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 655, 'end': 666, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1665, 'end': 1676, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2363, 'end': 2372, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Frank Mecca: thank you, mr chair. frank will mecca, executive director of the county welfare directors association. and i will say, this is my 26th year as the executive director of the county welfare directors association. and i only bring that up in response to a comment mr. lightbouren made in that i actually was here in 1997, mostly ably representing mr lightborn and his colleagues at the time. and so i think i'd start my comments by saying, i agree with much of what mr. lightborn said. we got a lot right in 1997. based on what we knew about welfare and poverty and the economy, we did many things that were better than a lot of states. and i think we've seen the fruits of that bear out, as most significantly in this sort of the recession sensitive nature of our program. and we've done some things to improve the program over that time. you've done some things, mostly to improve things in partnership with the administration, things like the housing support program, things like the stabilization program and subsidized employment. we also enjoy, the county's enjoying an excellent relationship with our advocate partners, and with our operational partners at the department of social services. and that's not always the case, and certainly not the case necessarily in every program. and that's a good foundation. but we've done some things that weren't so good since 1997. we've shortened time limits to the point where we think it's to the detriment of clients, and probably to the level where it's added a level of confusion to the program that's probably not warranted by whatever benefit might have been achieved. my colleagues have all talked about grants, and the inadequacy of grants, and then how that's affected the ability of clients to sustain themselves, raise their children, and to advance their welfare to work goals. and as mr. herald said, we've also laundered hundreds of millions, actually billions of dollars out of the welfare to work and welfare program for the purposes of general fund budget savings. because a quirk of the way the federal government block granted the tanf program allowed the states to count a lot of things toward our maintenance of effort requirement that you were doing before and that you're going to do anyway. and so that allowed many states, and we took advantage of it like others, to launder out a huge amount of resources that this state committed to the lowest income people that we no longer do. and yes we've had major budget deficit and issues in our state. i certainly don't fault fiscal stewardship and prudence that sometimes hard decisions have to be made. this program is born a disproportionate brunt of those decisions over my 20 some years doing what i'm doing. so with respect to sort of the specific issues on this item, we've actually been pleased with modest increases in grants and the repeal of the maximum family grant rule. but our members see every day the impact of grants that are 50% or lower of the poverty rate, and less than that with respect to the relationship to the average fair market rents. and as housing prices skyrocket, our caseworkers tell us every day the combination of their, the lack of the sort of grants keeping up, and skyrocketing rents and the cost of housing makes it extremely difficult for folks to avoid homelessness. in fact, we've seen a big increase in homelessness among calworks families. and if you don't know where you're sleeping tonight, or you're not sure if you can keep a roof over your head tonight. it's really difficult to get to your job, your work assignment. and so, ms. stillwell-parvensky did a terrific job talking about the impacts of poverty. poverty affects adults and children. it effects executive function, it throws off your fight or flight neural reactions. it affects folks in a way that makes it difficult for them to move from welfare to work. and to the extent that children living in deep poverty, we geometrically increase the likelihood that those children don't escape. poverty themselves as adults. and so, we've done some things on the welfare to work side to start to think about welfare to work in terms of a two generation strategy. but i was thinking in terms of mr. bland's chart, where he shows sort of what happens when people work and what happens for the 50% of folks that aren't working. and i don't think we should conclude from that chart that it means. everyone in the non-working quadrant, or hemisphere of the chart, it doesn't mean they have the option to at that moment. we have to work as hard as we possibly can to move people from welfare to work. and we're going to talk more about ideas that we have in that regard. but we absolutely have to make sure that the children who are in that other hemisphere don't suffer the type of toxic stress from the poverty that their living in, that will make it so much harder for them to avoid the lifetime negative effects. and so we welcome and appreciate the amount of time and attention and scrutiny that this sub-committee is giving to the issue. we don't always get it, and certainly the excellent work of the staff of both parties on this issue. and we'll have some suggestions and recommendations on other items, later in the agenda. and appreciate the opportunity to give our overview comments.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 265, 'end': 276, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 347, 'end': 356, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 467, 'end': 476, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1846, 'end': 1852, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3594, 'end': 3613, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 4215, 'end': 4220, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Malcolm Broodigum: Good afternoon, my name is Malcolm Broodigum, I'm a second year law student at UC Davis School of Law. And this semester I worked with Nicole Vasquez to summarize the report written by the Rand Corporation on SB 1041 reform. And today I'm going to present that summation to the Committee. So first I'll give you some quick context on the report, then I'll summarize its key findings, and give you my big take-aways. So in November 2016, the Rand released the first of three reports evaluating the SB 1041 reform. And the focus on the first report was implementation of that legislation. There is some data that looks at key indicators of participants for pre-imposed SB 1041. But the author stressed that that data is extremely tentative to draw any implications from, some I'm just not going to get into that. Instead I'm going to focus on the data from a survey of all 58 counties welfare directors, along with six local counties, Fresno was one of them, where they conducted interviews and focus groups with staff. So now I'll turn to the key findings from the Rand report. So first, delay of state level guidance that resulted in some implementation, and training issues, for county level staff. While the state level work group was praised as being inclusive and thorough, it was slow to release guidance to counties. And so one-fifth of counties found that to be a major or moderate hindrance to implementation. And it lead to inconsistent and inadequate training for case workers, particularly on the new well for work 24 month time clock. Second, the general complexity of SB 1041 has hindered some counties in implementation, for example about one-fifth of case workers had minimal to no understanding of how the new time clock operated. And in the six focal counties, some case workers characterized the new clock as quote, the most challenging aspect of the legislation. Especially knowing when to tick or untick that clock for a particular participant. Third, CalWORKS participants also struggle to understand the SB 1041 changes. 80% of counties reported the explaining SB 1041 was a moderate or major hindrance, which is a product of its complexity. And then nearly all counties, about 93% identified complexity as a barrier of some kind. And then Rand conducted focussed groups with actual CalWORKS participants, and they reached the same conclusion, this participants didn't really understand what the changes were. Fourth, a big problem as talked about by Mr Harold was, this inherent attention between the federal workers participation rates in SB 1041. There's concern from both state level and county level staff, about this tension because on one hand, the state is penalized for not meeting the work participation rate. But on the other hand, we have this new time clock which doesn't require core activities. So it's hard for case workers to advise their clients which policies are they supposed to prioritize? Fifth, just generally implementation of the time clock has been a challenge and there are few challenges identified specifically. One was that the time clock may not be applied uniformly to all participants, because there's confusion about how to consistently apply to individual participants. Second, caseworkers are concerned that the 24 month time clock is not sufficiently long to address barriers. The report didn't have any data on this point, but that's an important question that subsequent reports may shed light on. And then lastly, the 24 month time clock success and SB 1041 success really depends on the early engagement programs. So that time clock was initiated in January 1, 2013, and not all those engagement programs had been implemented at that time. So those are the key findings, I'll just kind of give you my biggest takeaways. Number one, most counties report positively about the flexibility produced by the new 24-month time clock, but actually implementing it seems to be a challenge, especially for the case workers. Number two, the lack of state guidance on case worker process, when the time clock should tick or untick. Lack of state guidance on training, case worker training, and whether to prioritize work participation rate, versus the implementation of SB 1041 is kind of a problem. That may be able to addressed by the state level working group. Number three, the complexity of SB 1041 especially administering the clock takes time away from case worker's main job of counseling. Many of them report that their job is changed to being primarily data entry. And then another thing is that the complexity may detract from the participant's ability to make informed decisions. But at the same time the new time clock is putting more of an onus on the participant to pick their own path. So those are my main take aways. My sole recommendation is just, to keep all relevant stakeholders informed their subsequent land evaluations, so that they can produce the best information for this community to make their decisions, thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 135, 'end': 149, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1064, 'end': 1068, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2262, 'end': 2266, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2476, 'end': 2482, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ryan Woolsey: Department of Finance Good afternoon Mr. Chair, Ryan Woolsey with the LAO. We don't have any issues to raise with the administration's Cal Works proposal at this time. But we will be reviewing the May revision in the coming weeks, and will provide our assessment to the Committee at that time.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 60, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Todd Flan: Again Todd Flan for the department. The Rand study is an ongoing project. We're in the process of reviewing the next draft, the next report and look forward to clearing that and sharing that with you as well. Since the time of the original release, on the one hand, we recognize it was a complicated set of changes. It did take time to get guidance out, although again, that was a deliberative process, very stakeholder inclusive process. And I think the report reflected that appropriately. In the months since the report has been released, the department has issued over eight Q and A additional guidance having to do with the 24 month clock and implementation of SB 1041. We've conducted eight different training sessions, with counties, with county workers covering 28 different counties. So we do see the program as one of sort of continuous improvement. So, we think an independent evaluation from RAND is a key thing. And we respect their criticism and their praise of the program and expect you to take that in light as we make policy decisions going forward.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Aslanian: Yeah, Kevin Aslanian, Coalition of California Welfare Rights Organizations. I was around in 1997 when this happened. And in the first year, they took $700 million from CalWORKS program and gave it to everybody else. And that build up, and build up, and build up. And this year, the $7.2 billion available to CalWORKS, if you look at the carryover, the maintenance of effort in the block grant is $7.2 billion. In the budget, only 5.2 or 5.1 is just for CalWORKS. 2.2 is Student Commission or whatever, and that's just deplorable. When you have kids living in poverty. I mean, what's more important, the Student Commission or a child? CalWORKS children are rarely going to get there. And I think it's outrageous that that money is being stolen from the mouths of children who are living in deep poverty. And I think it should stop, thank you.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Frank Mecca: thank you mr. chair. frank frank mecca with the county welfare directors, again. issue three reflects two proposals that we're putting before you. the first relates to the calworks single allocation, which is the term for basically the funding that counties receive to administer the program, both eligibility and welfare to work services. the governor's budget proposes a reduction in calworks single allocation of $198 million. that is on top of a $160 million cut in the current year. from a percentage standpoint over 2 years, that is about a 20% reduction in the funds the counties have to administer the program. now that caseload reduction was driven by the currently employed budgeting methodology. it wasn't a decision other than the product of a methodology. and it's the product of a methodology that is flawed. and basically, we have a situation where in relatively stable times, the caseload goes up, counties get more money, that makes sense. caseload comes down, counties get less money, that makes sense. there's some relationship between caseload and funding. but in times of rapid economic expansion, when caseloads drop significantly, the budgeting methodology produces such a large drop that it takes us below our basic fixed cost to operate a program. because our program has variable costs that we can affect over time, but we've got fixed costs. if you've got 100 people on the caseload, or 1,000 people on the caseload, you've got some degree of fixed cost. whether the economy's great or not great, people still apply, and eligibility workers still interact with applicants. and so on the converse side when the economy tanks and the caseload increases rapidly, the budgeting formula conversely provides a lot more money. more money than we typically can spend and we end up not spending it and giving some back. and so, this is not just a methodological problem for us. a 20% reduction over 2 years actually will do extreme damage to the welfare-to-work infrastructure. that's the most scalable, the most variable, and the less fixed part of our operation. that's employment services, subsidized employment, etc., that we're going to have an extremely difficult time delivering services that clients need to move to work. it also puts us in a position where we so degrade the infrastructure that when we hit the next downturn and people start flooding our doors, we don't have the capacity to serve them. and then we're in this bloom and bust cycle, ramp up, ramp down. and so what we're asking most importantly to avoid the damage to clients in the budget year is that you maintain the funding level in the single allocation. don't grow it, don't reduce it, but just maintain it for a one time solution. and then ask the department to work with the counties and advocates on a budgeting methodology that makes more sense. clearly, case loaded a factor. but we have to figure out a way to avoid boom and bust cycles, and ideally think about the types of activities we want to incentivize perhaps in the budgeting methodology. and so we would request that a maintenance of the funding. we would envision trailer bill language where the administration, the legislature, the counties and the advocates get together and decide what are the high priority welfare to work activities we want to see funded. and so this wouldn't necessarily be just the single allocation. it would be money targeted to specific types of activities that we all agree are the high priority big bang for the buck activities to help people get to work. and then come back to you next year with the new budgeting methodology.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Herald: Mr. Chair, once again Mike Herald with The Western Center on Law and Poverty. And just very briefly, on the issue that Mr. Mecca just raised with you. We support much of the proposal of the County Welfare Directors Association on this. We do think a maintenance of the current single allocation is an important consideration. And I would just note this historically again, I'm sorry to be the history Professor today, when we did have the hit of the Great Recession. The State of California was able to massively expand its CalWORKS programs, its food stamp delivery programs, in a way where we were able to do it instantaneously. As our clients needed help, the counties were there and able to provide that. I recall that at one point we added more CalWORKS cases in an 18 month period than any other state's entire TANF population. That was just our addition, and that's because of the capacity of the counties to manage that flow. So it's a very important issue and one that we look forward to working with the Committee on. I'm here mostly though because I want to discuss the issues around performance measures and indicators. And as I sort of touched on in the prior session, we have been in a regime now for 20 years where the major thing that this program is measured on is the federal work participation rate. As Mr Bland described earlier, states are required to get 50% of their recipients meeting the work participation rate. We have just come through a period where the state has gone through some corrective compliance. Thankfully, we have all worked together to correct it. But I would say that there's broad concurrence, I think, nationally, I think among many of us in this room, that as a measure, it really is really more of a process measure. I think Mr. Bland described it in a hearing in the other chamber a few weeks ago as a busyness measure, which I completely concur with. And it is, but it is not the only way that we can do this program. The State of Minnesota for example has found ways to meet the federal work participation measure and, at the same time, adopt performance measures based on client outcomes. And we think this is something that the state should be seriously considering moving towards. So that we're beginning to measure the things that we know. We know so much more now after 20 years about what works. One of the things that we know that works is that employment is absolutely crucial. We must get people their GEDs. The more we get people into some community college education, the greater the likelihood that they're going to be employed going forward. We all know this from our own experience that education is the key to moving forward. Unfortunately, we have a program that's completely designed around work first. And that has been sort of the incentive for counties to work on over the last 20 years. So we are recommending to the Legislature this year that we form a work group that would create a series of measures that would focus on these things that really will lift up participants outcomes. We have a couple of recommendations, we think much of these needs to be designed within a work group process that's very detail oriented. We would encourage it not to be too focused on looking at process measures, we think it really ought to be focused on the things really impact people. We think that perhaps the Legislature should consider whether some financial incentives should be rewarded to counties which do a good job of improving or meeting certain target goals that we might establish. Now we would not encourage the state to adopt any penalties. That potentially harms our clients. If counties lose funding because they don't mean certain targets, that means there's less services and the ability to assist our clients at the local level. But thinking about ways in which we could provide incentives to counties that do a good job of improving. Or meeting baseline targets is something we would urge you to consider. We would also encourage the Legislature to consider whether they would want a neutral third party, or fourth party as it may be, to help assist in the staffing and the development of these proposals. I would argue that there are distinct interests at play here, and no offense at all to our colleagues at the Department of Social Services or at the county welfare director's. We all have interests that we need to support and work on. And it may be beneficial if we had an independent party that was actually sort of leading the staff into the work and bringing the group together to make sure the interest of all parties were being considered. Without one party kind of having an unfair advantage in the development and the satisfaction of those interest. And we're not, we provided the Committee a list of issues that we think are really important to consider, certainly measuring educational attainment and outcomes. How many people received mental health services, how many people receiving domestic violence services. Those are all really important, and we gave you a list. We think those can be adopted within the workgroup process. But we would say, going back to our prior panel, the number one outcome that we must measure is the reduction in deep poverty among our families. We must establish goals that push the counties and the state towards eliminating deep poverty in our state. So at the same time that we're asking the Legislature to embrace and move forward funding grants, so we get all families out of deep poverty. We need to be pushing the state and the counties towards those same goals by measuring them, and making that a high priority outcome measure that we do. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 123, 'end': 128, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1325, 'end': 1330, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1775, 'end': 1780, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Frank Mecca: mr. å , if i may. frank frank mecca with cwda, there's a good deal of alignment between what mr. herald just mentioned and a proposal that we've presented the committee for the adoption of outcomes and accountability system. that starts with the creation and the identification of outcome measures. we've suggested the adoption of trailer bill language that models a calworks outcomes and accountability system after the highly successful child welfare outcomes and accountability system that is currently in place. that was put in place by ab 636, by then-assemblyman darrell steinberg. under that system, the state and the counties and advocates identified what we want to achieve. and mike's right, other than the federal wpr, we do not have a codified set of outcomes in this program. there's a lot of different ideas and some alignment and some disalignment, but we've never said okay counties in this state, this is what we want from you. so if educational attainment is an outcome that's desirable, it's not codified anywhere. if partial participation is important, that's not a goal that we've said anywhere. and so in the ab 636 model that we would recommend replicating for calworks, we not only established what those outcomes are and we identify the ways that we would actually measure them. we require the counties to use that information for purposes of self assessment and self improvement planning. and i think this is a really critical aspect of the child welfare program, so we have publically available transparent data on an uc berkeley website. by county every quarter that tells how every county is doing on every measure. we have a requirement that every three years the counties get with local stakeholders and assess how they're doing. and based on that self assessment, develop self improvement plans that then the county monitors its success with. and then we envision a situation where, through the provision of technical assistance, peer review, and as a final sort of, if everything else isn't working, formal corrective action. the state engages the county in how they're doing. this process of continuous quality improvement driven by clear outcomes, and transparent self-assessment and self-improvement made a huge difference in the child welfare program. and our members are excited about the prospects for what it can do for improving the calworks program, as well. so, we're actually recommending the adoption of trailer bill language that would require the department to create the work group, as mr. harold indicated. to put the elements of this outcomes and accountability system in place.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 5, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 18, 'end': 29, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 97, 'end': 103, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 569, 'end': 586, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 688, 'end': 692, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2538, 'end': 2544, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Department of Finance: fundamentally, yes. when we developed the current methodology, it was sort of in response to coming just sort of starting to try to recover from the deep recession, huge case loads. we were trying to figure out simply a mechanism for how to get support of services and operational services into the hands of counties. if i were sort of to redesign a system, i think i would look along the lines of some sort of stop-loss, stop-gain corridor. obviously, that's something that we'd have to work with our colleagues in the department frank of finance as well as all of the stakeholders. but it having been in the situation where you're sort of trying to chase the trends and not being able to either dismount or mount at right times. some mechanism that softens that is desirable.
[]
Department of Finance: Department of Finance, Tyler Woods. I would say that finance is definitely open to ongoing discussions to evaluate a revision in the single allocation methodology. But does not support a related augmentation at this time. But to the extent that becomes a legislative priority we're more than happy to work with the Legislature.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 34, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kevin Aslanian: Kevin Aslanian, Coalition of California Welfare Rights Organizations. We support the proposals that have been submitted. Regarding self-assessment, I think self-assessment is fine. But we also need to look at the data. Currently 50% of the people participating in Welfare To Work, do not get transportation. Many people do not get child care, many do not get ancillary services. So, we need data to find out what's happening. Self-assessment alone would not produce any benefit for our clients. We could look at the self assessment plus the data to see how many people met the various milestones that we're going to agree to, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Bartholow: Thank you Mr. Chair and Members of the Committee. Jessica Bartholow with the Western Center on Law and Poverty in support of this proposal. What we loved most about this proposal is it embraces the educational goals of the program and acknowledges that education is paramount in the building the path out of poverty. Remember that the path out of poverty is built by the people who are exiting poverty. So often times we talk about people being lifted out of poverty by programs and that just isn't the case. Having experienced it myself, nobody comes along and lifts you out of poverty, you climb, you scratch, you bite sometimes, you cry and you, yourself, lift yourself, walk yourself, run yourself out of poverty. And most people that do that, they do that through education. First through a high school degree then through a college degree. This proposal, it will support people who have enrolled in the program. And also give them something to drive towards. One of the things I like the most about this proposal is it allows us to kind of reset the place and the way in which we talk to people who are in the CalWORKS program about a high school degree. And so often that conversation starts with the acknowledgement of the deficit. You don't have a high school degree. What do we do about that? You need a high school degree. And sometimes it can feel to people that it's preaching, it's rather than coaching. I believe that this proposal along with other changes in the program can help the recipients feel more as though they're being coached and supported into this opportunity. And it comes along with the support for the services in the community colleges, where they can receive the services. So not just driving people to that location, but also making sure that when they get there there's somebody ready to catch them. For these reasons we support this proposal grateful to the minority leader for bring It forward and for just support.
[{'start': 50, 'end': 67, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Breanne Holland: breanne with the california community college calworks association and american river college. thank you for the oppurtunity to speak in support of this bill. the calworks officers at the local level in terms of the bureaus are predominantly work first. participants are pushed to find jobs, and as one of my students testified in the policy committee, not sustainable careers. this leads to a cycle of barely scraping by and then back to aid over and over. education provides a more sustainable path. the more education an individual has, the lower the corresponding unemployment rate and the higher the median income. providing additional support to the participants pursuing education in the form of an educational incentive changes the tone of the calworks program. it says to our participants we want to invest in your self sufficiency and sustainability. providing additional funding to adult education in the form of promoting the high school diplomas or equivalent and community college programs in support of that goal, self sufficiency and sustainability provides for more robust programs and offerings to increase the success of our students in shorter periods of time. i was also hoping to introduce one of my students. her name is jessica. yes, it's a great name. her name is jessica taylor, and she unfortunately had to leave to pick up her youngest, a six year old. but she did write down what she'd like me to say, so i'd like to read it for you. hello, my name is jessica taylor. i will be graduating on may 17th of this year. i am a first generation college student. i come from a long line of thieves and labourers. growing up, my family was so poor we would eat beans for a week. so when it came time for me to go back to school, nobody in my family could help. the calworks program gave me so much. it gave me somewhere to go and ask, what do i do next, how do i do it, and where do i go? calworks had workshops available to assist me in learning to market myself and my skills in a desirable way. one of my favorite programs was the book lending library. this program was not available when my husband was a student just before me. because of that, we went in to debt with student loans. he has his aa now, but at what cost? luckily, i did not have to further our debt because of textbook costs. other programs such as the gas cards and meal vouchers have made an unbelievable difference. i had to miss tests and homework because of not having a way to school. i have had to go all day at school with no food in my stomach or backpack. these programs made the difference in my ability to focus, achieve, try and succeed. before i had calworks, i had a gpa of 2.3 to 3.0 because of missing school, no gas to have to pay attention. with the help of calworks book lending library food voucher, gpa gas awards, as well as emotional support, i had a 4.0 for five semesters, and i'm graduating with highest honors. the calworks workshops taught me how to look better to employers. because of calworks my husband works for the state, and i am graduating with a 4.0 gpa. i know have a federal job. she's now a mail lady and walks 17 miles a day, and is very proud of that. and we are moving out of the bad neighborhood where shootings happen on every other week. thank you, jessica.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1244, 'end': 1251, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1289, 'end': 1303, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1481, 'end': 1495, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3288, 'end': 3295, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kevin Aslanian: yeah again, kevin department aslanian coalition california welfare rights organizations. this is a great proposal, it actually gives people positive incentives to do the right thing, the whole welfare system is designed with the negativity. the only issue that we have with this proposal is that woman and calworks parents who go to college, good education to be the heroes. because they don't go there to have fun. they go there for one purpose, to become self-sufficient. many of them today are being sanctioned, because they went to college, and because they didn't go to job club, they went to college, they're being sanctioned. that means that their grant goes down every month from $577 a month down to $350 a month. so we will suggest that even they should get these incentives because they're going to college, and they're trying harder. and they're sacrificing a lot to become self-sufficient. thank you.
[{'start': 12, 'end': 17, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Ryan Woolsey: if i could just add, ryan kevin woolsey with the lao. we prepared the estimate that's referenced in the agenda about a year ago. inez, mr mays mentioned, there is a lot of uncertainty here. it's not even actually completely clear how many calworks recipients complete highschool diplomas, or geds, during the year, so there's a lot of uncertainty. there could be a range. in addition, though, we haven't revisited this to look at any changes, or evolutions, in the proposal since that time. so, just want to underscore that there's a lot of uncertainty here.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 129, 'end': 133, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 138, 'end': 142, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michelle Silvervenski: okay. thank you. i'm michelle ryan silvervenski, children's defense fund california. and really excited to be here on behalf of a number of advocates to speak in support of a new voluntary home visiting program within the calworks program, which i think is going to be a really innovative program to address some of the issues that we've been talking about today. and i want to deeply thank you for your leadership, mr chair, on this issue. as we've spoken about, a deep, deep child poverty has a traumatic effect on children throughout the course of their life. and we know from the research that early childhood is a critical period of brain development, and poverty during that period of time can be particularly detrimental. the universal challenges of new parenthood are compounded, really, by deep poverty and families that are on the calworks program, families that are living in deep poverty, really need additional supports during that challenging time. and what we know from a huge amount of research is that voluntary home visiting programs are a proven solution for promoting child health, strengthening parenting and building family self sufficiency. and through planned visits, trained professionals can provide pregnant women or parents of very young children, with a range of supports to meet those families particular needs. which can promote preventative health and prenatal practices, coaching parents on how best to care for their babies in supporting their early learning, and connecting those families to really important services. so on behalf of children's defense fund, black women for wellness, western center on law and poverty, the california welfare directors association and others, we propose funding up to $100 million for a new, voluntary, early home visiting program within calworks for pregnant women and parents of very young children served in calworks. and this budget allocation would allow county human services agencies to partner with local programs, and we'll hear about one of those programs in a bit, to provide that voluntary home visiting services to pregnant women and parents of young children. and i just want to highlight, briefly, i think your agenda does a really good job at highlighting what the research shows about the benefits of home visiting, but we're really looking at significant amounts of long term impact from this program. home visiting is one of the most rigorously studied programs and interventions that we have and we see both short and long term impacts on both the child and the parent. so, we see, from home visiting programs, better maternal and child health outcomes, reduced child abuse and neglect, improved quality of parent child interactions. and then, in the long term, as a result of that, children are healthier and more successful in school and less likely to have behavioral problems as they get older. and then, on the parents side, we also see a significant impact in increasing families economic self sufficiency. and, ultimately, high quality early home visiting programs can produce a substantial return on investment. so really, thank you again for your leadership. and are happy to have here with us people who can speak to some of the impacts that that has had directly on parents and families.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dawn Arlt: my name is dawn michelle arlt, and i'm a contracts analyst with first 5 san joaquin and creator of our calworks home visitation pilot program. we are in collaboration with the san joaquin county human service agency, and first 5 san joaquin facilitates that initiative in our county. so in the first six months that we've had it, we began on july 1st, 2016. our first year will close on june 30th, 2017. but we did do an analysis of the first six months of the program. what we do is weekly home visitation program, that offers job search, job readiness, parent assistance through the form of education workshops. we provide literacy services, health education, financial planning. as well as screenings for early developmental disabilities, and delays and referrals for community services that may be needed. during the first 6 months, we looked at the first 100 families that were served in the program. 42% of those families, 42 of them are now employed. 92% of them reported that they know how to properly seek employment, and have a current up to date resume. as well as, i think, one of the biggest highlights was, that 75% of the parents reported that they now read to their children at least five day a week. which was only 23% when we began. so i think statistics are wonderful, although it doesn't speak to the program as much as actual people who have participated in it. so this is erica cobigan and she is going to share her experience with the calhelp program.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1394, 'end': 1407, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Erica Cobigan: So, good afternoon, I'm sorry. My name is Erica Cobigan and, as Dawn said, I was one of the very first participants. It hugely changed my life, mine and my children. The home visiting program came inside my home and saw life from a whole different scope. I was a teen pregnant person at 16, I'm 27 now, but I didn't know much. I didn't then and I still didn't know it now. And my son he's three in July, so when they started this program here, when I heard about it I'm like yeah, for sure, sign me up, because I don't quite know how to go about raising or what's best for him, but I want best. So, yeah, I'm all for it. So they came and,  - I didn't know that, I just thought he was a late bloomer, he wasn't speaking. I wasn't aware that he had to be verbal. He said a few mom, dad, or sister, or what not, but not nothing significant. So as the home visitor came on the visits, she pointed out, she addressed it to me, she's like, by the way, you might just want to look into it. And sure enough, so I took it to the pediatrician. So along with that, other issues we were dealing with, other issue is home, which is my son got a screen for autism, which there wasn't a problem, so I was glad that it wasn't going to be that. But, by far, it was actually a little worse. I had been in my home, although I would go to my CalWORKS meetings or what-not, I was still dealing with something at home, more of an emotional issues, and that's what was taking a toll on my son, myself and my daughter. I was in a domestic situation, so more like my son was experiencing trauma, and I knew it was a problem, but I just didn't know how to go about making it better, but with this program and the people that I've met alongside of that, have made all the difference. My son now is going to be three. He's fully verbal and I'm in a much better emotional state. I'm pretty much ready for work. And it's just been great all in all. And I have the people [..] come to my home, things could probably could have just gotten worse. So I appreciate you hear my story and I hope that other people, too, can have the opportunity to have better quality of life. Because in the end that's what life's about. Thank you.
[{'start': 42, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 64, 'end': 68, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Monique Ramos: Good afternoon, Monique Ramos on behalf of First Five LA. We'd like to align our comments with the Association, and just point out we're actually the largest county funder of home visiting in the country. So really see the value out of this program, thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Frank Mecca: Thank you, Mr. Chair. Frank Mecca with CWDA, and our members strongly support this cost effective investment.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jessica Bartholow: thank you, jessica with the western center on law&poverty. thank you for sharing your story and we urge your support of this measure.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Frank Mecca: Thank you, Mr. Chair. Frank Mecca with the County Welfare Directors Association in very strong support of this proposal, and greatly appreciate Mr. Maienschein and Mr. Santiago's sponsorship of the proposal. Our members work hard to keep CalWORKS families from being homeless and to help rehouse people who are. The daily shelter care rate has not been raised in years. And it really means in many places there are no shelters that will take $65 a night. And so getting people off the street and into a temporary safe shelter is often the first step to getting people more permanently housed. And if we don't effectively have a reasonable opportunity to put people in temporary shelters, sometimes we lose them, and we lose their children as well. And so this is a really important proposal in our effort to stop the shockingly high rates of homelessness among families. The story Mr. Lightbourn talked about at the outset of this hearing was of a person at Mr. Maienschein's county who the county was able to get housed. And from that standpoint, was able to get employment. And we want more success stories like that. And raising the shelter care rate and eliminating the requirement that the days be used consecutively will really help.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 148, 'end': 159, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 168, 'end': 176, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 885, 'end': 895, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 962, 'end': 973, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kevin Aslanian: Kevin Aslanian, Coalition of California Lawful Rights Organization, in strong support of this proposal. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Herald: Mr. Chair, Mike Herald with the Western Center of Law&Poverty. We also support this proposal. Last year we were able to make some changes, some long overdue changes, on the once in a lifetime policy to the homeless assistance program. This would be another step forward, and I'm especially grateful to Mr. Maienschein's proposal to extend the proposal out for people exiting the child welfare and foster care programs, very important and significant change.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 306, 'end': 317, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jessica Bartholow: thank you, mr. chair and members. jessica with the western center on law and poverty, but also this time as a board member of the national diaper bank network. we're here to let you know that we are in support of assemblymember lorena gonzalez fletcher's proposal. to provide a quantity of diapers reasonably necessary for the time a participant in calworks has an infant or toddler up to three years old, and the time they spend in childcare. as you know the calworks program was established 20 years ago to protect children, provide assistance to families so that children could be cared for in their home and support parents as they secure work or prepare for work, or reduce barriers for work. every non-exempt calwork adult recipient must participate in welfare to work services. this means that while they're participating in welfare to work, their children must be in child care. state law also provides that necessary supportive services shall be available to every participant in order to be assigned, or to accept employment. supportive services offered are currently listed as child care, transportation cost, mental health services, substance abuse, domestic abuse services and ancillary expenses. this budget request is to make sure that diapers are included in the resources that these families receive. as a reminder, the current maximum calworks grant for a family of three when a parent is complying with welfare to work requirements is just 44% of the federal poverty line. and when children live in deep poverty, as you heard in prior testimony, they can endure great hardships that can impair their future ability to thrive, to be successful and to live happy lives. one of the reasons that deep poverty is so impactful is because children live without their basic needs being met. and this leads to toxic stress. this impacts not only the child but also the parent, leading to maternal depression very often. part of the way in which maternal depression happens is because the parent unable to meet the basic needs of a child is depressed. and we can understand that, all of us who've been parents. when a family is unable to afford the 8 to 12 diapers needed daily for an infant, cue baby. uh-huh, good job. see, she waved. good baby. they simply use fewer diapers. we've heard testimony at western center on law and poverty, but also through the national diaper bank network that families will sometimes take a urinated diaper and hang it to dry so they can use later. they leave their babies in wet diapers because they don't have enough to change them. and this not only makes the baby uncomfortable, and unhappy. but, also leads to pain, suffering, to sores, to infections, to rashes, and to unnecessary visits to the doctor. poor children already have so many increased likelihoods to make them ill, and they experience illness more often than other children that aren't poor. and unmet diaper needs lead to increase in illness and also undermine a significant tool to help when illness comes, when a child is sick, diarrhea and increased urination, they lead to an increase need for additional diapers. so unmet diaper needs not only impacts the physical health of the child, but also the mental health of the family and the likelihood that the family will exit poverty. because in most child care facilities, in order to drop a child off to attend to your welfare to work, to your job training, to your education or to your employment that's still low-wage enough for you to participate in calworks, you need diapers. most facilities request that a day's worth of diapers is dropped off. and not having them means that your child will not be able to attend. you won't be able to attend to your employment and the child won't benefit from the great many ways that early childhood experience can help them in their future years. so for all of these reasons, we're in support of this proposal. we're so grateful it's been brought to this committee. and with that, i'd like to turn it over to the real experts on unmet child needs.
[{'start': 34, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 228, 'end': 252, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nancy Cano: good afternoon, my name is nancy, i'm from sacramento. as of this month, i am participating in the calworks welfare to work program. i am here today with cielo, my five month old daughter to tell you what it's like to need diapers. my work activity is attending classes so i could become a medical assistant. it is very important for me to join the welfare to work program so i can have access to child care that is near my classes. and so recently i worked at a restaurant in midtown, but i didn't get child care for my two year old through a center because i was not in welfare to work. and i was paying for my own child care. my mom helped me out as much she could, but it wasn't enough to keep all my shifts, so i had to leave the job. and while she was watching my kids, i had to purchase diapers for at home and also at her house. so it was double the cost, and now with two children who need diapers for child care, diapers are even more expensive, i only receive $600 a month. and paying rent, that only leaves about $200 for diapers and everything else. fortunately, i can by larger boxes with better prices. but it's still $150 to $200 per month to have enough diapers for both of my children. there have been days where we don't have enough diapers, so they need to wear them a little longer. it's so stressful experience for all of us, including me as their mom, when my baby needs diapers and i only have a few left. a few times we ran out, and i have used the traditional type of cloth diaper. they don't work as well though. so we're stuck inside the house when that happens. i take parenting classes to stay involved at the sacramento food bank and family services. they are a part of the diaper network, and i can get extra packages of diapers through them. i've also gone to an emergency packs of 10 diapers before from a different nonprofit nearby called the well springs women's center. i am glad we live near these organizations and that soon i'll be able to get a better job. until i finish my classes, i'm able to work full time as a medical assistant. i need to make sure i have enough diapers for both cielo and joshua so they can use the daycare by my school. i hope that diapers or something calworks can also help us with soon. i don't know what would happen if i had to miss class because of something like running out of diapers. thank you for the time to tell our story.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 154, 'end': 159, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2127, 'end': 2132, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2137, 'end': 2143, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kevin Aslanian: Kevin Aslanian, Coalition of California Welfare Rights Organizations, strong support, thank you. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Benito Delgado-Olson: good afternoon, delgado-olson, supplybank.org. we're very grateful to the assemblymember and particularly our youngest participant, today's testimony. everything they've said is true, we operate more than 100 diaper distribution locations now throughout the state of california. one thing i did want to point out, because i know this is a numbers committee. there's over 40,000, according to the office of statewide health planning and development, emergency room and inpatient visits every single year for diaper rash, urinary tract infections etc. those cost a lot of money, particularly the er visits. there might be something that you look at when you're evaluating the merits of this proposal. the other thing i would just point out is, part of another program we're working on right now. we've done focus groups of current calworks clients all across california. and when you qualify those for parents of a zero to three year old, without question, the number one need is diapers and without exception. and that's with a whole lot of participants. it's diapers, baby wipes, and diaper creams. so, again, strong support of this proposal. thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kathy Musberg: Chair members, Kathy Musberger with the California Association of Food Banks. We want to go on record, certainly continuing our support on this. I think what we've heard here today and just heard from the last gentleman's testimony is that this is a commodity people can't go without with children. And it's very important for both work and child care. And we do know at the food banks that people with limited resources end up spending a lot of money on diapers. And that if we could alleviate some of that, it would be incredibly helpful for them sort of maintaining their resources throughout the rest of the month for food and other things. So we support this, and we do hope that there'll be some sort of. We appreciate the work, the stakeholder groups. We hope some resolution will be coming soon. Thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 30, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michele Stillwell-Parvensky: michele dawn stillwell-parvensky, children's defense fund california in strong support of this proposal. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tyler Woods: Department of Finance, Tyler Woods, I would say finance hasn't received any data yet that indicates counties can't access these clients in a timely manner. But we're open to receiving any of that data that might be out there.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Carroll: Mr. Chair, Mike Carroll with the Western Center of Law and Poverty. We would just note that in recent years with the implementation of the OCAT system, we are getting more requests than ever. We are identifying more children and families than ever who need mental health services. So to the degree to which we're having a difficulty finding assessments, getting those assessments done promptly, that would seem to be reason enough for us to consider this proposal. So we would strongly encourage your consideration.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Aslanian: do the. that's okay. kevin michele aslanian, california wildlife organization in support. thank you. thank you.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Aslanian: good afternoon, aslanian, coalition of california welfare rights organizations. and i have some handouts. and this is the education proposal and we've been looking at this for many years, and right now the industry based economy is dying and a new industry that we have is the knowledge based economy. and we have to prepare our folks for the knowledge based economy, and the only way you can do that is by allowing people have us to get a secondary education. so under this proposal, we believe that anyone who is going to college full time, making satisfactory progress in a publicly funded educational entity, then they should be able to continue to go to college because they are getting counseling services, and they are getting all the benefits of this guidance that they need. the vans study has revealed that the number of folks who want to go to college has been decreased and we have on page three, we have a chart showing that it used to be 10%. today, it's about 5%. the knowledge based economy would yield people income, and we have a chart over here that shows like with the high school diploma, you would get about $700 more, some college would be $750, associate with an aa, you would get 800 more. your unemployment rate would go down. so there's a lot of benefits for folks who are going to college and get a degree. in fact it really doesn't matter what kind of a degree you get. if you get aa or ba in basket weaving, or you get it in engineering. as long as you have an aa, you could apply for whole bunch of different jobs. it just opens up a whole host of doors. right now we have a lot of families, like i've testified before, who are going to college and being sanctioned. so this will basically unsanction those folks and allow them to continue to go to college without living in deep, deep, deep poverty. the proposal, we've also had a lot of complaints from community colleges, that people sign up for college even if the steps approved by the county welfare department, they don't get their books on time and they have to drop out of school. so this proposal will say that 50 days before the beginning of the semester we get a standard allowance of $500 to buy your books and if you want to claim actual expenses you can put in a claim for that. it also deals with the child care problem in that people at the beginning of the semester could sign at the station as to what their hours are, so they could get childcare rather than waiting for the college to come up with a piece of paper, taking that to the school, and then people end up dropping out of school because they don't have college. finally, what we're proposing is that after one year anybody who's not meeting the wpr, they're being moved out caseload, so will not impact the work practice of the wpr. so that's our first proposal. should we ask, should i go on for the next one? okay thank you. so for the next one i have some more, next ones. hello? how? how? hi. yeah, that's okay. sure. so to increase the month from 48 to 60 months, which happened in 2009 when we took a whole bunch of drastic cuts because of the recession. california is one of the handful states right now that has 48 months. most states are 60 months. the little chart over here shows all the red states that have 60 months. the cost over here would be minimal, for fy 17-18 would be $6 million, and ongoing would be about $30 million or $33 million. according to children's defense fund, this causes high child poverty and impacts minorities. our proposal is to restore the additional 12 months to the safety net when the law goes into effect. parents during the 12 month period can volunteer to participate in the welfare to work program and it will not effect the wpr because they will always be in the safety net families. and our last proposal is the sanction proposal. if i can find it, okay, so in 2012 we found out from dss that there were 3,331 families who were being sanctioned, even though they were meeting the work participation rates. in meeting the work participation rates, means that you have to, 50% of the caseload has to do this. there are people who are going to college, the first year you meet the wpr. but because they're going to college in the first year, they didn't go to job club, they get sanctioned. so those people, and then also people who are working also get sanctioned. so what we're asking for is a simple policy saying anybody who is willing to work participation rates shall not be sanctioned. we would be glad to work with a department to come up with an implementation to make sure this works. but we just don't think anybody who's reading the work participation rates should be sanctioned, have their grant go down from $577 down to 350 a month with that.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 788, 'end': 792, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Todd Bland: Again Todd Bland for the department on a couple of the proposals. On the 48 month clock to 60, the various proposals that I've seen have all had higher cost than these. I'm not sure if this is a much narrower proposal that I'm less familiar with. On that, we would just say, it's just a matter of cost. We recognize the merits of the policy. With respect to sanction alleviation, we agree in principle with Mr. Aslanian in that those that are meeting a few WPR, should not be sanctioned. The question is what are the best ways to do that and to do that for all the clients? Mr. Aslanian's proposal seems to focus a little bit on cases that show up in the sample. We do a sample to comply with WPR and through that we do find a certain number of cases like this. And when you project that out you get the numbers that he just mentioned. We think potentially better approaches are to do what San Bernardino county does, which is essentially when they learn that a client is meeting, they automatically send them a participation plan, once they sign that that puts them in compliance. There's also some promising practices in Humboldt County and Monterey, having a welfare to work. Sort of that side of the House, the employment counselor, attend as well. We are working on an all-county letter with best practices that we're hoping to issue next month. Again, we agree in principle. We would just say details matter.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 411, 'end': 419, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 578, 'end': 586, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mike Carol: Mr. Chair, Mike Carol again with the Western Center on Law & Poverty. We fully concur with the reestablishment of a 16 month time clock. There was no empirical evidence at the time that this change was made, when the policy was made, that this was necessary and in fact, we have contrary data, which shows that actually since the implementation of the TANF program, most people actually exit the program within 24 months as it is. So shortening the time limit really was arbitrary and harm families who needed the additional time and we would strongly encourage that. And obviously we hear the dialog between the department, Mr. Aslanian and the issues around sanctions and the people who are meeting the work rate. To us this is sort of a no brainer and we would encourage the Legislature to adopt the policy.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 629, 'end': 637, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Frank Mecca: Thank you, Mr Chair, Frank Mecca in support of the extension, restoration of the 16 month clock and also conceptually in favor of a policy, whereby people who meet the federal WPR aren't sanctioned. I agreed with Mr Bland, that figuring out the how is the important thing and I would point out that we don't currently have a reporting requirement on clients to tell us if they're working unless they're earning a sufficient amount to be over a threshold. And so if you have a situation where a client comes in, is not meeting the WPR, meets with the worker, is then assigned to go to an activity, but they get a job in the meantime. We don't necessarily know and we don't necessarily have a system that requires the client to tell us, and so without adding additional burdens to clients, figuring out ways to make sure that we find out those things so that people who are doing everything we want from them don't get penalized because of it, is the right thing to do we just have to figure out how.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 216, 'end': 221, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Todd Bland: I think you have OCAT. Do want to kick it off or no? I mean. Again, Todd Bland. The on point CalWORKS assessment. Sorry, the appraisal tool was a key feature of the AB 74 legislation, the early engagement strategies. I think the proposal before you is that, Mr. Mecca will describe that. We've always considered to be a strategic goal that essentially the functionality of OCAT, which is a standalone system that the county workers use. That that be embedded, interfaced, I'm not the right technical person, but the concept that essentially there shouldn't be dual entry. The systems should be able to work together, share information, share reporting, and do all that. That is a strategic goal for the department, to develop that as a shared service in this budget cycle, as the Governor's Budget was developed in January. We didn't feel we had the resources at this time, but it does remain a goal of ours.
[{'start': 68, 'end': 78, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 262, 'end': 267, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kevin Aslanian: Yeah, Kevin Aslanian with California Welfare Rights Organizations, we think there's a lot of information in OCAT that we have no idea. We're paying for it, but we have no idea what's in there and it would be nice to make that public. I'm not sure how we get there. But we would urge the Committee to try to do something to get it there, thank you.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tyler Woods: Tyler Woods, Department of Finance. Essentially in 17-18, in a nutshell, we got about 266 million additional 1991 realignment revenues. And as Mr. Bland just mentioned, current statutory language restrains our ability to put this funding into other parts of the CalWORKS program. This language will allow us to fund additional components of the CalWORKS Single Allocation beyond the grants.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 147, 'end': 152, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Gina Da Silva: good afternoon, mr. chair and members of the committee. gina kevin da silva with the california immigrant policy center. thank you for agendizing this issue today, and thank you to your staff for the ongoing discussions with advocates. three years ago, the one california program was established in the face of a growing need for qualified, culturally competent immigration services to increase access for legal protections and economic opportunity and i'm happy to report that three years later, the state's program is set to reach hundreds of thousands of californians and that california reports a continued increase in successful citizenship applications and daca applications. the program has also supported undocumented californians applications for more permanent access to immigration relief, including remedies for victims of crime and domestic violence. last year's $30 million investment has supported efforts, as you heard, to reduce the barriers for underserved and hard to reach populations. including the development of the api capacity project and building capacity for legal services in rural regions. we appreciate the continued investment of $50 million in the governor's proposed budget. however, the base line investment undercuts the capacity of this program at an emergency moment when need is at an all-time high. the one california program is a critical component of the comprehensive and strategic package of proposals to be heard today. it is a preventive measure to protect communities in our state against the devastating impacts of deportations by informing immigrants of their rights and supporting their successful achievement of affirmative relief, and or citizenship. the policies and rhetoric at the federal level have spread terror for immigrants and their loved ones. as non-citizen californians face deep insecurity, we have to ensure that community organizations they trust are adequately resourced to provide them the critical supports that they need. the program can absorb, and requires a $30 million investment, to do education outreach services that are ever evolving as federal immigration policy continues to change and immigrants are fearful to proactively seek services and they're also being displaced by increasing economic inequality. for funding legal services that connect undocumented californians to affirmative immigration remedies. for naturalization services to support our green card holders, the ultimate relief from deportation is citizenships. and most critically, expanding the api capacity project and capacity grants in rural regions. a recent survey of the san joaquin valley by fresno state shows that nearly half of the adults in the region worry that they, a family member, or a close friend could be deported and 63% of them cited the negative impact deportations will have on the region's economy. we need to continue a $30 million investment in the successful one california program to support a comprehensive strategy in the face of increasing detentions and deportations. thank you so much for this opportunity to speak and share the proposal. we urge your support for this issue moving forward, thank you.
[{'start': 56, 'end': 75, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Noel Palomo: mr chair, committee members, noel gina palomo, california rural legal assistance foundation. i have the pleasure to present a client testimony. my name is alexis buzz and until october of 2016, i was an undocumented immigrant for over 20 years and an undocumented student in higher education for six years. i have lived in the us since i arrived at the age of two. growing up, i always knew i wanted to attend college, and thanks to the support of my parents and mentors, my academic endeavors were consistently supported. even though i am now a green card holder and a us permanent resident, i will never forget the experiences of not being recognized as a human being in this country. i will never forget what it is like to have to grow up in a pesticide-ridden farm in an agricultural community to be safer, in quotes and isolated from any law or immigration enforcement, where my father toiled in the fields, and we still have issues with quality drinking water. i will never forget what it was like to work as hard as possible in school and sometimes in the fields with my father, as i attempted to be the first person in my family to both graduate from high school and attend a university, with the knowledge that i literally had no financial support or protection even if i were to be admitted. i will never forget what it was like to fear for my own safety and to always wonder if i may never see my parents ever again, in case they were apprehended and deported. i will never forget what it was like to graduate in the top 5% of my high school, and with honors from the space and engineering academy and to be admitted to the engineering programs at cal poly and uc san diego. i will never forget the sheer devastation of having to deny my admittance to college and consider leaving this country altogether moving back to mexico because i felt hated, hopeless, and depressed. i will never forget the sheer amount of time, energy, and effort it has taken me to apply and receive nearly 100 small scholarships to afford and finally be weeks away from graduating from uc san diego with a double major in ethnic studies and public health after over six years. words cannot describe how essential important having quality and free legal services and representation in my journey to becoming a permanent resident. had it not been for daca and for one california funding, i truly do not think i would have adjusted my status. the legal counseling and support i received for daca led my attorney to realize i was eligible for an adjustment of status. and because of the state funding could represent me free of charge. this grant has literally saved my life. and has opened borders for me to continue my community and better serve my family and serve my community. i am now better able to be involved in immigrant rights advocacy without fearing deportation. i'm now now better able to afford graduate school, and have access to more jobs and fellowships i otherwise would not have. i now have more resources to improve the quality of life for my family, and for years to come. this grant and these services changed the lives and saves families. and i personally know full well the impact it's had in my case. and for these reasons, i urge the california state legislature to continue funding such a vital program and to lead the nation in supporting our undocumented community across the state. at the end of the day, it is our moral duty and our responsibility to protect and support our undocumented community, respectfully submitted, alexis buzz. thank you.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 155, 'end': 166, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 3539, 'end': 3550, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Maya Ingram: ingram, legislative advocate with the aclu of california. we're here supporting the proposal today for deported veterans. this program would provide legal services to them and would focus on trying to find post-conviction relief or pardons and other paths for them to return to the country. i'm going to spend my time today discussing the situations of deported veterans and how they got to that place. i want to align myself with the comments of ron coleman at cipc on the economic impact of deportations, which is as relevent here. so non-citizens have been serving in our military since the american revolution, but their deportation is a relatively new occurence. and this has come from changes from federal law, which have mandated without judicial discretion the automatic deportation of lawful, permanent residents. that, combined with enhanced, increased immigration enforcement has led to their deportation. the us has likely deported thousands of veterans, both aging vietnam era veterans, and also newer service members. this results in their permanent separation from their families. we did a report where we interviewed almost 60 of these individuals to find out the facts of their cases and lives. we found that nearly all of them had spent decades in the country. as lprs, most of them have been brought here before age 10. nearly all left behind young citizen children who are suffering as a result of losing their parents. they all enlisted with clean or minor criminal records. almost all were discharged under honorable conditions, and their most common criminal convictions were nonviolent drug offenses. these offenses often resulted from their difficulties in transitioning back from service into the communities, and turning to drugs and other means as a way of coping with that hard transition. the hard truth here, is they were all eligible for citizenship during their service, but many tragically didn't realize what they had to do in the application process. many of them actually thought that by enlisting in the military, they automatically became citizens, because the military oath is almost identical to the naturalization oath. in some cases, the military actively provided misinformation to them about the pathways to citizenship through service. and for many of them, their naturalization files were lost or misplaced. also in the past, ice has failed to follow a 2004 memo that specifically dictated discretion in adjudicating deportation cases against veterans. and the military has refused to track the number of veterans placed in deportation proceedings. they lack counsel and for all those reasons that caitlin and ron presented in the last panel, this makes it very hard for them to present their cases. this budget proposal would provide great legal resources to them so those who do have paths to come back to this country can present their claims. just a few weeks ago, governor brown pardoned three of the individuals in our report who had honorably served in our military, and now potentially have paths forward to coming back to this country. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 447, 'end': 458, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2645, 'end': 2652, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2657, 'end': 2660, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2925, 'end': 2930, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Maya Ingram: ingram, legislative advocate with the aclu of california. we're here today in support of the assistance to immigrant counsel project. this project will prevent avoidable deportations by ensuring that criminal defenders in california have access to tools that they can use when advising their non-citizen clients about the immigration consequences of their case. they have this affirmative duty already under california law and the us constitution, but don't have the tools at their disposal to be both experts in criminal law and immigration law. under current immigration law, even a single misdemeanor conviction can result in a lawful permanent resident or person without status's automatic deportation. the trump administration has increasingly also been enhancing enforcement against people with criminal convictions. and that's why it is all the more important that their criminal defenders know the immigration consequences of that person's criminal case when advising them. this proposal is cost effective. there are almost 2,400 public defenders in this state and many other counties contract out those services. so rather than trying to make everyone a line expert in immigration law, it sets up a cost effective model. one portion is pairing individuals who are the in-house experts in public defender's offices, one of them, bernice espinoza from the sonoma county public defender's office is here to speak today, with nonprofits iorc and others who can really mentor them, get them the tools they need to be the go-to expert that can advise all the other deputies in their office. and the other proposal, part of the proposal is to provide training materials, and attorney development materials, because this is actually an active area of the law. there was just a decision at the end of march by the california supreme court that really reiterated that someone who's not advised of the immigration consequences can vacate their plea. so these resources would be used to keep people abreast to current developments, when those cases come out, do practice advisories to really tell them how they can use them and apply them to their clients. by doing this right at the outset, it'll also avoid potential court costs. we know that because this is an affirmative obligation, if you're not advised, you can come back into court and petition the court to vacate their plea, which then requires district attorneys to go back through cases, court to hear these petitions. so the costs are real, when we don't do this right at the outset, and that's why we're supporting and advancing this cost effective proposal.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1337, 'end': 1353, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Angie Junck: Great, my name is Angie Junck, and I'm an attorney with Immigrant Legal Resource Center. And for 30 years, we have been working with criminal defenders to ensure effective assistance of counsel to non-citizen defendants. And I just want to say a couple things. One is that they have a constitutional duty to do this, but it's so complex in this area that many of the offices are not able to meet that need without some resources at the state level. And so there is a great concern that the constitutional rights have not been met for many non-citizens across the state. Second thing I wanted to talk about is just really about the human impact, that not having criminal defenders be able to effectively represent immigrants has. And I wanted to say just in the 30 years that we've done it, we've seen the devastating impact on individuals, on families and communities as a result of this. And the impact of removing an individual from the United States goes way beyond just the individual him or herself, but goes to the families. And it's really created classes of children or society whose parents has been exiled, and in addition to the immediate economic impact of deporting a breadwinner on a child or young person, there are emotional and psychological consequences that we fear have yet to be sufficiently explored. And this includes US citizen children, many of whom have a foreign-born parent, that are now separated and have their family taken apart. And so we've really seen the tragic breaking up of families in a lot of these cases that we've personally advised over the years. And we've seen some of the impacts, you look at you see students, straight A students become C students. You see families losing their homes, you see families starting to require public assistance, there's costs on that. And you have children that just can't listen and they can't concentrate in school. One of the public defenders that we work with shared with us a case in which a mother requested that she speak with her daughter to explain the difference between death and deportation. And her father had been detained for over two years and would now be permanently deported to their home country. But she could not emotionally differentiate the result and her father's death. To her, they deliver the same results. And so, I think for us is we're really concerned that what is happening today is a public health crisis that we're not even beginning to see the impacts of for future generations. And unfortunately, the way that the immigration system works is there is very little due process and there is no representation. And so these are really extreme situations that are imposed as a result of many offenses. And if we are to continue to be a society that cares about punishment fitting the crime, these very real consequences must be taken into consideration during criminal proceedings at the front end and, where possible, avoided. And so for that reason, we're pushing this funding to strengthen effective assistance of counsel. And we see it as a really important step for the State of California, thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Aslanian: Good evening. Kevin Aslanian, Coalition of California Welfare Rights Organizations. We support all the advocate's proposals. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gina Desilva: Gina Desilva with the California Immigrant Policy Center. I'll speak to the proposals that me and my colleague did not already present on this immigrant project and deported veterans, and just align our comments with those of the panelists. And really thank the Assembly for their leadership in the past in advancing these types of proposals to support immigrant communities. And that we've really thought very intentionally about how this not only supports the state, but very critically, the rural communities as well. So thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Lisa Rodriguez: good evening members. lisa noel rodriguez with the guapa group on behalf of catholic charities. we are in support of issue 13. thank you for all your help.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gabriel Garcia: hi there, gabriel lisa garcia with the southeast asia resource action center. in regards to one california we definitely support it. we know that naturalization is the ultimate protection for our communities that came over as southeast asian refugees. many of them never received any educational resources or financial support to naturalize and matriculate to citizenship. it's not until now that we're seeing a tax at the federal level that they are actually realizing the need to obtain citizenship. and one california provides the resources to do that. in regards to deportation defense through due process, we definitely support this as well. we know that immigrants and refugees that do receive deportation defense during their dissension proceedings are five times as likely to win their cases than immigrants and refugees that do not. when that happens breadwinners can stay with their family, continue to provide for their family, contribute to their communities, and contribute to california's economy. for that reason we support these immigration defense proposals. thank you.
[{'start': 10, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sandra Palacios: Good evening. Sandra Palacios with the California Catholic Conference. And on behalf of the bishops here in California we strongly support all three proposals. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Berniece Espinoza: Berniece, I have a 16 year old pregnant girl in juvenile hall with an ICE hold. ICE wants to come and interview her. What do I do? My name's Berniece Espinoza, and I'm the Sonoma County Public Defenders in-house criminal immigration specialist. These are the calls that I receive. Last June there was a 16 year old girl, she had an ICE notification. Despite the fact that there are protections that prohibit the communication under welfare and institutions code 827 and 831, the juvenile hall communicated with ICE and let them know that my client was in custody. We were able to help her safely repatriate to her country, but if I was not there this wouldn't have happened. On my first day of work at the Sonoma County Public Defender's Office, my first case was an Eritrean citizen. He was a victim of torture in his home country and unable to deal with the trauma, had problems with his spouse and re-living some of that trauma with his spouse. Again, if I was not there, they would not have been able to plea to a greater penalty of strike in order to avoid certain immigration consequences to allow the client to remain in the country. We had a client who was at eight years old, came to this country, kicked out of his home the minute he outed himself as a gay man. He ended up having to live on an abandoned field in Sonoma County, where he raised some marijuana plants. This would've stopped him from being able to get DACA. But we were able to system on finding a just result where he was still punished, but being able to have a trespass and vandalism charge. Since being in Sonoma County for the last 15 months, we've identified 6 people who thought they were legal permanent residents, but were actually derivative citizens. They otherwise could have been removed from this country had they not been informed of this. But I didn't always have this skill set. You see after graduating law school I went to the public defenders office in Contra Costa County and then to Riverside. I did study immigration law, I did work for the Mexican American Legal Defense and Education Fund, and I did do an asylum representation as my first year in law school. I'm also the daughter of an immigrant, and these issues were very important to me. But I didn't know the impact or the seriousness of this until Garcia Martinez from the LA Public Defenders Office came to my office and explained that I have a constitutional obligation as a public defender to tell all of my non citizens how this is going to impact their lives. In 2012, my office was sued in Riverside for failing to advise. And at that time, I was asked to put together a program. It's because of groups like the Esperanza Immigrants Rights Project and the Immigrant Legal Resource Center that I was trained. It's this proposal that we're asking. For those of us who are line deputies, who even me caring as much as I wanted, I knew just enough information to hurt my clients than to help my clients. And I was making my office subject to liability of being sued again. While I was working in Riverside we identified seven people who were actual citizens with ICE holds. We did over 500 analysis. And we stopped the practice of probation calling ICE when kids would report to the probation officers. Not only would the kids be reported on, but entire families. As a public defender, I'm the last attorney most people will see. And for that reason, I ask you to please support the proposal for the immigrant, sorry, The Immigrant Council Project. The legislation has already passed penal code section 1016.2 and 1016.3, which protects our clients. But with this funding, you make sure that I and my fellow deputy public defenders are not subject to being found incompetent and failing to do our jobs under the sixth amendment, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 141, 'end': 158, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 2305, 'end': 2320, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Joseph Vigella: Hi, good afternoon. My name is Joseph Vigella on behalf of CHIRLA, the Coalition for Human Immigrant Rights, here in support of all the proposals put forward. Specifically, I would like to talk about One California. We've been a grantee of that program since it started. And one of the things that we've found is a pattern. A pattern in which those folks that come to our offices without the funding of One California, they will not be able to afford to apply for either DACA or citizenship. The other pattern that we found is that once they either became citizens or were granted DACA, their economic stability was very different. That means that most of them, their wages increase dramatically once they became DACA granted or citizens, citizenship. In regards to citizenship, what we saw is also not only the ability to transfer to better jobs. But also the ability to potentially buy new homes, even if they were all the programs that would qualify, other than if they were not citizens. And so I'm going to share through the sergeant a couple of testimonies that we had in regards to folks that have come to our offices and were given free legal assistance. And the pattern, like I say, that they told us is that without this funding, they will not be able to apply. Because they are low income, and many of them, they're just trying to make ends meet at the end of the day. Thank you.
[{'start': 31, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shermaine Share: Hi, good evening, Shermaine Share with the National Immigration Law Center. I'm here in support of all four proposals and particularly for the due process funding. Because it's critically important, as you've heard, that people do have attorneys when they're facing deportation. People have likened immigration law to the tax code in terms of being the most complex area of law. And it's extremely difficult, if not impossible, for somebody who's already in detention to gather evidence, present their research, develop their own case. Particularly if you factor in the fact that people might have language barriers and might be experiencing trauma, both from what happened in their home countries, as well as from the experience of detention. So it is very important that people are provided representation, so they have a fair day in court and also can have due process, thank you.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 27, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Santosh Seeram: good evening, mr. chair, santosh-santana representing the california asian and pacific islander budget partnership. and we're in strong support of the one california proposal, thank you.
[]
Joaquin Sotelo: Good evening, my name is Joaquin Sotelo. I am a United States Navy veteran, who is now facing deportation. I was, at an early age, brought from Sinaloa, Mexico at the age of nine. I lived here all my life. Due to a family conviction, I was incarcerated in prison for three years. I only did 6 months out of those three years. I did more time in a detention center. I did 18 months at a detention center. I was in Mesa Verde, from Mesa Verde, I went back to here, Rio Consumes. And I know what people live lives, and I know how that is like when you have the fear of deportation, and when you are by yourself, alone with no help, no legal help, no representation whatsoever. I've been there, I've seen their faces. I know what it feels like. I know their lives, what their lives is like. And that is not what a United States veteran should have gone through. But I'm going through it right now, as I speak to you. I ask that please, we do come in the due process, and all the other four options here. Because if it wasn't because of that, I would have still been in the detention center. A lawyer came into my life and put a smile on my face. Put a smile on my children's face. And put a reason for me to keep on living. Being in detention center is not easy. That is the worst nightmare. There is, a lot of pain, a lot of discrimination. There is a lot of anger, there is a lot of suffering, there is no medication whatsoever, not even for your teeth. If you break a bone, you're not going to go to the doctor right away. And there is no classification mentally for the ill either. They just throw you in a room like a dog, I've been there and I lived there. I ask please, support the due process and all the other four options. Thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andy Stone: hi, good afternoon. thanks for this opportunity. my name is name is andy gabriel stone, i'm here to represent pangaea legal services. we're a nonprofit legal services provider that works with immigrants, and deportation proceedings, and immigrant detention. we would like to urge you all to please support all four, in particular, due process. i'd like to mention the fact that almost 8,000 people are detained in california today. there's a huge need, the need is immediate, the need is urgent, the need is intense. and this proposal would provide support legal services for roughly 4,000. there's still much more work to be done, and we really look forward to continuing to push what's available and to support our communities and these trying times, thank you.
[{'start': 68, 'end': 86, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrew Medino: andrew of asian americans' advance in justice of california. just echoing the support of my colleagues in strong support of the proposals, advocate proposals under issue 13. thank you, sir.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 6, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sandy Valenciano: Hello, my name is Sandy Valenciano. I'm the statewide coordinator for California Immigrant Youth Justice Alliance. Also, in support of all four proposals, but specifically, I wanted to emphasize the due process removal defense service and immigration council project. We are an undocumented youth-led statewide organization from San Diego to Sonoma County. A lot of our youth are undocumented and have parents that are undocumented. But more specifically, actually, I wanted to highlight, I'm undocumented, my family's undocumented. We had the unfortunate event of last year, my cousin, majority of my family lives in Fresno. And unfortunately, we have local sheriffs facilitating deportations at a different level. And, like Fresno, that is one of the counties where the sheriff has the most open collaborations with ICE. And my cousin was detained. He was in jail, and he was actually supposed to be serving time in a rehabilitation home. And because they didn't have enough space for him, they actually booked him in the jail. And because he was booked in the jail, it happened to be the unfortunate situation where ICE happened to be by that day, at that time. And because of that, my cousin then was transferred to immigration custody. If it wasn't because obviously, I am more in knowledge of the system, we would've never been able to track my cousin. Because they kept guiding us and gearing us In different directions of where he was that he was not in the locator system where they're supposed to input his file because his name was spelled wrong. I ended up having to call different detention centers that I was aware of because I do this work to locate him and thankfully we were able to locate him and get him in touch with a visitation center that works there called Civic. But also, one of the biggest challenges for my family was that access to representation for my cousin. Because of the heavy costs for my family they weren't able to find representation soon enough. By the time they found representation, my cousin had completely felt exhausted of being in detention. He was in Adelanto detention. For those of you all that don't know, there have been two deaths in the past two months, in Adelanto detention centers. So it's not the best place to be. That forced my cousin to sign his own removal. If he was in the beginning, my cousin was actually a resident. If he had been advised of his immigration consequences when he was being convicted. This would have been avoided and also the representation. My uncle, his father actually had a stroke at the end of last year where they had told his family that he was going to die. And my cousin was not there to support his family at such a tough time. So this is very personal to me, and I hope you could support this.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Clara Long: hello, my name is clara. i'm with human rights watch. human rights watch is an international nonprofit that works in over 90 countries, including the united states. i focus on immigration in the united states, and i have to tell you we're here to support. i'm here to support the due process initiative because the lack of due process for immigrants especially detained immigrants, is a human rights crisis in the united states. california with 15% of the countries detained population can make a huge difference in changing that picture. i want to just pause and tell you what that picture looks like because as part of my job as a human rights observer, i have gone into immigration detention centers around the country including in arizona, louisiana, alabama and also california. and what desperation looks like is walking into a room of people who have signed up to speak with human rights observers and having all of them say can you help me? can you get this information out? what do i do with my case? what does this mean? can you look at these documents? you're a lawyer, aren't you? that's because there's no one else. there's literally no one else for people to turn to. last year, as part of a report that will actually be released next week about the abysmal medical care in immigration detention, i spent some time in hudson county detention center, which is in new jersey. and it holds people who are going to immigration court in new york where a program similar to this one is already in place. almost everybody in that detention center has lawyers. and i have to tell you, i walked into that detention center, and i said hi we're from human rights watch we're here to talk to you and people said hey. and the level of blase sort of acceptance of someone from the outside in the detention center just almost knocked me to the floor, people had someone to look out for their interests, and had someone to connect them to the outside and connect them to their families. and that is not happening here in california, and you have the chance to make it happen. so i really do urge you to support the measure. thanks.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Polstein: Hi, my name is Laura Polstein, I'm a immigration attorney at Centro Legal. We're located in Oakland but we serve clients all throughout Northern California. We are actually the biggest, probably, deportation defense provider right now in Northern California but what we can do is a tiny drop in the bucket. We strongly support all of the proposals including also the funding for unaccompanied minors. We're grantee for that program as well as for One California and both have been really successful. I want to speak a little bit more about the due process proposal, which is so urgent, so needed. We're in the detention centers and we're seeing firsthand the absolute crisis when people do not have attorneys. We have a case, a young man named Rocindo, that we actually Learned about through Sandy's organization, Sija, because a public campaign was launched on his behalf. Rocindo's been living in the United States since he was about six years old, this is really the only home that he knows. He was in immigration custody for over three years. Vast majority of that time without an attorney. We got involved and a few months later he was finally released. We're still fighting his case. His case is still pending because he was released on bond. But in a case like that, which is legally very complex, had gone up on appeal was sent back, all kinds of evidence was submitted after we got involved. It is just impossible for somebody like Rocindo to win without an attorney and funding this due process proposal will make that possible for more people. It will be an absolute game changer for the state the same way that it's been in the New York City area where there are attorneys. I think being in court on a pretty much almost daily, weekly, couple times a week basis, just seeing how some of the government attorneys have been acting, especially in light of the changes at the federal level. I think it's more important than ever that immigrants in detention have attorneys who are qualified and know what they're doing, and can defend their interests. Thank you so much for considering it.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 744, 'end': 751, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 792, 'end': 797, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 814, 'end': 818, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 874, 'end': 881, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1441, 'end': 1448, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Julio Perez: Hi everyone, Julio Perez with the, Long Beach Community Hispanic Association, and here in support of item number 13. We are funded by the One California grant, this is our second year, and we have served approximately 600 clients for naturalization services, about 200 DACA recipients, and I have to tell you that their change in quality of life is enormous. They are able to help the families and access different resources so I strongly support this item we urge you to support it. We also do a workforce development services and we're are trying to integrate our community and society and work for better California, thank you.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rudy Carilles: Hi, everybody, Rudy Carilles from out in Long Beach as well. I'm here in support of the One California grant. I have four proposals. Like my colleague, Julio said, we do all of the services. And I have seen in the last almost two years how it has effected all the individuals, all the clients have come in. New initial DACA students who never had out before, who never had a way to work. But now finally can work and it helped better their lives, not only for themselves but for their families and to pursue higher education. And I just want to hope that you guys support refunding and giving an additional, another $15 grand for next year. Thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 152, 'end': 157, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Noe Paramo: Noe Paramo representing California Rural Legal Assistance Foundation. A One California stakeholder, we appreciate your support and consideration and we support all four proposals this evening. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Herald: mike andy herald with the western center on law and poverty. we too support all four proposals and we urge you to tell your colleagues and the rest of the legislature about all this testimony today because it has been so moving. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Caitlin Bellis: caitlin mike bellis of public counsel. we also support all four proposals and i would like especially, again, to address the due process initiative and to emphasize how important flexibility is in these programs. access to the detention centers is difficult at times. the meeting conditions are very difficult. i'm usually talking to my clients through a phone and a window. and so both in term of how the money is dispersed and in terms of who is eligible to receive services for it to operate efficiently, it's extremely important that we keep it broad and flexible. i'd also like to, on behalf of our colleague from the national daily borough organizing network, amy maclean, say that they also support. amy could not be here, but they are also in support of all force, so thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 666, 'end': 677, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 707, 'end': 710, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kalifasa Guy: thank you, mr. chair and members, kalifasa caitlin guy on behalf of the california public defenders association. we support all of the measures but we're most interested in the assistance to immigration council. it's a critical need for organization, for our members to be able to be educated in immigration law. and have the resources necessary to advise our clients effectively to avoid immigration consequences. we believe that the program is set up on the right way, that this is the right amount to get started, and trying to meet the need. of course, this will not cover everybody but it creates a great starting point and baseline to actually have these services provided in every county. there are some counties, again, that already have programs in place and bolstering those other counties and smaller counties is going to be critical. and i was just told that riverside actually cut their funding for their program on assistance to immigration council. so we know that resources are going away in other places. and we think that the state should step in to help us reach our constitutional duty to advise these people on the potential outcomes for their cases. thank you.
[{'start': 43, 'end': 54, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Berniece Espinoza: i apologize, berniece kalifasa espinoza, again. i didn't make it clear. we did, in riverside, when i was asked to start the program for the criminal immigration program, it was because of a lawsuit, because we failed to advise. there was a transition in administration and 14 months later there was no longer any funding for the program. and now there's no one that does the work that i do, and yet there's 120 attorneys who have to figure this out. when i last left the riverside public defenders office, i had 75 felony clients, five of which were facing life and two were attempt murderers. in the two years that i was not doing the work, everything that i had learned, i had to relearn because the immigration law changes daily. by not having someone who specializes in immigration law inside of the public defender's office or someone we can reach out to, there's no way we can keep up. and we will be ineffective assistance of counsel.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Natasha Collins: collins with the lao. the sergeant, i believe, is distributing a handout. i'm going to be providing some background on adult education in california. so beginning on page one, we outline the main purpose of adult education, which is to provide adults with the precollegiate skills they need to participate in civic life and the workforce. the main areas of adult education are basic skills in english and math, citizenship and esl and vocational skills. historically, both school districts and community colleges have been the primary providers of adult education programs in the state. but historically, the state's adult education system has been rather fractured in various ways. for example, school district-run adult education funding was historically provided through a categorical program, while community college adult education was funded through apportionments. in addition, school districts and community colleges often did not coordinate services amongst one another. they used different student assessment and placement policies, different data structures, and had different funding, fee, and faculty qualification policies. to help address these numerous coordination problems, the state restructured adult education in 2013-14 as described on page two of your handout. specifically, the state created 71 regional adult education consortia, consisting of school districts and community colleges and then provided them with funding to develop and implement a regional adult education plan. first, with $25 million in one-time installments for planning, and then with a $500 million ongoing annual program grant known as the adult education block grant, which began in 2015-16. at the same time as this was going on, the state required the california department of education and the community college chancellor's office to make various recommendations pertaining to alignment issues, specifically on student assessments, common student identifiers, and fee policies. the legislature also required the academic senate at the community colleges and the commission on teacher credentialing to establish reciprocity agreements such that teachers could teach between either system. as part of accepting block grant funding at a consortia level, they're required to develop and update three-year regional adult education plans and they also must report annually to the community colleges and cde, the agencies that oversee these consortia on these regional plans, the types and levels of their service, and funding allocations. the agencies then report this information back to the state every year, and the first of these reports actually came out this march to the legislature. on page three, we outline some of the other funding sources in addition to the adult education block grant for adult education. and first, we outline that in addition to the block grant funding, the community colleges receive separate funding for adult education through state apportionments and we estimate that this totals about $280 million annually. adult education consortia also tend to receive federal funding through the workforce innovation and opportunity act and through the the cte perkins act, both federal funds. lastly, school district programs and community colleges may charge fees, which we estimate to be in the low tens of millions of dollars for school districts and about $150 million for community colleges. the cte and the community colleges are going to provide some information on the progress of the consortia effort, but we wanted to point that there remains many inconsistencies in the ways that certain policies are applied to community colleges offering adult education and adult schools, specifically in the area of data systems assessment and fee policies. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 7, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Ferguson: Sure, Chris Ferguson with the Department of Finance. I think Natasha did a great job of explaining the adult education program, so my comments will be brief. The Governor's Budget maintains the $500 million investment in the adult education block grant program and proposes some technical trailer bill language to clarify the accounting codes that are used for adult education at the K-12 level.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 61, 'end': 68, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Debra Brown: good afternoon, debra jonah brown on behalf of state superintendent of public instruction, tom torlakson. i'm going to provide a little bit of an update on the first two years of implementation of the adult ed block grant, so that was last year, and then the current year we're in. and then i'll turn it over to my colleague, mr. rodriguez, from the community colleges and he'll talk a little bit further about the work that's underway late this year and moving into next year. so we will say that this has really been a positive partnership between the community colleges and the department of education. and so we have established the adult education block grant office, and they work collaboratively on the administration of these programs. a couple areas that ms. collins from the lao recommended around data and accountability and assessments. we'll provide some updates on that. so, we do recognize the importance of data and accountability to ensuring the consortia are meeting the needs of their region. and so this is an area that will require time, but one where we'll be successive with each progressive year. so overall, as you will have seen in the report from year one, this reflected some basic elements of self-reported data, mostly demographic and data from regional consortium. as we move forward into the successive years, there'll be more complete information. so last summer, we were working with the planning research center out of mississippi state to better understand data types. and so that helped us identify the areas that we needed to move forward in as we were looking at building a quality robust data system. and so this included establishing data structures, establishing a data tracking system, development of a data prototype, training on data collection, and solidifying the data system. so this is all work that is currently underway and that should be reflective in certainly the year two report that's next year, but then also the interim report that you'll get in november of this year. and i think yeah, i think with that, i'll turn it over to mr. rodriguez.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 91, 'end': 104, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 330, 'end': 339, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 768, 'end': 775, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2089, 'end': 2098, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mario Rodriguez: Chair and members, Mario Rodriguez with the California Community College Chancellor's Office. I would just note that on page two of the LAO's handout, the fourth and fifth bullet, where it talks about the ways in which we have created initial options for the Legislature to consider when making these systems align better. We have both heard, both of our offices, the State Department of Education and also our office, that those options, the Legislature would like to see more recommendations, more concrete recommendations for you guys to consider when it comes to aligning minimum qualifications for teachers, for fees, structures, and various other activities, assessment and placement policies. And so while we've made initial recommendations in those, we know that they have been somewhat weak. And so what we're doing this summer and this fall in anticipation of our next annual report is trying to revisit those issues and those recommendations in an attempt to make them more concrete. And so that's work that's underway right now. In the fall, we're going to be releasing our first report, and it's going to be on the assessment and placement policies. And we imagine that that report will have a more concrete set of recommendations around those. Happy to answer any questions, thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shirley Dan: Good afternoon, Shirley Dan from the Department of Finance. The Governor's Budget includes approximately 484 million in Proposition 39 funding. Which will be predominantly be going to K through 12 schools and California community colleges for energy efficiency projects. This year's proposal is consistent with the same contract as previous years and allocates approximately 423 million for K through 12, 52 million for community colleges, 3 million for the Workforce Investment Board, and 5.8 million for the Conservation Corps. This brings the five year funding total to about $2.1 billion for energy efficiency projects and with that, I'll take any questions.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debra Brown: Good afternoon, Debra Brown on behalf of the State Superintendent of Public Instruction, Tom Torlakson. I think I'll defer most of my comments to the Energy Commission, given that the Department's role in this is to, once the plans are approved, we receive the authorization and then we send the money out to districts. So our role is somewhat limited in this. And just to note that particularly a comment noted in the analysis around the need to consider changing the encumbrance state to ensure that districts have sufficient time to expend the funds, particularly those in the budget year, which they won't know until after the time they've already will have been required to submit the plans to the Energy Commission.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 89, 'end': 102, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Drew Bohan: Good afternoon, Drew Bohan the Chief Deputy Director of the California Energy Commission. I just wanted to give you a snapshot of where we are in the program to date. We think we're doing very, very well. We have, to date, 82% of public schools have participated. They have sent to us their applications for funding and we've sent those along. We are currently at a 96% approval rate. So, they come in a flow basis and we work on them as quickly as we can and we have a very, very small backlog. 82% of public schools, but only a little over a third of charter schools. So that's been the area where there's been the least amount of uptake. In terms of dollars, we have approved applications for funding for a grand total of $1.1 billion and have 4,700 sites where projects have been performed to improve energy efficiency or install local renewable energy and the total number of measures is 17000 spread out throughout the state. So the program's working well. These projects overturn money to the schools, there's a requirement that you imposed in the legislation that we are guided by that requires that all projects meet a test where they're at least as efficient, they'll pay back at least as much as the cost of the measure. So if you put in lighting for $100,000, you have to get a $105,000 back in savings on your energy bills. So this ends up working out to be a very good program for the schools and I think I'll leave it at that in case you have any questions.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dan Kaplan: Good afternoon, Dan Kaplan with the Legislative Analyst's Office. I'm sorry, I think Finance, sorry.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ed Hanson: Ed Hanson, Department of Finance, briefly touch on the Governor's budget proposals for mandates.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dan Kaplan: good afternoon, dan with the lao. in regards to the governor's mandate backlog proposal, we recommend that the legislature adopt a more strategic approach for paying down the mandates backlog. we note that 60% of school districts and 31% of county offices of education have no outstanding mandate backlog claims on the state coffers. and furthermore, of those districts and county offices that do have claims on the state books, there's quite a disparity in terms of the per-student value of those claims. and it's for these reasons that paying down the claims on a per-student basis equally becomes less and less efficient over time. we estimate that the per-student approach would ultimately cost the state $174 billion to retire a mandate backlog claim of only 1.1 billion, and it's for these reasons that we recommend that the legislature adopt a more strategic approach. in regards to the governor's proposal to add the training for child abuse detection to the mandates block grant, we recommend that the legislature add 41.9 million rather than the governor's proposal of 8.5 million to the block grant to more accurately capture the cost of performing the mandate. our office conducted an independent analysis using statewide data to reach this 41.9 million figure. and the key difference between our analysis and that of department of finance's is that the department of finance assumes the training only takes 15 minutes to complete. however, after we obtained data on the 66 school districts that submitted mandate claims to the state controller's office, we found that only 1 district claimed a time as low as 15 minutes and that the average claim time was much closer to the hour that we used in our analysis and that the commission on state mandates used for their analysis. and as such, we think the 41.9 million figure is a more accurate representation of the true costs. the governor does not have a proposal in regards to a new mandate related to online standardized testing. this is largely because the state released its statewide cost estimate after the governor came out with the january budget. however, we recommend adding this mandate, as well as $25 million, to the mandate block grant. as a quick bit of background, in 2014 the state required school districts to administer online standardized tests. the commission on state mandates subsequently determined that the provision of computers that met minimum standards as well as minimum standards, the provision of minimum standards for internet connectivity were reimbursible mandates. subsequently, we conducted our analysis and reached our $25 million figure. thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debra Brown: good afternoon, debra on behalf of state superintendent of public instruction, tom torlakson. i would add, similar to proposition 39, our role here is to send the money out to the leas as appropriate. so i wouldn't have any further comments.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 79, 'end': 92, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Chris Ferguson: Chris Ferguson with the Department of Finance. The Governor's Budget proposes roughly a $1.2 million increase to apprenticeship programs. This reflects adjusting the cost of living for these programs, as well as continued alignment with the non-credit Community College funding rate. The Governor's Budget does propose one other substantive amendment for trailer bill and that is in response to an audit by the California State Auditor. What that trailer bill would do is, it would authorize the Chancellor's Office to place instructions in the K-12 Audit Guide, as well as the Community College District Audit Manual to review the hours, the related and supplemental hours of instruction claimed by apprenticeship programs. So that authority is in direct response to a recommendation identified by the California State Auditor.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Judy Heiman: good afternoon, judy debra heiman, legislative analysts office.  we have no concerns with the administration's proposal on apprenticeships.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : Good afternoon, Marty Rodriguez of the Chancellor's Office, we support the included
[{'start': 16, 'end': 31, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rhoda Nasar: good afternoon, rhoda judy nasar department of finance. the administration's proposal for the community college's capital outlay program for 2017-18 includes a total of $11.7 million proposition 51 bond funds for initial design for nine projects. total costs for all phases of these projects are $304 million proposition 51 bond funds and $144.4 million district funds for a total of $448.4 million. consistent with the administration's statewide infrastructure funding policies, as outlined in budget letter 1626, these projects represent the most critical fire, life, and safety projects of the 29 proposals that were submitted for funding. for the remaining 20 projects, we plan to continue working with the community colleges to further understand their priorities and their capital program and to develop a plan to rule out proposition 51 funds that is consistent with the administration's overall infrastructure policy as well as the priorities of the community colleges. and with that, i'd be happy to answer any questions.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Judy Heiman: judy rhoda heiman, legislative analyst's office. so, the vote has approved $2 billion in bond funding for community college projects. we've recommended that you consider developing a multi year plan for spending those bond funds. this would help ensure that the voter authorized funds are put to use within a reasonable time. it would help ensure that bond sales are spread over several years, allowing time for the chancellor's office and the department of finance and your staff and yourselves to review the projects over the next few years and equally importantly, it would allow the community colleges plan their capital outlay programs. so, one option for such a multi year plan would be to approve a quarter to a fifth of the amount of funding in proposals each year for each of the next four or five years. there's nothing magic about that number of years. and either way, in the end, the state will be paying debt service on the full $2 billion in bond funds and whether you accelerate a little or not, won't make a noticeable difference in the total amount of debt service, the state's total debt service.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sally Lukenbill: Sorry, Sally Lukenbill, Department of Finance, so this initial proposal for these nine projects will just be for the preliminary plan phases. So there has been no design done on any of these projects to date.
[{'start': 7, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Matthew Roberts: good afternoon, my name is matthew judy robertson, i am the dean of field operations for the california community colleges. i want to thank you for your support for the strong workforce program which was established last year. giving 200 million of ongoing dollars on the budget. the strong workforce program recognizes california's gap of 1 million more middle-skilled workers to fuel our economy, our regional economies to advance social mobility and to lower the unemployment rate. this gap is best addressed by career technical education programs or cte programs we feel. we have successfully rolled out the strong workforce program dollars given this first year in '16, '17. according to the timelines within the statute, we're driving local action through planning and regional action, through collaboration and more planning that meet labor market needs. everything is based on that labor market. we have accompanied the dollars with a new accountability system, always based on outcomes that reflects federally aligned workforce outcomes through wioa. we should expect more and better career technical education being developed as a result of these dollars. let me give you some examples because this is kind of where the fun stuff is. the bay area, and just in looking at the analytics that are on our website that talk about where the expenditures are going or what the plans are calling for. in the bay area, for instance, the tech industry struggles with hiring, especially hiring diverse candidates. in this area, six community colleges will come together to create, let's call it diversity and tech pathways. 12 community colleges in the bay area will take on the cyber patriot program with their high schools as part of the career awareness for cyber security pathways. these are all emerging. los angeles advanced manufacturing projects targeting 50, 5,800 job openings according to the labor market information. four colleges will come together to create what's called a crosstown engineering design manufacturing hub which is a very collaborative process, it involves several of the la colleges in the region. and then lastly, central valley, i'll bring up some examples there. we have four colleges that will do pathway industry automation technicians from community colleges to a bachelor of science in industrial automation. and so, sort of feeding that advanced manufacturing sector. two colleges will revitalize their ad-tech certificate to help central valley increase crop yields, reduce waste, and improve water efficiency. so as you can see, there's several projects in the work, these are just several examples of what we have going. in total, we have 626 projects that have been certified, if you will, or sort of run through the labor market process, the projection process and so those are projects that are funded. and so these are touching all 113 community colleges across the state in addition to all the regional economies. what's different from years passed with these dollars is instead of having these projects come to us in the information sits in our agency, we have taken the data and given it back to the field of the stakeholders that were calling for this initiative, the stakeholders that were calling for the creation of these jobs to close the gap. so that's where the analytics on our website comes in as one part of our transparency. we want to inform our business partners. we want to inform the legislature what those expenditures are. we also know that some regions as this is a new initiative, some regions will require some more attention than others. we're looking at things like unemployment rates. how do we target those regions that are suffering from higher unemployment rates? and so we look forward to working with your staff in the next year to sort of come up with solutions to address those issues. and lastly, we remain committed to doing what matters for the jobs and economy and delivering to california the work force that's needed for us. thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 49, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Helen Rothdowden: I'm Helen Rothdowden I'm from SCIU local 1,000 and we're going to speak on item number eight. Which is, is that right, or 10, which is the request to increase the time period and no cost extension for the innovation grants. Right now it's one year to encumber and three years to spend. Our first class just started in January. The grant is supposed to end in this July, and then six months for the community colleges to write it up. Our first class won't graduate until the main cohort, until December. What we found is it takes a lot longer to get these programs up and running. A lot of, we have 53% of our people, we have 50, mainly women, 87% women. 53% of them are single heads of households and 95% of them them are minorities. And their salary when they finish this will go from $45,000 a year to $93,000 a year, and they will be in the middle class and this is a program in Stockton, a high-need area where we've met with Lassen College, and this is a program we're working with the CDCR, Department of Corrections. The facility in Stockton. We will then, we want to do the same thing in Lassen. In Susanfeld, where they have a 25% vacancy rate in the number of RNs and there we would also be partnering with a private hospital if we do that program. So these are wonderful programs, we had over a 142 people who wanted to apply for 50 positions. So, obviously, not only is there a need but there's really reason to do this, but we need a longer period of time. Our next program will be meeting with this, actually in your district, Mr Chair, which is with American River College and with Sac City to also do an LVN to RN program. Thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Elizabeth Walner: good afternoon, my name is elizabeth matthew walner and i'm here on behalf of cccaoe, the california community college association for occupational education. and we would like to just thank the legislator, and administration, and your committee, for your confidence in the strong workforce program and offer our support of it in general and tell you a little bit about what we're doing in support of the program. last month we began the first of 30 more and better cte forums. we've hosted three, well one's going on right now, one's tomorrow and we've hosted two others. we've had over 200 people participating. it's a regional collaboration between folks in a region, la, san diego, wherever, coming up with planning for the more and better cte and the strong workforce project. next week we're hosting our statewide conference, our spring conference. it is completely sold out and people are clamoring to get in, we just need more seats which we're not going to get. and that conversation is largely centered around both equity and access for each student and how that participates and works with the strong workforce project.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Frank Gornick: Good afternoon, I'm Frank Gornick, the Chancellor of the West Hills Community College District and I'm here to speak on behalf of including all 29 projects in the Capital Outlet process. The reason I'm doing that is that we have had a project, West Hills Community College District Center Expansion Project, in the chancellor's office for over 11 years, waiting to be funded. And here's part of the problem with the process. Mario does a great job, have no problem with the Department of Finance. But this is how poor communities stay poor. We represent for that Center four cities, Firebaugh, Mendota, San Joaquin, and Tranquility. None of those cities are over 7,000 people, okay? We've had a center that if you look at it you'd think gosh it's a state center. It wasn't. In 1952 it was a bowling alley in Firebaugh and we purchased it and began to renovate it so we could, it was the largest facility we could get in that community at the time. It has scored number one on the list in the Chancellor's office for all facilities, for these last seven or eight years. We did pass a bond. Our residents passed a bond with Prop 39. We could only get $11 million on assessed value. We have about $6 million of that bond still left in anticipation of this building, we have taken care of expanding the area. If this project doesn't get funded this year, it gets recalculated again next year. And I'd ask you just one item. Look at item B on the very bottom of page 30, it says often used to supplement by state funds. So I can't compete with larger districts who have a larger assessed value, to bargain with the chancellor's office to say, if you have a $50 million project, if I give you $25 million of my local bond, then you're only going to spend $25 million of that bond. I don't have the 25 million to shorten my projects. So that's where the inequity comes in and so, I'd like you to fund all 29 projects because it's only fair way to redistribute the dollars. Thank you.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 425, 'end': 430, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Pablo Monzo: good afternoon, my name is pablo elizabeth monzo. i'm the associate vice chancellor facilities management for the los rios community college district here in sacramento, the second largest district in the state. we've used the state bond program to great extent on all of our building program and in 2006, which was the last time prior to prop 51 where we had state monies, we used it to build a lot of critical projects for us. even though we've seen a drop in enrollment, and now a flattening out of enrollment, the need that we're talking about that we need to fulfill now with our facilities is a need that's been there for over 10 years and so, we have projects, like the natoma center, that we've actually had to wait almost 10 years since we submitted it to the state for approval. we've actually now combined that. it was supposed to be done in two more phases. we've combined those two phases and we're actually having to rent 20 classrooms and other facilities just to meet the need that we have there. so the state bond program for us is critical, not only to continue to improve our stem capabilities and our vocational skills, also in our ability just to deal with buildings that are over 60 years old. so i urge the legislature, we urge the governor to please approve all 29 projects on the list that have been approved by the board of governors. thank you very much. thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 48, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebecca Curley: good afternoon rebecca pablo curley on behalf of the community college facility coalition, also here to speak to the capital outlay item. we are asking you to fund all 29 projects in the 2017-18 budget. what that means dollar dollars wise is $70 million in the 17-18 budget for planning and then over the course of three years there will be a total of 692 million through construction. so just wanted to give you those numbers. voters authorized the dollars for more that just health and safety purposes. they authorize dollars for construction, renovation, reconstruction and equipping of facilities. we don't believe that there's a solid policy reason to delay on the implementation of proposition 51. we agree very much with some of the points that were raised by assemblymember o'donnell. the buying power of that $2 billion decreases every day with cost increases in the construction market and interest rate increases. it just doesn't make sense to delay, because we will buy fewer projects with our $2 billion, thanks.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 782, 'end': 791, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lizette Everett: Thank you. Good afternoon, Lizette Everett on behalf of the Community College League of California representing the 72 community college districts throughout the state. We want to echo some of the comments that were made by Chancellor Gornick. This is really a matter of equity, and also really honoring the will of the voters. These voters have recognized needs in their communities, needs that are correlated to a facility, a place where people go and get an education, get opportunities. If you look at the list of funded projects, these are facilities that provide math, science, fine arts opportunities, everything that our communities are asking for and have voted. So we ask that you include all 29 projects and to the comments around not having a plan. The five-year capital outlay plan that the Board of Governors approved is our plan. It's proved effective, and we ask that you fund all projects. Thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 235, 'end': 242, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Austin Webster: Chair and members, Austin Webster on behalf of the Faculty Association of California Community Colleges. In the interest of time, I'll align my comments with the previous speakers. We would urge the Legislature and the Governor to include all 29 of the capital outlay proposals in the budget. Thank you so much. Thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Ferguson: chris with the department of finance. the governor's budget proposes roughly a $1.2 million increase to apprenticeship programs. this reflects adjusting the cost of living for these programs as well as continued alignment with the noncredit community college funding rate. the governor's budget does propose one other substantive amendment for trailor bill and that is in response to an audit by the california state auditor. what that trailer bill would do is it would authorize the chancellor's office to place instructions in the k12 audit guide, as well as the community college district audit manual, to review the related and supplemental hours of instruction claimed by apprenticeship programs. so that authority is in direct response to a recommendation identified by the california state auditor.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Judy Heiman: next. good afternoon, judy, legislative analyst's office, we have no concerns with the administration's proposal on apprenticeships.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mario Rodriguez: good afternoon, mario rebecca rodriguez with the chancellor's office, we support the included language that would allow us to audit and to be compliant with the recommendations by the state auditor.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rhoda Nasar: good afternoon, nasar, department of finance. the administration's proposal for the community college's capital outlay program for 2017-18 includes a total of $11.7 million proposition 51 bond funds for initial design for nine projects. total costs for all phases of these projects are $304 million proposition 51 bond funds and $144.4 million district funds for a total of $448.4 million. consistent with the administration's statewide infrastructure funding policies, as outlined in budget letter 1626, these projects represent the most critical fire, life, and safety projects of the 29 proposals that were submitted for funding. for the remaining 20 projects, we plan to continue working with the community colleges to further understand their priorities and their capital program. and to develop a plan to roll out proposition 51 funds that is consistent with the administration's overall infrastructure policy, as well as the priorities of the community colleges. and, with that, i'd be happy to answer any questions.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Judy Heiman: Judy Heiman, Legislative Analyst's Office. So, the voters approved $2 billion in bond funding for community college projects. We've recommended that you consider developing a multiyear plan for spending those bond funds. This would help ensure that the voter-authorized funds are put to use in a reasonable time. It would help ensure that bond sales are spread over several years, allowing time for the Chancellor's office, and the Department of Finance, and your staff, and yourselves to review the projects over the next few years. And equally importantly, it would allow the community colleges to plan their capital outlay programs. So one option for such a multi year plan would be to approve a quarter to a fifth of the amount of funding in proposals each year for each of the next four or five years. There is nothing magic about that number of years and, either way, in the end, the state will be paying debt service on the full $2 billion in bond funds. And whether you accelerate a little or not won't make a noticeable difference in the total amount of debt service, the state's total debt service.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mario Rodriguez: mario mario rodriguez with the chancellor's office. i think what this comes down to for us is exactly what ms. heiman mentioned, which is planning. so, first off, we're very appreciative of the five projects in the governor's budget. we're appreciative of the four projects in the april letter process, we appreciate the administration listening to our concerns. what we want to be able to see, though, is, given that it's been over a decade now without state bond resources being allocated, that's basically a decade of pent up demand for facilities. our thought all along is that, and i think i've mentioned this before to this committee, but we don't look at projects as brick and mortar. we look at projects as a way that the college wants to serve this community with educational services. and so, while either projects, and we often talk about them as far as debt service, for us, this is a chance for the community to be served in a way in which they deserve. in which they've demonstrated to us through a rigorous grant process that this is going to meet the community's needs and this is something that the community has been planning for a period of years. and so, for us, colleges come to us, and they say, look, we've been planning for this project, whether it's a cte center, or whether it's a new lab for some of their science courses. they come to us with a long plan, and a long lead time of expecting to be able to be successful in this. so when the, when there's a bit of change in exactly how we're going to look at these projects, it makes it hard for them to carry out their educational mission as effectively as we'd like. so at the end of the day, obviously, we'd like to see all 29 projects approved, but more than anything, we'd like to see a thorough and robust planning process be awarded, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 111, 'end': 117, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Sally Lukenbill: Sally Lukenbill, Department of Finance. So this initial proposal for these nine projects will just be for the preliminary plan phases. So there has been no design done on any of these projects to date.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mario Rodriguez: I'll start while my colleague is coming up, I am Mario Rodriguez with the chancellor's office. Also, because of the change in the time of the hearing, our vice chancellor of workforce and economic development, Van Ton Quinlivan. Who's really done a fantastic job of leading this effort and a lot of the other efforts we've had around workforce development and group technological education in recent years. Is actually speaking to a group she had previously agreed to in Oakland today. So today we have Matthew Roberts, who's our dean of field operations, who's been our lead on this issue, to kind of give a brief overview. And we're both here and happy to answer any questions.
[{'start': 49, 'end': 64, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 210, 'end': 227, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 503, 'end': 518, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Matthew Roberts: Good afternoon, my name is Matthew Roberts, I'm the dean of field operations for the California Community Colleges. I want to thank you for your support for the Strong Workforce program, which was established last year, giving $200 million of ongoing dollars on the budget. The Strong Workforce Program recognizes California's gap of 1 million more middle-skilled workers to fuel our economy, our regional economies, to advance social mobility, and to lower the unemployment rate. This gap is best addressed by career technical education programs, or CTE programs, we feel. We have successfully rolled out the Strong Workforce program dollars, given this first year in 16-17. According to the timelines within the statute, we're driving local action through planning, and regional action through collaboration and more planning. That meet labor market needs, so everything is based on that labor market. We have accompanied the dollars with a new accountability system, always based on outcomes, that reflects federally aligned workforce outcomes through WIOA. We should expect more and better career technical education being developed, as a result of these dollars. Let me give you some examples, because this is kind of where the fun stuff is. The Bay Area, and just looking at the analytics that are on our website that talks about where the expenditures are going, or what the plans are calling for. In the Bay Area, for instance, the tech industry struggles with hiring, especially hiring diverse candidates. In this area, six community colleges will come together to create what's called a diversity in tech pathways. 12 community colleges in the Bay Area will take on the CyberPatriot program, with their high schools as part of the career awareness for cybersecurity pathways, these are all emerging. Los Angeles, advanced manufacturing projects targeting 5800 job openings, according to the labor market information. Four colleges will come together to create what's called a cross town engineering design manufacturing hub, which is a very collaborative process. It involves several of the LA colleges in the region, and lastly Central Valley, I'll bring up some examples there. There are four colleges that will do pathway industry automation technicians from community colleges, to Bachelor of Science in industrial automation. And so, sort of feeding that advanced manufacturing sector. Two colleges will revitalize their Ag Tech certificate to help Central Valley increase crop yields, reduce waste, and improve water efficiency. So as you can see, there's several projects that are in the works, this is just several examples of what we have going. In total, we have 626 projects that have been certified, if you will, or sort of run through the labor market process, the projection process, and so those are projects that are funded. And so these are touching all 113 community colleges across the state, in addition to all the regional economies. What's different from years past with these dollars is, instead of having these projects come to us, and the information sits in our agency, we have taken the data and given it back to the field. The stakeholders that we're calling for this initiative, the stakeholders that we're calling for the creation of these jobs to close the gap. So that's where the analytics on our website comes in, as one part our transparency. We want to inform our business partners, we want to inform the Legislature what those expenditures are. We also know that some regions, as this is a new initiative, some regions will require some more attention than others. Were looking at things like unemployment rates, how do we target those regions that are suffering from higher unemployment rates? And so we look forward to working with your staff in the next year to sort of come up with solutions to address those issues. And lastly, we remain committed to doing what matters for the jobs and economy, and delivering to California the workforce that's needed for us, so thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christy Bouma: mr. chair and members, christy on behalf of the california professional firefighters. delighted to hear from the previous witness. we agree an apprenticeship is an excellent program for jobs, and so i just wanted to make a couple comments on the item that you also see in your agenda. requesting a one time augmentation to fund deficit hours of training, they were delivered, but not funded, and also an ongoing increase to support the apprenticeship program. i would clarify that the apprentices noted in here that grew from 53,000 to 74,000 since 2014, that shows a tremendous amount of growth, but also that's across all k12 lea programs, not just the firefighters, although we'd love to have all those folks. and on the budget audit language, maybe just to make a comment that we'd love to engage the committee staff on, not just what the audit uncovered, but maybe some clear language to support the work that the chancellor's office is doing, and the obligations they have to allocate these rsi training dollars. as you know, it's a reimbursement based system, but the way the money goes out, i'm not sure how much, how many tools they have to actually reconcile. they were allocated this much money, assuming these many hours are going to be trained, and then after the fact, how many training hours were actually delivered, and was the funding sufficient or not? so that's why we're asking you to recognize there's been a huge deficit on the k12 side, because the allocation method is different, and there's a lot of accountability about where these hours are being trained, whether they're being delivered, and whether they're being funded. so, and how much better for you to make determinations in the future about need for the program if you actually know. thank you. the delivery.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Elizabeth Wallner: good afternoon, my name is elizabeth, and i'm here on behalf of cccaoe, the california community college association for occupational education. and we would like to just thank the legislator and administration and your committee for your confidence in the strong workforce program and offer our support of it in general, and i'll tell you a little bit about what we're doing in support of the program. last month we began the first of 30 more and better cte forums, we've hosted three, well, one's going on right now, one's tomorrow, and we've hosted two others, we've had over 200 people participating. it's a regional collaboration between folks in a region, la, san diego, wherever, coming up with planning for the more and better cte and the strong workforce project. next week, we're hosting our statewide conference, our spring conference, it is completely sold out and people are clamoring to get in, we just need more seats, which we're not going to get. and that conversation is largely centered around both equity and access for each student, and how that participates and works with the strong workforce project.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 64, 'end': 70, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Anna Ferrera: Good afternoon, Chair and members, Anna Ferrera on behalf of the School Energy Coalition and also the Coalition for Adequate School Housing on Proposition 39. That item, we submitted case studies to the Committee on the school projects that are going forward under Prop 39, we are very proud of those. We appreciate the continued focus on K14 And also we are in very strong support of that encumbrance state extension. Schools will not know at this point if the August 1st, 2017 date stays in place what that 5th year funding will be, and the allocations have gone up and down in the five years that the program has been in place. So they like to know what that is before they go out and encumber for those projects and they must schedule around teachers and student schedules and its very difficult to do that without knowing what your funding is going to be. Thank you. So we would strongly urge that. Thank you.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Frank Gornick: good afternoon, i'm frank mario gornick the chancellor of the west hills community college district, and i'm here to speak on behalf of including all all 29 projects in the capital outlet process. the reason i'm doing that is that we have had a project, west hills community college district center expansion project in the chancellor's office for over 11 years waiting to be funded. and here's part of the problem with the process. mario does a great job. i have no problem with the department of finance, but this is how poor communities stay poor. we represent by that center four cities, firebaugh, mendota, san joaquin, and tranquility. none of those cities are over 7,000 people, okay? we've had a center that, if you look at it you'd think, gosh, it's a state center. it wasn't, in 1952 it was a bowling alley in firebaugh. and we purchased it, and began to renovate it so we could, it was the largest facility we could get in that community at the time. we have, it is scored number one on the list in the chancellor's office for all facilities for this last seven or eight years. we did pass the bond. our residence passed a bond with prop 39, we can only get $11 million in assessed value. we have about $6 million of that bond still left. in anticipation of this building, we have taken care of expanding the area. if this project doesn't get funded this year, it gets recalculated again, next year. and i'd ask you just one item, look at item b on the very bottom of page 30. it says often used to supplement by state funds. so, i can't compete with larger districts who have a larger assessed value to bargain with the chancellor's office to say, if you have a $50 million project, if i give you $25 million of my local bond then you're only going to spend 25 million of that fund. i don't have the 25 million to shorten my projects, so that's where the inequity comes in. and so you're lucky to fund all 29 projects because it's the only fair way to redistribute the dollars.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 433, 'end': 438, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Pablo Manzo: Good afternoon. My name is Pablo Manzo. I'm the Associate Vice Chancellor Facilities Manager for the Los Rios Community College District here in Sacramento, the second largest district in the state. We've used the state bond program to great extent on all of our building program and in 2006, which was the last time prior to Prop 51 where we had state money's. We used it to build a lot of critical projects for us. Even though, we've seen a drop in enrollment and now a flattening out of enrollment the need that we're talking about that we need to fulfill now with our facilities is a need that's been there for over 10 years. And so we have projects like the Natoma Center that we've actually had to wait almost 10 years since we initially submitted it to the state for approval we've actually now combined that. It was supposed to be done in two more phases, we've combined those two phases. And we're actually having to rent 20 classrooms and other facilities just to meet the need that we have there. So the state bond program for us is critical not only to continue to improve our stem capabilities and our vocational skill. Also in our ability just to deal with buildings that are over 60 years old. So I urge the Legislature. I urge the Governor, to please approve all 29 projects, on the list, that had been approved by the Board of Governors. Thank you very much. Thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rebekah Cearley: good afternoon, rebekah frank cearley on behalf of the community college facility coalition. also here to speak to the capital outlay item. we are asking you to fund all 29 projects in the 2017, 18 budget. what that means dollars wise is $70 million in the 17, 18 budget for planning and then over the course of three years it would be a total of 692 million through construction. so i just wanted to give you those numbers. voters authorized the dollars for more than just health and safety purposes. they authorized dollars for construction, renovation, reconstruction and equipping of facilities. we don't believe that there's a solid policy reason to delay on the implementation of proposition 51. we agree very much with some of the points that were raised by assembly member o'donnell. the buying power of that $2 billion decreases every day with cost increases in the construction market and interest rate increases. it just doesn't make sense to delay because we will buy fewer projects with our $2 billion. thanks. thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 781, 'end': 790, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Lizette Navarette: good afternoon, navarette on behalf of new college league of california representing the 72 community college districts throughout the state. we want to echo some of the comments that were made my chancellor gornick, this is really a matter of equity and also really honoring the will of the voters. these voters have recognized needs in their communities. needs that are correlated to a facility. a place where people go and get an education, get opportunities. if you look at the list of funded projects, these are facilities that provide math, science. fine arts opportunities, everything that our communities are asking for and have voted. so we ask that you include all 29 projects. and to the comments around not having a plan, the five year capital outlay plan that the board of governors approved is our plan. it's proved effective and we ask that you fund all projects.
[{'start': 208, 'end': 215, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Austin Webster: chair and members austin rebekah webster on behalf of the faculty association of california community colleges. in the interest of times, i'll align my comments with the previous speakers. we would urge the legislature and the governor to include all 29 of the capital outlay proposals in the budget. thank you so much.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Nevin: good afternoon. david on behalf of santa monica community college district and long beach community college district. we're appreciative of the for additions. including the santa monica community college math science addition. as well as the long beach city college multidisciplinary facility expansion. and encourage the approval of those, thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Natasha Collins: Natasha Collins with the LAO. The sergeant I believe is distributing a handout. I'm going to be providing some background on adult education in California. So beginning on page one, we outline the main purpose of adult education which is to provide adults with the pre-collegiate skills they need to participate in civic life in the workforce. The main areas of adult education are basic skills in English and math. It is citizenship and ESL and vocational skills. Historically, both school districts and community colleges have been the primary providers of adult education programs in the state. But historically, the state's adult education system has been rather fractured in various ways. For example, school district run adult education funding was historically provided through a categorical program while community college adult education was funded through apportionments. In addition, school districts and community colleges often did not coordinate services amongst one another. They used different student assessment and placement policies, different data structures, and had different funding fee and faculty qualification policies. To help address these numerous coordination problems, the state restructured adult education in 2013, 14 as described on page two of your handout. Specifically, the state created 71 regional adult educational consortia consisting of school districts and community colleges. It then provided them with funding to develop and implement a regional adult education plan. First with $25 million in one time installments for planning and then with a $500 million ongoing annual program grant known as the Adult Education Block Grant which began in 2015, 16. At the same time as this was going on, the state required the California Department of Education and the Community College Chancellor's office to make various recommendations pertaining to alignment issues. Specifically on student assessments, common student identifiers and fee policies. The Legislature also required the Academic Senate, the Community Colleges, and the Commission on Teacher Credentialing to establish reciprocity agreements such that teachers could teach between either system. As part of accepting block grant funding at a consortial level, they are required to develop and update 3 year regional adult education plans. And they also must report annually to the community colleges and CDE, the agencies that oversee these consortia on these regional plans, the types and levels of their service, and funding allocations. The agencies then report this information back to the state every year. And the first of these reports actually came out this March to the Legislature. On page three, we outlined some of the other funding sources in addition to the Adult Education Block Grant for adult education. And first we outlined that in addition to the block grant funding, the community colleges receive separate funding for adult education through state apportionments and we estimate that this totals about $280 million annually. Adult education consortia also tend to receive federal funding through the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act, and through the CTE Perkins Act, both federal funds. Lastly school district programs and community colleges may charge fees which we estimate to be in the low tens of millions of dollars for school districts and about $150 million for community colleges. The CDE and the community colleges are going to provide some information on the progress of the consortia effort. But we wanted to point out that there remains many inconsistencies in the ways that certain policies are applied to community colleges offering adult education and adult schools specifically in the area of data systems assessment, and fee policies. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Ferguson: sure, ferguson with the department of finance. i think natasha did a great job of explaining the adult education programs, my comments will be brief. the governor's budget maintains the $500 million investment in the adult education block grant program, and proposes some technical trailer bill language to clarify the accounting codes that are used for adult education at the k, 12 level.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 55, 'end': 62, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Debra Brown: good afternoon, debra austin brown on behalf of the state superintendent of public instruction, tom torlekson. i'm going to provide a little bit of an update on the first two years of implementation of the adult ed block grant. so that was last year and then the current year we're in, and then i'll turn it over to my colleague mr. rodriguez from the community colleges. and he'll talk a little bit further about the work that's under way late this year and moving into next year. so we will say that this has really been a positive partnership between the community colleges and the department of education. and so we have established the adult education block grant office, and they work collaboratively on the administration of these programs. a couple of areas that ms. collins from the lao recommended around data and accountability and assessments, we'll provide some updates on that. so we do recognize the importance of data and accountability to ensuring the consortia are meeting the needs of their region. and so this is an area that will require time, but one where we'll be successive with each progressive year. so overall, as you will have seen in the report from year one that this reflected some basic elements of self reported data, mostly demographic and data from regional consortium. as we move forward into the successive years, there'll be more complete information. so last summer we were working with the planning research center out of mississippi state to better understand data types. and so, that helped us identify the areas that we needed to move forward in as we were looking at building a quality robust data system. and so this included establishing data structures, establishing a data tracking system, development of a data prototype, training on data collection and solidifying the data systems. so this is all work that is currently underway and that should be reflective in certainly the final year two report that's next year, but then also the interim report that you'll get in november of this year, and i think yeah, i think with that, i'll turn it over to mr. rodriguez.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 96, 'end': 109, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 333, 'end': 342, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 775, 'end': 782, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2105, 'end': 2114, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mario Rodriguez: Chair and members, Mario Rodriguez with the California Community College Chancellor's Office. I would just note that on page two of the LAO's handout the fourth and fifth bullets where it talks about the ways in which we have tried initial options for the Legislature to consider when making these systems align better. We have both heard, both of our offices, the state Department of Education and also our office. That those options that Legislature would like to see more recommendations, more concrete recommendations for you guys to consider when it comes to aligning minimum qualifications for teachers for fee structures and various other activities, assessment and placement policies. And so that, while we have made initial recommendations in those we know that they have been somewhat weak. And so what we're doing this summer and this fall and in this picture of our next annual report is trying to revisit those issues and those recommendations in an attempt to make them more concrete. And so that's work that we're, that's underway right now. In the fall, we're going to be releasing our first report, and it's going to be on the assessment of placement policies. And we imagine that that report will have a more concrete set of recommendations around those. Happy to answer any questions. Thank you.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shirley Dove: Good afternoon. Shirley Dove from the Department of Finance. The Governor's Budget includes approximately 484 million in Proposition 39 funding which will be predominantly going to K through 12 schools and California community colleges for energy efficiency projects. This year's proposal is consistent with the same construct as previous years and allocates approximately 423 million for K-12, 52 million for community colleges, 3 million for the Workforce Investment Board, and 5.8 million for the Conservation Corps. This brings the five year funding total to about $2.1 billion for energy efficiency projects. And with that, I'll take any questions.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debra Brown: brown, on behalf of the state superintendent of public instruction, tom torlakson.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 68, 'end': 81, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Drew Bohan: good afternoon. drew debra bohan, the chief deputy director of the california energy commission. i just wanted to give you a snapshot of where we are in the program to date. we think we're doing very, very well. we have to date, 82% of public schools have participated. they have sent o us their applications for funding and we've sent those along. we are currently at a 96% approval rate. so they come in on a flow basis and we work on them as quickly as we can and we have a very, very small backlog. 82% of public schools, but only a little over a third of charter schools. so, that's been the area where there's been the least amount of uptake. in terms of dollars, we have approved applications for funding for a grand total of $1.1 billion, and have 4,700 sites where projects have been performed to improve energy efficiency or install local renewable energy. and the total number of measures is 17,000 spread out throughout the states, so the program is working well. these projects all return money to the schools. there's a requirement that you imposed in the legislation that we are guided by that requires that all projects meet a test where they're at least as efficient. they'll pay back at least as much of the cost of the measure. so if you put in lighting for $100,000, you have to get $105,000 back in savings on your energy bills. so this ends up working out to be a very good program for the schools and i think i'll leave at that in case you have any questions.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dan Kaplan: good afternoon. dan, with the legislative analyst office. i'm sorry. i think finance. go ahead.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ed Hanson: ed, department of finance. briefly touch on the governor's budget proposals for mandates. okay. in 2012-13, the state adopted a k-12 mandate and a community college mandate as an alternative for school districts to be reimbursed for claimed cost for mandated activities. for the '17-'18 governor's budget, the administration proposes $227 million for the k-12 block grant mandate. this includes $8.5 million for the new mandated activity that's related to trainers for mandated school reporters and an additional $700,000 adjustment due to ada adjustments. the governor's budget also provides $32 million for the community college mandate block grant. the budget also provides $287 million in discretionary funding that is structured in a manner that will also offset outstanding mandate claim balances. this is discretionary funding that locals can use for local priorities. whether it be deferred maintenance, technology needs or professional development activities.
[]
Dan Kaplan: Good afternoon. Dan Kaplan with the LAO. In regards to the governor's mandate backlog proposal, we recommend that the Legislature adopt a more strategic approach for paying down the mandate's backlog. We know that 60% of school districts, and 31% of Country Offices of Education have no outstanding mandate back log claims on the state coffers. And furthermore, of those districts and county offices that do have claims on the state books, there's quite a disparity in terms of the per student value of those claims. And it's for these reasons that ping down the claims on a per student basis equally, becomes less and less efficient over time. We estimate that the per student approach would ultimately cost the State $74 billion to retire a mandate backlog claim of only 1.1 billion. And it's for these reasons that we recommend that the Legislature adopt a more strategic approach. In regards to the governor's proposal to add the training for child abuse detection to the mandate's block grant, we recommend that the Legislature add 41.9 million rather than the governor's proposal of 8.5 million to the block grant to more accurately capture the costs of performing the mandate. Our office conducted an independent analysis using statewide data to reach this 41.9 million figure. The key difference between our analysis and that of the Department of Finance is the Department of Finance assumes that the mandate training only takes 15 minutes to complete. However, after we obtained data on the 66 school districts that submitted mandate claims to the state controller's office, we found that only one district claimed its time as low as 15 minutes. And that the average claim time was much closer to the hour that we used in our analysis and that the Commission on state mandates used for their analysis. And as such, we think the 41.9 million figure is a more accurate representation of the true costs. The Governor does not have a proposal in regards to a new mandate related to online standardized testing. This is largely because the state released its statewide cost estimate after the Governor came out with the January budget. However, we recommend adding this mandate as well as $25 million to the Mandate Block Grant. As a quick bit of background, in 2014, the state required school districts to administer online standardized tests. The Commission on State Mandates subsequently determined that the provision of computers that met minimum standards as well as minimum standards, the provision of minimum standards for Internet connectivity were reimbursable mandates. Subsequently, we conducted our analysis and reached our $25 million figure, thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Debra Brown: thank you. good afternoon, debra drew brown on behalf of state superintendent of public instruction tom torelkson, i would add similar to proposition 39 our role here to send the money out to the leas as appropriate. so i would have any further comments.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 100, 'end': 113, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Nina Beady: Thank you, my name is Nina Beady. Thank you for this disabled accommodation so I can speak. I'm disabled by electromagnetic sensitivities to cell towers, cell phones, Wi-Fi, and smart meters. EMS is recognized by the US Access Board and is a protected disabled characteristic. California's 1998 survey found 3.2% of respondents were very sensitive or allergic to electromagnetic radiation. That was 1.1 million Californians. This is not an orphan illness. This bill does not comply with ADA. Small cell towers are an access barrier for the EMS disabled to their homes and communities. Since 1998, radiation levels have soared. How many more Californians have EMS? You don't know because industry is moving too fast. My symptoms include heart arrhythmia, severe sleep disruption, migraines, nausea, and loud ringing in my ears. US and international experts warn about the public health cost. Other countries are taking protective steps. This bill mandates more public exposure, liability for the state. Halt this bill so you can examine these issues. They say that this bill cost California nothing. That's false. My costs include at least $500,000 in lost income which costs the state in tax revenue. If 10,000 Californians are EMS disabled with $50,000 per year lost income, that's $500 million of economic impact including taxes. Local economic loses, the stores, restaurants, coffee shops, businesses from the $4 coffee and $25 meal once a month, and $40 concert tickets three times a year. I don't buy it, it's 568 per year. 100,000 people like me means $56 million less for local economies. I've lost access to most of these places, too, due to their wireless. I've also lost access to ambulance services and the hospital. Cell towers nearby will likely kill me, and there are other unfunded costs to this bill. Halt this bill or delay it until the next session and examine these issues, thank you. May I put documents electronically into the record?
[{'start': 22, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Harry Layman: Thank you, my name is Harry Layman. I am a trial lawyer by experience, but an old one doing other work now. I've dedicated the last six years of my life to this particular issue based on scientific study. My background was in engineering cases including the Yuba flood cases for example. And I would speak as to those as an example for physical catastrophe resulted from litigation that should have been avoided, because I know the inside of that one because I was one of the plaintiff's lawyers. And I will tell you that the eventual $423 million settlement that took 12 years that should have never been wasted, it could have been settled, in my view, having been one of the plaintiff's lawyers for probably, $90 million, except for this unfortunate decision to fight. The relevance of that here too fiscally, now, is that there has been notice violation here in multiple ways. There were simultaneous issuances of contradictory positions from two separate state websites as to whether or not the bill was, in fact, going to be on. And as a result, we hadn't nearly the attendance and nearly the quality of testimony we would have otherwise had. In addition to that, it is my understanding that with regard to the profuse amendments involved that there's a Senate rule requiring that the amendments be supplied in writing to the other Committee Members two days before the hearing upon which those amendments are approved. That was not complied with, so rather than this just being a toss up or a close call for a sitting judge, I think it's actually unfortunately a strong case in terms of lack of notice and I would like to give up that sword. I would like to say to you, take it, and the way to take it is to do this correctly with correct notice so I don't have that tool. I'd like to give it up. But speaking of swords and the fiscal consequences, this is what I said in my letter, a couple of days ago. Did you have, this is really a wonderful moment for the fiscal health of California to pull the sword of courage out of the stone of apathy here. Because, well, one of the points I wanted to make. On the way up here, I stopped at this great gas station-
[{'start': 22, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Lee: Chris Lee on behalf of the California State Association of Counties. I'm strictly speaking to the fiscal impacts of the bill. I think there's three areas where there could potentially be costs to local jurisdictions based on this legislation. First, is related to the permitting fees where SB 649 does allow fair, reasonable, and non-discriminatory fees to offset those costs. The second would be our ability to lease and license our property and as a League of Cities mentioned, SB 649 would limit that to what we think is a below market rate for the installation of those facilities. And the third and final area of cost where we think there is potentially a reimbursable state mandate, would be the administrative costs borne by a city or county in having to create a program to license and lease their property for the use of small cells. So this is something that state law currently does not require. We don't think that the fees for the ongoing licensing and leasing are sufficient to cover those administrative costs, and there's a potential reimbursable mandate there that would come at the state's expense.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Deborah Whitman: hello, yes, my name is deborah jonah whitman, and i am the president of a nonprofit called environmental voices. and i am one of millions that suffer from emf sensitivities. and i'm opposed to any spending on this issue, and i oppose this legislation.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Jones: Mr. Chairman and members, David Jones on behalf of the cities of Burbank, Glendale, the cities of Marin and Murrieta, Pasadena, and San Marcos. Opposed for the fiscal reasons mentioned by the League and CSAC. Thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Elizabeth Espinosa: Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and members, Elizabeth Espinosa here today in opposition on behalf of the Boards of Supervisors in the counties of Riverside and Santa Clara, thank you.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tracy Rhine: Good afternoon, Tracy Rhine, Rural County Representatives of California. I'd like to align my comments with the other counties and cities before me, thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Laura Parra: Laura Parra on behalf of the cities of Long Beach, Riverside, and San Carlos in opposition.
[]
Jordan Ellison: Jordan Ellison with Ellison Wilson Advocacy on behalf of the cities of Inglewood, La Canada Flintridge, El Centro and Santee, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Audrey Durfor: audrey deborah durfor on behalf of the county of san mateo and the county of sacramento in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jonathan Clay: clay for the county of san diego and the city of encinitas in opposition.
[]
John Moffatt: moffatt on behalf of marin county and the city of visalia in opposition.
[]
Melissa Romero: Thank you, Chair and members. Melissa Romero with the Environmental group Californian's against waste, in strong support of SB 705. This bill will have no cost to the state, and it's simply putting a policy into law that has already been enacted at the local level for over 100 cities and counties. Belmont, Culver City, El Cerrito, Encinitas, San Jose, Salinas, Richmond, Pasadena, Watsonville, Santa Monica, and many, many more urge your support.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Genevieve Abaddon: genevieve audrey abaddon, on behalf of clean water actions air waste usa, 7th generation advisers, 
plastic pollution coalition, surfrider foundation and wishtoyo chumash foundation, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Shestak: mr. chairman and members, tim with the american chemistry council, we do believe there are significant state cost associated with this bill. survey that we did at the state agencies and school districts, those entities spent nearly $7 million on polystyrene food service products in fiscal year 2016. it is a fact that replacement products are on the neighborhood of somewhere between 2 and 3 times more expensive. so we do believe that there would be a significant fiscal impact for those particular entities the way the bill's currently drafted. i do take this exception to the comment that these facilities can just automatically manufacture something else. there are facilities in the state that manufacture only polystyrene foam, those jobs would be impacted as well. so, for those reasons we urge a no vote, thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katie Hansen: katie genevieve hansen with the california restaurant association, we are opposed to this bill. this legislation would require our members to use alternative packaging products. oftentimes that are two or three times more expensive than polystyrene foam. this just adds to the additional cost pressures that our industry's currently facing, and would make it even harder on our members, bottomline. for these reasons, we're opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Duncan Mcfetridge: mr chairman, members, duncan katie mcfetridge, representing dart container corporation, also opposed to the bill. take issue with the manufacturing jobs in corona and lodi from dart's perspective. those facilities cannot be retooled immediately. those jobs will go away. there's approximately 650 jobs in both of those communities. we urge the committee to keep the bill in suspense.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shaina Brown: good afternoon, brown with the california manufacturers and technology association. i'd like to echo the comments regarding job loss to california employees. i would like to also note that california continues to lag behind the national average of manufacturing job growth across the nation.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Angie Mineti: Good afternoon Mr. Chair and members, Angie Mineti with the California Retailers Association, in opposition.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Joe Ackler: mr. chair and members, joe of behalf of the plastic industry association, opposed.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 36, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Lovell: John Lovell on behalf of the Los Angeles County Professional Peace Officers Association, we're in support of the bill. And if I could simply incorporate by reference the other groups that support the bill. I want to indicate that the costs of this bill are even lower than the modest amounts estimated in the analysis. The analysis is based on approximately 100 people being covered by this law. Actually according to a analysis done by the Senate Public Safety Committee, the number of new people who would be brought under Pobar by this bill is 66 people statewide. That's a very minimal amount and that assumes that all 66 of them would take advantage and use the provisions of Pobar. Currently Deputy Coroner peace officers who are in Sheriff's departments are already covered by Pobar. This covers the narrow cohort, only eight counties, where there is a free standing coroners office that has peace officer deputy coroners in the office. This is a very incremental bill. I was frankly surprised that it was put on suspense but we would hope that it would go off suspense given the minor cost.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 681, 'end': 686, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 784, 'end': 789, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Justin Malan: Justin Malan for the Community Alliance with Family Farmers in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jess Milan: mr. chair, jess duncan milan for the us green building counsel and series in strong support. we urge this to come on suspense.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Lovell: John Lovell on behalf of the Association for Los Angeles Deputy Sheriffs, Association of Deputy District Attorneys, California Association of Code Enforcement Officers, California College and University Police Chiefs Association, California Narcotic Officers Association, Los Angeles County Probation Officers Union, AFSCME Local 685, Los Angeles County Professional Peace Officers, and the Los Angeles Police Protective League, all in support of this good sense public safety bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Beth Colgan: hello, my name is beth, i'm an assistant professor of law at ucla school of law. and my research focuses on constitutional policy implications of using economic sanctions as punishment. i'm currently studying a set of experiments that took place in the 1980s and 1990s in six different jurisdictions in the united states involving the use of what's called a day fine. which put simply is a type of economic sanction that's graduated to account for one's ability to pay. and in the interest of time, i'm just going to focus on a little bit of information from one of the jurisdictions that we have the most robust data that's maricopa county, arizona. and in the maricopa county project, defendants were assigned randomly to either court where they would receive a day fine adjusted to their ability to pay or to a court where they would receive a standard fine, known as a tariff fine. and as might be expected, in the court where day fines were assessed the median amount of fines dropped. and so as also might be expected, the results were that the amount of payments went up. so 96% of day fines defendants paid something toward the fine they were imposed as compared to only 77% of tariff fines defendants. and the takeaway here is that the graduation of economic sanctions to an amount that's within the defendant's ability to pay may well actually result in improved collection rates, even where the average amount of fine goes down. so in other words, a properly designed system could result in greater revenues. and that's because not only did the percentage of payments go up but actually the dollars collected went up. so despite the fact that the median fine amount was lower for state fines defendants, state fines defendants paid an average of $699 on their fines, whereas tariff fines defendants paid an average of $344. but, of course, we shouldn't just be thinking about money in through revenues, but also expenditures. i understand there's a concern in the fiscal report about the administrative time it would take to do an ability to pay calculation. the day's fine project developed simple tools to determine ability to pay, calculated basic calculator forms that were used and were quite successful with court staff and probation staff who were in charge of collecting ability to pay information reported that it didn't have a negative effect on court dockets. also, that we may actually see administrative costs go down. so taking again maricopa county project, people sentenced to pay the day fines were more likely to pay in full within three months than people sentenced to pay tariff fines were in an entire year. and so i believe the estimate in the fiscal report is that it would take 10 minutes per person to do ability to pay hearings even if that's the case. it needs to be weighed along with the reduction in time spent trying to collect money that people have no meaningful capacity to pay. so in other words, a well designed program for adjusting economic sanctions for ability to pay can ultimately be beneficial with both groups, both with respect to revenues and expenditures. i'll stop there but i'll be happy to answer any questions you might have.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Herald: mr. chair, mike jess herald with the western center on law and poverty. we're one of the co-sponsors of sb 185. and i think their two witnesses have done a fine job of outlining the fiscal issues that we wanted to raise. we would just note that aspects of sb185 were actually included within government's budget this year. and they've actually recognized that there's no actual data that shows there's a link between suspension for failure to pay and collection. we think that's right. we think the data that's been presented here reinforces that point. and we look forward to the bill coming off suspense. thank you.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Anna Magdu: Chair and members, Anna Magdu with the American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network, in support.
[{'start': 19, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Myriam Valdez: Myriam Valdez with Health Access, in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jo Michael: good afternoon mr. chair and members, michael for equality california. we are the cosponsor of this bill in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kevin Snider: Good morning, Mr. Chairman and Senators. My name is Kevin Snider with Pacific Justice Institute, Center for Public Policy. This bill seeks to remove the requirement to submit accurate information relative to sex for a driver's license. The applicant can choose their opposite biological sex through a third category called nonbinary. Nonbinary is an amorphous term, entirely useless as a descriptor for a government ID. There are fiscal implications. When flying, TSA may not recognize California ID if the card is inherently untrustworthy. Airports now hang signs that the ID from several states will not be accepted beginning January 1. This bill exposes Californians to the prospect of loosing the opportunity to fly with just a license. This will cause delay in getting through security by those unaware that their license is useless or have forgotten their passports. This bill will create the conditions for increased tensions for fliers, that often boils over into conflict. We do not know the full economic impact due to Californians not being able to board their flights, having to re-book, or missing important meetings. We do know that the loss in state revenue by the interference of travel and commerce is certain. The FAA commissioned UC Berkeley to study the impact of delays in flights. That study showed a negative economic impact of $33 billion for just one year. The economic loss results in a loss of tax revenues to the state. The purpose of ID is not to validate perceived psychological needs, ID serves an entirely utilitarian purpose, the prevention of fraud and the preservation of safety. I therefore urge the bill be tabled until the authors are able to provide the necessary assurances from the Secretary of Homeland Security, that changes to California ID will be accepted. Thank you for your deliberation and for your service to the community.
[{'start': 52, 'end': 64, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Greg Burt: chair and members, my name is greg mike burt from the california family council. i just wanted to bring up that this particular law is going to come in conflict with federal title ix law. currently, title ix requires k-12 schools and public universities to provide equal educational and athletic opportunities for both sexes. now that you're creating a third sex, that will require thousands of schools, both k-12 and universities, to provide athletic programs and facilities to nonbinary students. this would be very costly, thank you so much.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Lovell: Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, John Lovell. We are co-sponsors of the- California Association of Code Enforcement Officers. We're co-sponsors of Senate Bill 362. As Senator Galgiani pointed out, this is actually a very narrow cohort of people. Presently, many code enforcement officers are already covered by the confidentiality laws. For example, if you were a code enforcement officer who, under your city's organization chart is part of a Police Department, and about 400 or 500 are, you are already covered under the confidentiality provisions. Or if you are a code enforcement officer whose, officer whose duties include parking enforcement or vehicle abatement, you are already covered. So what this bill does is just fill in a fairly small gap of uncovered code enforcement officers. Similarly, with parking control officers. All municipal parking control officers are currently covered by the confidentiality provisions, but those who work for counties or special districts or universities are not covered. Again, these is a clean up bill that addresses a very important issue. We believe that the fiscal estimates from DMV are over estimated based on a misapprehension of who's actually covered right now.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 182, 'end': 190, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Andrew Langley: mr. chair and members, langley on behalf of the county of san diego in support. thank you.
[]
Sam Reddie: mr. chairman and members, sam greg reddie representing gun owners of california in strong opposition to this bill. the not even potential but the net negative impact of resources to the state of california will be incredible. over the last five years, more than 1 million firearms have been sold in the state of california and purchase that generates sales tax, that generates funds to go to various, fees to go to various funds. all of those things would be greatly reduced, and we'll have a very negative financial impact. there's no indication that has any other value except to slow things down. so we're in strong opposition to this bill. thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Craig DeLuz: mr. chair and members of the committee, craig sam deluz on behalf of the firearms policy coalition. first, we'll just state that we don't know that you can put a financial tag on the idea of rationing a civil right. but with that, we would like to note that the funding for this measure does come from dross. we already know that the dross fund is already severely being financially mismanaged. just recently, by budgets sub five, the attorney general came before the budget sub committee in order to request additional funding that is supposed to then come from the firearms safety withdraws, borrow from the firearms safety fund because it can't meet its current obligation. we don't believe that it makes a good physical sense to be putting additional burdens on the drills funded this time.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Roy Griffith: mr. chairman and members, thank you for the opportunity. roy craig griffith on behalf of the california rifle and pistol association for the reasons my colleagues outlined. we're in strong opposition, thank you.
[{'start': 57, 'end': 75, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Lange: i try not to fall over. karen roy lange, on behalf of the california association of county treasurers and tax collectors, in opposition to the provisions of sb 448 that would require tax collectors to include itemized information in the tax bill related to the 1% ad valorem. any direct charges assessed by school bonds or other sorts of municipal services are already identified on the tax bill but the 1% would be very misleading if we were to only include the services provided by the 1% and not the blended funding that comes from the federal and state governments as well. and it would also be incredibly onerous and burdensome and the millions of millions of dollars implement. so for those reasons we're opposed on fiscal issues. thank you.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gary Hughes: Gary Hughes, Friends of the Earth, and we are in support of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gary Burke: Chairman, Committee. There hasn't been many oppositions to this bill because we just heard about it from the fishing industry. But my name is Gary Burke, and I've been a California fisherman commercial for 45 years. Participated in the management of the California Fisheries and also service advisor to the Pacific Fishing Management Council. At first glance, SB 402 seems harmless, but it's a wolf in sheep's clothing. Senator Allen's past record tells the story. For the past three years, Senator Allen has authored two bills that would have ended the California Driftnet Fishery. The only viable way to catch swordfish off our coast. Because of these legislative attempts, the Pacific Fisheries Management Council set forth the motion to federalize these permits. One of the main reasons was to federalize these was to end these emotional legislative bills that attempts to stop a good fishery. California has three seats on the council of Pacific management Council. Science drives the decisions. If this bill is passed, it could cost millions of dollars in lost revenue and lost fisheries. It could hurt the crab fishery and also the anchovy fishery. It'd put them in jeopardy and it'll create turmoil between the feds and the state. Even if it's amended, this bill's worded wrong and it is not a good bill. Please oppose it, thank you.
[{'start': 142, 'end': 152, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 428, 'end': 433, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 499, 'end': 504, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Noah Oppenheim: mr. chair, members of the committee, thank you. this is noah karen oppenheim, executive director of the pacific coast federation of fishermen's associations, in opposition. i'll echo the comments of the two previous speakers. i'll also add on behalf of the largest association of commercial fisherman on the west coast, subject to one and potentially two federally noted fisheries disasters, the industry simply cannot support additional regulatory burdens that impedes our ability to provide seafood for the people of california and the world. and as far as regulatory burden to the state of california, as the committee digest notes, this creates a potentially duplicative and nebulous set of criteria by which the state is mandated to manage fisheries which are already the best managed in the world, bar none. this is simply an excessive burden that we can't stand for and we urge your opposition. thank you.
[{'start': 56, 'end': 76, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mike Montgomery: members and chair mike noah montgomery, congress of california seniors we support the bill.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Ross: Good morning, Karen Ross on behalf of the Marin County Council of Mayors and Council members in support of the bill.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gary Hughes: hughes with friends of the earth, and we're in support of sb 51.
[]
Sarah Badawi: Sarah Badawi on behalf of Environment California in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Department of Finance: department mike of finance is neutral in this bill and we don't see a fiscal impact to the state.
[]
Craig de Luz: mr. chair and members of the committee, craig on behalf of the farmers policy coalition in support.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sarah Badawi: Sarah Badawi on behalf of Environment California in support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Lovell: John Lovell on behalf of the Association for Los Angeles Deputy Sheriffs, Association of Deputy District Attorneys. California Association of Code Enforcement Officers, California College and University Police Chiefs Association. California Narcotic Officers Association, Los Angeles County Probation Officers Union AFSCME local 685. Los Angeles County Professional Peace Officers Association, Los Angeles Police Protective League and Riverside Sheriffs Association, all in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Perry: randy department perry with aaron reid and associates on behalf of porac 970 associations in support.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 38, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Craig DeLuz: Craig DeLuz on behalf of the Firearms Policy Coalition in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Ross: Good afternoon, Karen Ross on behalf of the cities of Burbank and Pasadena, in support of the bill.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Perry: Mr. Chairman and members, Randy Perry with California Children's Hospital Association in opposition.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alex Morris: Hi, Alex Morris with the California Energy Storage Alliance. Thank you Chair, thank you Senator Skinner. We're here in support of the bill and look forward to working through any issues in the Committee and in the suspense process.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 96, 'end': 103, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Tiffany Phan: Sorry, one more in support. Tiffany Phan, on behalf of the California Energy Efficiency Industry Council. Thanks.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alicia Priego: Alicia Priego on behalf of San Diego Gas and Electric. We are opposed to this bill. To the extent that this bill does require new targets for procurement on utilities would lead to additional rate payer costs.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amber Blixt: good morning, amber randy blixt with the independent energy producers in opposition. the committee analysis does a fiscal impact of over $500,000 for sb 338. we believe that these costs are unnecessary given that the state's policies already require that we invest first in energy efficiency, demand site resources and then renewables. also sb 350 which was recently passed indicates that it authorizes procurement of clean resources to provide grid reliability services that reduce reliance on fossil fuel generation. so we think that the additional set procurement targets are not necessary for these reasons, and they are going to just reduce the flexibility that we have been managing the grid while increasing cost, and we do think that if this bill does pass, what happens is even though these existing programs are already happening, each different ward is going to be analysed by these agencies and to see how it will fit into their existing processes. so that's where the cost of implementation are going to be come up. we respectfully ask for your no vote.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Lovell: John Lovell on behalf of the Association for Los Angeles Deputy Sheriffs, Association of Deputy District Attorneys, California College and University Police Chiefs Association, California Narcotic Officers Association, Los Angeles County Professional Peace Officers Association, Los Angeles Police Protective League, and Riverside Sheriffs Association all in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rico Mastrodonato: good morning mr. chair and members, rico amber mastrodonato with the trust for public land in support.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyra Ross: Good morning Kyra Ross. On behave of the City of Sacramento in support of the bill.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Daniel Cohen: Good morning, Daniel Cohen with the California Teachers Association in opposition to SB 78 due to its negative impacts on Prop 98 side of the budget, And the intent, the original intent of Prop 49 being do not deprive 98 of those funds. Thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Lange: Karen Lange on behalf of Mayor Edwin Lee and the City and County of San Fransisco, in support. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 31, 'end': 40, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Stanicia Boatner: boatner on behalf of the california state association of counties, in support.
[]
John Lovell: John Lovell, California College and University Police Chiefs Association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cassie Burdyshaw: My name is Cassie Burdyshaw, I'm the advocacy and policy director for Turtle Island Restoration Network. I'm here in opposition to the bill. My comments are on behalf of Turtle Island Restoration Network, but also on behalf of Mill Valley Community Action Network and Ocean Defenders Alliance. We oppose the bill because it acts as a subsidy to the oil and gas industry, and it's inappropriate to use our oceans, which are magnificent resource, as essentially a trash dump for used materials from the oil and gas industry. It presents a variety of environmental and fiscal risks, and that includes the introduction of Invasive species that are harmful to the ocean ecosystem, but also require a lot of fiscal resources on the part of the state and other parties to deal with. So please take that into account as a risk as we move forward and oppose the bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 27, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Noah Oppenheim: noah rico oppenheim, executive director of the pacific coast federation of fisherman's associations, here in opposition. in addition to exposing the state to liability with respect to environmental mitigation and clean up costs, it also exposes the state to liability because of the risks that these partially decommissioned rigs present to fishing operations. they're a navigation hazard. there's potential for entanglement with fishing gear as well as, of course, the potential for damage to vessels and loss of life. so i urge a no vote, and thank you for your time.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tiffany Phan: tiffany noah phan on behalf of the california energy efficiency industry council in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Victoria Rome: And good morning, Victoria Rome with the Natural Resources Defense Council, in support.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Lovell: Yes, John Lovell with the Association for Los Angeles Deputy Sheriffs. The Association of Deputy District Attorneys. California College University Police Chiefs, California Narcotics Association. Los Angeles County Professional Peace Officers Association. Los Angeles Police Protective League, and Riverside Sheriff's Association. We're all in opposition to the bill. We would note that the Supreme Court is looking into the global issue of bail. However, their report will not be concluded till December, and we believe that both physical and policy prudence suggests that these two efforts move in tandem, not separately. Many of us are old enough to remember when a very bright Legislator named Steve Peace pushed electronic utility deregulation a number of years ago. And because it wasn't looked at in a coordinated way unhappily, the only good result was that Enron was enriched. And we would suggest that the stakes are too high to do this in a way without looking at all of the various elements and all of the work in a coordinated fashion.
[{'start': 5, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 698, 'end': 709, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Gloria Mitchell: gloria tiffany mitchell bail bonds, california bail agents association in opposition of this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Slava Vilshtein: slava gloria vilshtein 50 bail bonds van nuys, california, in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Steve Payton: Good morning, Steve Payton, Venture Bail Bonds out of Humboldt county, we're strongly oppose this.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Davidson: good morning, bill slava davidson owner of humble bill bonds, venture bonds, and bill slava davidson bill bonds out of humble and del mar county and i'm opposed to this.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 81, 'end': 100, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Rob Dick: rob bill dick, california bail education association, former law enforcement, strongly oppose this.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Adrian Herrada: Adrian Herrada, owner of California Capital Bail Bonds, I strongly oppose this.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Fred Stevens: Fred Stevens, I'm a California Bail Instructor and also a private investigator. Just a few facts on boots on the ground out of Stanislas county between the 2nd and the 5th of May of this year. Over half of the arrests in the county that were performed were done on repeat offenders who had been released on OR. If aggregate cost of crime to the public is $5000 per defendant who is released, which is actually a little low, because that's a 2007 statistic. That means you're passing on $90,000 of cost to the public on crimes repeat performance to the public. So I'm strongly opposed.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Elizabeth McPherson: good morning, elizabeth of remy quick bail bonds. i'm also a member of the california bail agents association coming here today from west covina, california and i strongly opposed the bill. i believe that this will cause an increase in crime in our communities throughout the state if these two bills are passed, sb 10, and ab 42, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Calstra: good morning, my name is chris rob calstra, i'm from van nuys california, i came all the way from van nuys to see bob hertzberg today. from van nuys, i'm from his area. he does not represent us in van nuys, california. we don't have money for schools. they don't have art, they don't have music, they don't have anything, they don't have school supplies. when they need supplies, do you know where they go? they call chris castro bail bonds, that's where they go. i pay for their stuff, bob hertzberg does not. he's not here to talk to so, this will cost. will cost $3.5 billion to even attempt to implement. read the bill carefully because it was not written by a bill bond or anybody who knows anything about law enforcement. it will not work in the blood of the people will be on your hands overdoses, gang killings, child molestation. the victims cannot have this bill, cannot do it and you can't afford it.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 42, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 114, 'end': 127, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 417, 'end': 429, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 487, 'end': 500, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kristin McRiley: kristin chris mcriley, mcriley bail bonds, temple city, california. i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Al Patel: Al Patel from Lakewood Bail Bonds, Lakewood, California. I strongly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kellie Weatherby: I, Kellie Weatherby with Atlantis Bail Bonds, Sacramento. I strongly oppose the bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 3, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Geri Campana: Hi Geri Campana San Francisco, Al Graf Bail Bonds. Also, a licensed California school teacher, retired. Anyways, I oppose this bill.
[{'start': 3, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 31, 'end': 38, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Casey McKinney: mckinney sacramento, california, atlantis bail bonds. i oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 8, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Randy Perry: randy with aaron reid and associates on behalf of ... in strong opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 11, 'end': 21, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Thelma Guerra: good morning, thelma kristin guerra from the bail bonds company and i strongly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ryan Smalls: ryan, us fugitive service, prior law enforcement, i strongly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ruanne Dozier: ruanne thelma dozier, deputy district attorney on behalf of the california district attorney's association, we are in opposition. i'm also here representing sacramento county district attorney's office, we are also in opposition. our county looked at preliminary numbers, and for sacramento alone, we estimate that this bill would cost us anywhere from $6 to 8 million annually.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bill Armstrong: bill ruanne armstrong, cecil armstrong, bail bonds, out of glendale california since 1926. we oppose this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 23, 'end': 38, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Al Ricky: my name is al bill ricky. i own sacramento bail bonds, 66 years. this system is a service that we provide to the public. there's been a bail system since time. and the courts are the ones that set the bail. we provide the service. my opinion is that we just  cost the general public many many dollars for service people that fail to appear if you let them walk without anything that makes them commend a court, all of the people that back them to do that. thank you
[{'start': 11, 'end': 24, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Leanne Curtis: Good morning Leanne Curtis, I represent Alder Creek Bail Bonds of Truckee, Tahoe. And we do have in a lot of our research in the bail industry that one failure to appear is going to cost the tax payers $1,700 at minimum each. Right now, in Sacramento County, there's a close to 54,000 warrants in their system. If you do simple math, you're looking at about over $91 million a year going out to [UNKNOWN] to appear now for all of the people who are alert. So if this bill passes, you're looking at a much bigger number. And we're just talking about one county in this, so anyway I do strongly oppose the bill. Thank you.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 26, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Fred Anschultz: Hi, my name is Fred Anschultz. I'm a licensed bail agent in California since 1981. I am also the bail underwriting manager for Tokio Marine HCC Security Group one of the largest underwriters of bail in the state and besides all the other concepts have been mentioned, the amount of money that will be lost to the State of California in premium tax if this bill goes through is astronomical. And as a bail agent and for Tokio Marine HCC, we strongly oppose the bill.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Elana Salazar: Thank you. Good morning. Elana Salazar, California bail agent, Orange County. I strongly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 38, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tiki Maxwell: hi, maxwell, california bail agents association and new century bail bonds and i strongly oppose the bill.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Theresa Jennings: Hi Theresa Jennings, T. Jennings Bail Bonds, I strongly oppose this bill.
[{'start': 3, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 21, 'end': 43, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jessica Bartholow: Thank you Mr. Chair, members, Jessica Bartholow with the Western Center on Poverty response of SB10. We weren't planning to present today and had thought that there was an agreement not to be here and fill the room so we're not filling the room but we want to take a couple of minutes with some people that are in the room, impacted by bill, directly you can speak to you, about the bill and in support of the bill. I'll start, I, myself have had family members help on bill, only because they did not have enough money. When I was a child, my mother was held on bail or held in jail without bail for five days because she bounced a check. My father, a disabled veteran was home and in charge of us, but was under medication. And so it was a scary couple of days without her. These are what many families are experiencing across the state. And we have a couple of them here to tell you. Thank you.
[{'start': 30, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maurice Goans: Maurice Goans, Fathers and Families of San Joaquin, I'm in support of the bill. To victimize and penalize people who are low income that don't have a dispensable $5,000 laying around, that's just wrong, this is what poverty pimp looks like in 2017.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Daniel Aguilar: My name is Daniel Aguilar from Fathers and Families of San Joaquin, I'm in support of SB 10. I don't think it's right that we have to pay for our freedom, this is a free country.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ramon Aguilar: Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen, my name is Ramon Aguilar, from Fathers and Families of San Joaquin. My personal story is I had to spend the past 25 years in the system because I could not afford bail, whether I was guilty or not guilty. This affects a lot of people of color and those people of low income families. I think that it is unfair that because we don't have the money, or we don't have the support, that we cannot obtain these bails. The money is outrageous, a lot of us don't make the money, we'll never make that amount of money, but yet we have to come up with this money or we stay many years in the penitentiary or in jail. I am deeply for this bill, and ask that you understand that there are a lot of people out there that do commit crimes and some people do deserve to be in there, but they also deserve to have a right and just bail that a can fit their financial situations. Thank you so much. Thank you.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sara Flocks: Mr. Chair, members, Sara Flocks, California Labor Federation in support.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Cassie Burdyshaw: Hi my name is Cassie Burdyshaw and I'm here in support of the bill as a citizen and also a formal legal aid attorney, asking you not to punish poor people for being poor.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 30, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tiffany Whiten : Tiffany Whiten with the Service Employees International Union representing 700,000 Californians in strong support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mica Doctoroff: good morning mr. chair, members, mica al doctoroff on behalf of the aclu of california, we are a proud co-sponsor of sb 10 and ab 42 in the assembly. sb 10 builds on proven, effective reforms from all over the country, these are both effective from a policy perspective as well as cost effective. we are currently working with institutional stakeholders here in california to develop appropriate mechanisms to uphold both the california constitution, the u.s. constitution, and public safety here in the state. we respectfully ask for your support of this bill, thank you very much.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Katherine Brandenburg: Good morning, Katherine Brandenburg representing the American Bail Coalition. We are not in support of the bill but we are very appreciative of Senator Hertzberg's effort to work with us and hope we can continue working with him as the year goes through, thank you.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 152, 'end': 161, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Kyra Ross: good morning. ross on behalf of the marina county council of mayors and council members in support.
[{'start': 14, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Noah Oppenheim: Noah Oppenheim, I'm with the Pacific Coast Federation of Fishermen's Associations, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rico Masterdenado: Rico Masterdenado with the Trust for Public Land, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Juan Altamirano: Juan Altamirano with Audubon California, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vivian Ericson: vivian on behalf of the california coast keepers alliance, the ocean conservancy and the grasslands water district, in support.
[]
Gary Hughes: gary with friends of the earth, we're in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Vivian Erickson: bill in support, vivian, on behalf of community nature connections, the land trust of santa cruz county, caltrout, and arroyos and foothills conservancy, in strong support of sb 5.
[]
Jay Kalkenio: kalkenio on behalf of ocean conservancy, grassland water district, and laguna water greenbelt, in support.
[]
Nicole Wordelman: nicole mica wordelman on behalf of social compassion in legislation, the sponsor of the measure. we've been trying for several years to get this money out for spay and neuter programs, and this measure will help to do so. we'd appreciate at aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 21, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Lange: good morning, mr. chair and members. karen nicole lange on behalf of the state humane association of, california, the statewide association of the about 150 public and private shelters in strong support today. thank you.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amy Durbin: amy karen durbin with the california medical association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jim Lights: Jim Lights on behalf of ReviverMx, the thrust of this expansion would be to explore payment options including the ability of vehicle owners to pay their VLF monthly. We are in support and ask for your aye vote.
[]
Isabel Govea: good morning mr. chair and members of the appropriations committee. my name is dr. isabel. i am the principal at h.w. harkness elementary school in south sacramento for the sacramento city unified school district. we serve 370 students of which a staggering 87% are of low socioeconomic status. sadly, of our third graders through six grade, only 50% met the proficiency level language, arts. i'm here in support of sb 494 and i'm very grateful to senator ben hueso for authoring this critical piece of legislation and continuing to champion literacy in california. we can all agree that literacy learning in kindergarten through fourth grade is fundamental for academic success. however, for the students at harkness elementary school and the surrounding community, it is absolutely essential. the greatest challenge and harkness elementary is extremely limited access to early literacy development. our children live in poverty, they do not have the luxury of some of the things that some of us considered basic supports to develop literacy skill such as language rich environments at home or weekend trips to the library. there is a lot of research on the negative correlation of poverty levels and exposure to language, consider this simple analogy to help this message resonate. the vast majority of the fourth graders in my school have had the same exposure to language, oral and written as your children or mine did in kindergarten. harkness students need all of us to provide a guarantee that we will do whatever it takes to mitigate this gap. at harkness, we have been able to partner with organizations such as reading partners to provide additional literacy instruction, to accelerate our students literacy development. and an added benefit is our kids know there's someone else besides their teacher who cares about them and builds a relationship centered on a passion for literacy. senate bill 494 would establish the golden state reading guarantee grant program. this program would assist local educational agencies and schools like mine, ensuring that all students meet reading standards and language progressive skills by the end of third grade, by providing us the needed resources and flexibility with these resources to help struggling readers. improving literacy outcomes is also one of the strongest steps california can take to ensure our future economic strength. it starts with communities like mine. sb 494 provides a sensible approach to improve literacy using many of the resources we already have available by supporting under-resourced school districts who want to implement additional reading intervention strategies. and by bringing light, best practices that can inform instruction across california. it is for these reasons that i ask for your support of sb 494.
[{'start': 83, 'end': 89, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 456, 'end': 465, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Bob Giovati: yes, mr. chair and members, bob amy giovati with the state council on developmental disabilities. the state council is formed by state and federal law to make sure the people with intellectual and developmental disabilities get the help they need. in addition to the comments that were made by the good senator, when i first saw this bill, i thought, well, how many people would this really impact? probably not that many. but when i actually looked at the statistics of the number of people, for example, that acquire traumatic brain injury between the ages of 18 and 22, i was stunned. the number of people that are admitted to the emergency wards in california is much higher than most of us would care to imagine and the number of people coming out of those services with residual injuries is extremely high as well. so for that and many other reasons the council supports the bill. thank you.
[{'start': 28, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : thank bob you. bob hi, bob my bob name bob is bob doctor bob cassie bob spalding bob diaz, bob i'm bob a bob specialist bob in bob physical bob medicine bob and bob rehabilitation bob and bob in bob particular bob brain bob injury bob medicine. bob i bob work bob at bob the bob uc bob davis bob medical bob center bob and bob i bob work bob in bob the bob hospital bob setting bob taking bob care bob of bob patients bob with bob severe bob and bob moderate bob traumatic bob brain bob injuries bob in bob the bob icu bob and bob taking bob them bob to bob rehab bob to bob be bob able bob to bob discharge bob them bob home bob safely bob to bob a bob community bob environment. bob and bob i bob see bob that bob in bob families bob where bob they bob don't bob have bob adequate bob support bob in bob terms bob of bob community bob support.
[{'start': 6, 'end': 9, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 15, 'end': 18, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 23, 'end': 26, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 30, 'end': 33, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 39, 'end': 42, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 46, 'end': 49, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 57, 'end': 67, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 68, 'end': 80, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 81, 'end': 89, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 91, 'end': 94, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 99, 'end': 102, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 105, 'end': 108, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 120, 'end': 123, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 127, 'end': 130, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 140, 'end': 143, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 153, 'end': 156, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 161, 'end': 164, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 180, 'end': 183, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 188, 'end': 191, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 195, 'end': 198, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 210, 'end': 213, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 220, 'end': 223, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 231, 'end': 234, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 245, 'end': 248, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 251, 'end': 254, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 260, 'end': 263, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 267, 'end': 270, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 275, 'end': 278, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 282, 'end': 291, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 292, 'end': 295, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 304, 'end': 307, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 315, 'end': 318, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 323, 'end': 326, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 329, 'end': 332, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 338, 'end': 341, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 345, 'end': 348, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 353, 'end': 356, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 366, 'end': 369, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 378, 'end': 381, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 389, 'end': 392, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 398, 'end': 401, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 405, 'end': 408, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 418, 'end': 421, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 427, 'end': 430, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 438, 'end': 441, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 446, 'end': 449, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 459, 'end': 462, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 473, 'end': 476, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 483, 'end': 486, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 496, 'end': 499, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 503, 'end': 506, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 511, 'end': 514, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 519, 'end': 522, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 527, 'end': 530, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 538, 'end': 541, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 547, 'end': 550, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 554, 'end': 557, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 564, 'end': 567, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 571, 'end': 574, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 578, 'end': 581, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 587, 'end': 590, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 594, 'end': 597, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 608, 'end': 611, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 617, 'end': 620, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 626, 'end': 629, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 637, 'end': 640, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 644, 'end': 647, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 650, 'end': 653, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 664, 'end': 667, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 681, 'end': 684, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 689, 'end': 692, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 695, 'end': 698, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 703, 'end': 706, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 712, 'end': 715, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 719, 'end': 722, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 732, 'end': 735, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 742, 'end': 745, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 751, 'end': 754, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 761, 'end': 764, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 770, 'end': 773, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 783, 'end': 786, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 795, 'end': 798, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 802, 'end': 805, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 812, 'end': 815, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 819, 'end': 822, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 833, 'end': 836, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mira Morton: thank you, mira  morton here on behalf of the california children's hospital association, also pleased to be here in support today. our hospitals regularly serve young adults between the ages of 18 and 21 and when they are dealing with a traumatic brain injury, they regularly report that there really aren't sufficient or age appropriate outpatient care for these young adults once they leave the hospital and we believe ultimately this is a good investment that will save the state money down the road and help these folks live more productive lives. so we support the measure.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 22, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jo Michael: good morning mr. chair and members. michael for equality california. we're proud to co-sponsor this bill along with the folks from the california department of insurance who i believe are on their way, but i'm not sure they're going to make it. so we would say that any investment that this bill requires is well worth it. and we absolutely support this as an investment for all under served communities. we respectfully urge your aye vote. thank you.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Rhine: Yes, sir, good morning, Jason Rhine, League of California Cities, we are in support of this measure, the Senator did a great job of outlining the bill and the possible loan revolving loan program that we're looking to fund. Again, it's a one-time augmentation that would be paid back, we have cities would like to streamline this approval process and just need a little assistance on that end, and we look forward to your support, thank you.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Charlie Ray: Charlie Ray with the California Construction, Industrial Materials Association in strong support, be happy to answer any questions.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Flojaune Cofer: cofer, public health advocates, in support
[]
Chester Malone: Chester Malone for the local Public Health, Local Environmental Health Agency, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rico Mastrodonato: Rico Mastrodonato with the Trust for Public Land, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dennis Albiani: dennis mira albiani on behalf of the california grain and feed, california seed, and california pear growers association, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Beth Capell: Beth Capell on behalf of health access California. In Northern California health insurance premiums are distinctly higher than in Southern California. This measure is aimed at the hospital practices that have driven up health insurance prices to be higher in Northern California than in Southern. We looking forward to working with the Committee while it's on suspense to address any cost issues.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Andrew Kiefer: mr. chair and members, andrew dennis kiefer with blue shield of california. we align ourselves with the comments of the previous speakers and ask for your support in due time.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alex Hawthorne: thank you, mr. chair, i don't think any of us do, hawthorne with the california hospital association here in opposition to the bill. we agree there is an issue with market dominance in healthcare. four health plans, control 85% of the healthcare market. health plan consolidation drives up healthcare costs. plans that, i'm sorry, lost track of my thought there. the one thing i wanted to focus on for this hearing is the issue of contracts as it relates to costs in health care. certainty in contracts brings cost down. if you enter into a contract, you know that costs will come down. you have certainty in the contract and there are studies on this that show that. what this bill would allow is for uncertainty in contracts. it allows the undermining of contracts and if we don't have certainty that those will be upheld, healthcare costs will go up, and we don't think that's a good thing. the second thing that i wanted to address was, that this bill doesn't allow us to set rates for services in advance. this is a good thing for consumers, if you're allowed to negotiate rates in advance, that brings costs down. if you have to dispute every single individual claim as they come in, we're talking about tens of thousands of claims. this should be done in advance. if it's not, healthcare costs will go up, and the final thing that i wanted to touch on was litigation. litigation is very expensive. most of these claims are done through arbitration. these are very routine claims that big entities have dispute over and they arbitrate them currently. if they're not allowed to arbitrate they will be litigated, and the one nuance to this is that the third party payers involved in this bill are pre-empted by the federal government, which means the only recourse of action we have, to settle disputes is through the federal courts, which is very time consuming and very expensive. the cost pressures this bill would place on the healthcare market are enormous. we would urge a no vote. thank you.
[]
Karen Sarkissian: Good morning, Mr. Chair and Senators. Karen Sarkissian with the California Chamber of Commerce. We are strongly opposed to that anti-arbitration provisions in the bill because they restrict formation of arbitration agreements, which is prohibited by The Federal Arbitration Act as reiterated by the US Supreme Court. While we appreciate the fact that there will be a fiscal impact to the state, there will be significant fiscal impact to employers because it will lead to costly litigation. Thank you.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Juan Thomas: Thank you Mr. Chair, Juan Thomas representing California Medical Association. We're opposed for some of the same reasons as the prior speakers. But we're also concerned about the impact to the bill on the underlying contract that our physicians negotiate with health plan. We appreciate some of the recent amendments, we think they try to get there, but they don't quite get there and so as a result we're still opposed to the bill, and ask you for a no vote at the appropriate time. Thank you.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 32, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mira Morton: Mira Morton on behalf of the California Children's Hospital Association, also in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Shannon Smith-Crowley: shannon andrew smith-crowley representing the american association of university women in support. just to say as senator jackson said, this is something schools are supposed to be doing already, and it's clear that they need a little extra guidance because we've got data from 2014 and 2015, 89% of colleges reported no incidences of sexual assault or dating violence and while we'd love that to be true, the case, obviously it's not, so we ask for your support on this bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 28, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 122, 'end': 129, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
John Lovell: john shannon lovell on behalf of the association for los angeles deputy sheriff's, the california college and university police chief's association, and the los angeles county professional peace officer's association, all in support. thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 19, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kyra Ross: Good morning Kyra Ross on behalf of the City of Glendale, in support of the bill.
[{'start': 13, 'end': 22, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
James Schwab: james jonah schwab, on behalf of secretary of state alex padilla, in support. this is probably the number one question we received after election day in november and through december was, well when does this proposition take effect? well, the constitution says the day after election day. well, what happens if the vote count changes? and there's no good answer to that. and so, this aca really goes to, i think clarifying when it takes effect, which will help out people who are directly effected by these measures in terms of getting their businesses ready. when cannabis became legal, wasn't one of the big questions when the plastic bag bans took effect. so, i would appreciate the effort and strongly support aca 1.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 52, 'end': 64, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dorothy Johnson : Good morning, again, Mr Chair and members. Dorothy Johnson with the California State Association of Counties, pleased to be in support of this measure, and we really thank the author for his leadership on this issue. As was mentioned, this is an optional tool for counties to save money when it comes to printing, but can be a very thick packet of material. And we think this is especially important in light of the immense cost pressures that counties are facing for elections administration. And so with that, we respectfully ask for your aye vote today.
[{'start': 43, 'end': 58, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jill Levine: I'm Jill Levine, I am the Registrar of Sacramento county, I am representing the California Association of Clerk and Election Officials, we are in support. Sacramento Country alone added 25 pages to their sample ballot book in English only because of this, so we appreciate this bill, thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Wolfe: mr. chairman and members, good morning. david james wolfe with the howard jarvis taxpayers association, in support of the bill. members, all this is really just a natural follow-up to the assemblyman's ab 271, or 2071. all these ballots should be postmarked or, otherwise submitted on election day and this just ensures if these ballots are submitted to a courier service that that actually happens. i ask for an aye vote.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maya Ingram: Maya Ingram, legislative attorney with the ACLU of California. We respectfully oppose this bill, because it is a solution in search of a problem. We are aware of no evidence that the type of voter fraud for vote by mail ballots being targeted with this bill occurs in order to justify the additional burden and we're aware of no bona fide private mail companies that have not been prosecuted for fraud. AB 775 also has a fatal flaw in that it does not specify what documentation in the legislation would need to accompany the ballots in order for them to meet this additional requirement. In addition to the required date or time stamp, this ambiguity can lead to confusion, and could lead to different standards being used across the 58 counties that will be reviewing these ballots. Thus, confusion could have the serious consequence of voter disenfranchisement, and for that reason, we ask for your no vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Resnikoff: Thank you, Assemblymember Low. Chair Berman, Members, thank you for the opportunity to speak here in support of AB 765. My name is Paul Resnikoff. I am the Vice Mayor of the City of Campbell. Did you know allowing a local initiative to be submitted to voters at a regularly scheduled election instead of requiring a special election would result in substantial savings to counties, cities, and tax payers throughout California? In addition, the extra time allotted can be used to negotiate better legislation, and/or to better educate voting public, resulting in higher, more representative voter participation. AB 765 still allows for special elections, when deemed appropriate. From a personal standpoint, the City of Campbell recently was forced to hold the special election with final cost estimated to exceed $600,000. As a council, we were faced with the distasteful option of accepting by ordinance a poorly written local initiatives, or in the words of the proponents, wasting hundreds of thousands of taxpayer dollars. So the tactic at the time was rightfully called extortion by our mayor. Governing boards should not be facing similar threats during their decision-making process. AB 765 will protect voters' rights in a local initiative process and save taxpayer money. And will result in a more educated electorate and a greater voter turnout. There's no downside to this bill. I, therefore, respectfully ask for your aye vote today.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 29, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 37, 'end': 43, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 131, 'end': 145, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicholas Heidorn: Nicholas Heidorn with California Common Cause, in support of AB 765. We believe this bill will strengthen the integrity of the local initiative process, and will also further the work that the Legislature has done to ensure the highest turn out possible in local elections. As everyone knows, special elections have notoriously low voter turnout. To give a recent example, the Congressional 35th District had turn out of only 15%. We don't think ballot initiative proponents should have the strategic ability to choose to place the measure in front of voters, when they know the voter participation will be at its very lowest. We also think that it is abusive that proponents can use the potential cost of the measure to try and coerce the local governments to simply pass it when the local governing board doesn't approve the policy. Perhaps, even the electorate wouldn't approve of the policy. So in some jurisdictions, for example, it would cost only in the tens of thousands of dollars to put a measure on the ballot. But the cost to local government to hold an election would be in the hundreds of thousands of dollars, putting pressure on the general fund and court services. For these reasons, we point out that the state does not have this possibility. We think that's the right approach, and we'd suggest that the local process should be similar to the Tate in that regard. For these reasons, we're in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jill LaVine: Good morning, I'm Jill LaVine, I am Registrar of Voters for Sacramento County, and today I'm representing the California Association of Clerk and Election Officials. We are the sponsors of this bill, and we had an incident in the June primary where we were taken to court because the candidates did not understand the difference between the signatures in lieu and the nomination signatures. And so we were hoping to clarify this by separating those time periods and making sure that candidates understood what papers and what signatures come in at what time. So we appreciate Assemblymember Cooper taking this bill.
[{'start': 18, 'end': 29, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 591, 'end': 597, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
James Schwab: James Schwab on behalf of Secretary of State Alex Padilla, in support. And we appreciate the effort to clear up the confusion around the overlapping timelines between the signature in lieu of and the nomination papers. I ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 45, 'end': 57, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dorothy Johnson : Good morning, Mr. Chair and members. Dorothy Johnson with the California State Association of Counties, pleased to support this measure.
[{'start': 37, 'end': 52, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Peter Cohen: yes, good afternoon, members. my name is cohen, and i'm with the council of community housing organizations in san francisco. we're a coalition of 25 san francisco based community organizations, building affordable housing, doing tenant services, providing tenant support. and we're very much in support of the bill, thanking senator ting for carrying this. we have a unique situation in san francisco, we're i guess fortunate, they have a very, very, strong real estate market. so, we've had an aggressive inclusionary housing policy. our planning department just put out a report two weeks ago, saying we have built 4,600 units of inclusionary housing alone. those are bmrs in private development since our inclusionary policy went into effect 12 years ago, so it's very, very successful. and as the assemblymember said, we have an unfortunate situation where the state density bonus can be utilized. but not only doesn't add affordable housing, but reduces the number of units that we're getting. so this bill simply allows us to apply our local inclusionary to projects, even if they scale up in density. and it's technically feasible, it's just we just don't have the mechanism to do it. we're again fortunate, i think, in our city to be a leader in affordable housing in terms of production, but also in terms of very creative policies. and we think that we have an ability to use both state density bonus, to increase overall production, and inclusionary to maximize affordable. this bill will help us make them a compliment.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 334, 'end': 338, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Karen Lang: hi, good afternoon, madam chair and members, karen jonah lang. as the author pointed out next week, it's anticipated that the board of supervisors in san francisco, will adopt the support position on the measure. so i wanted to get in chance to voice that support, at least verbally in the mean time. and thank you, and i ask for an aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 45, 'end': 61, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Hanlon: Good afternoon, my name is still Brian Hanlon, and I'm the Co-Founder of the California Renters Legal Advocacy and Education Fund, and the Policy Director for the San Francisco YIMB, or Yes In My Backyard Party. The Density Bonus Law was passed in 1979. And for 37 years, San Francisco refused to grant density bonuses. After the Latinos Unidos v Napa court case, began by the late housing hero David Grabel, San Francisco realized that they would need to abide by state law. The City's proposal, the Affordable Housing Bonus Program, was vigorously opposed by the organizational sponsor of AB 915, Peter Cohen of the Council of Community Housing Organizations, known as CCHO. Cohen referred to the proposal as the quote, redevelopment model, unquote, meaning the intentional destruction and displacement of low income communities of color. The Founder of CCHO, Calvin Welch, called San Francisco's attempt to comply with the Density Bonus Law quote, ethnic cleansing, unquote. I urge members of this Committee to not give in to the absurd fear mongering, unfortunately, common in San Francisco politics, do not permit the State Legislature to become another arena where dysfunctional San Francisco politics plays out. Specifically, the problems of the Cohen-Ting Bill are as follows. AB 915 would reduce significantly the economic incentives to use the Density Bonus Law and the economic value of Density Bonus units, which will result in fewer homes built. In San Francisco, with a very high inclusionary percentage, now at 25%, many proposed housing development projects are only financially feasible if they receive density bonus units under the current law program. The bill would create huge financial, legal, and political uncertainties for developers considering using the Density Bonus Law for future projects, and for land owners wishing to sell their land to such developments. The law would completely circumvent the spirit, intent, and function of the State Density Bonus Law which is to quote, be interpreted liberally in favor of producing the maximum number of total housing units. The Legislative Analyst's office, scholars of the UC Berkeley's Urban Displacement Project, academics at UCLA's Luskin School of Public Affairs, and economists everywhere speak with one voice regarding the need for California to build much more housing, including much more market rate housing in order to end our dire housing crisis. As San Francisco's Inclusionary Housing Technical Advisory Committee made clear, increasing the required inclusionary percentage in San Francisco will result in fewer homes built. AB 915 is the exact wrong solution of San Francisco's housing affordability crisis. And is part of a constellation of anti-housing policies that are an existential threat to people like myself, middle-class renters. The question is, do we get to live in San Francisco or not? If Assemblymember Ting has his way, I will be commuting from Stockton. Please, give the middle class a shot at living in San Francisco. Please, vote no on AB 915, thank you.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 395, 'end': 407, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 599, 'end': 610, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 677, 'end': 682, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 862, 'end': 874, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2907, 'end': 2911, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Debra Carlton: Debra Carlton with the California Apartment Association. We have quite a few of our developers that are developing and want to develop in San Francisco. However, because of the very high inclusionary rate today, many of them are backing out. And because of this change and potential change in the density bonus, we will see more exit the market in San Francisco, which is what we desperately do not need there. Of course, with this, we believe that this is what's going to happen. So with that, we ask for your no vote.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Svec: svec on behalf of the california association of realtors, also in opposition.
[]
Alyssa Stinson: Alyssa Stinson, on behalf of the California Building Industry Association, also in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Colon: tim karen colon, on behalf of the san francisco housing action coalition. this has split the city badly, and it unfortunately comes from small groups far out on the fringe. this has no support among mainstream economists and urban planners. this will reduce the production of subsidized affordable housing. it's a bad idea for a housing crisis, please, oppose it.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dan Kuerig: Madam Chair and members, Dan Kuerig on behalf of the League of California Cities. We're in support of this bill. Some of the fine thresholds that are in existing law haven't been updated for a long time. And so, we do support the author's effort to update them. Finding the appropriate balance point at to what level, we know it's gonna be a policy discussion, and we look forward to working with the various stakeholders along the way. But some of these fines haven't been touched for a long time, and we do believe that adjusting them allows for a more appropriate enforcement going forward.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Maya Ingram: maya tim ingram, legislative attorney with the aclu of california. i want to echo the comments of my colleague and just highlight the real human impact by increasing fine task, so for example, one oakland woman received a municipal fine for a municipal camping violation. she was unable to afford housing, she was homeless, that's why she was camping. when she did find affordable housing, she was then denied the apartment because of the outstanding fine she had for this municipal camping ticket. what studies have shown is that many americans are living on the financial edge and the study by the federal reserve showed that 46% of american families couldn't make a $400 unexpected expenditure without having to sell something or borrow money. so, these gradual increases of fines across the board and all the ways that people go through life do have real world consequences. and for those reasons we were hoping to see the bill get narrowed, and remain in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Missy Johnson: good afternoon members. missy here on behalf of la care. we're the sponsors of the measure and we respectfully ask for your aye vote.
[]
Cliff Berg: madam chairman, cliff maya berg on behalf of santa barbara county. would first like to thank you and your staff for working with the author and the sponsor and the amendments that have been proposed. obviously, we are happy to accept those amendments. unfortunately, there's been a significant problem in santa barbara county with people who ignore me. they are ignoring the permanent requirements. we're hoping this bill will incentivize them. to comply with the law and get a proper permit. we have with us glen russell our planning director in case you have any questions or need more information glen.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 509, 'end': 521, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 600, 'end': 604, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Chris Lee: Chris Lee, in behalf of Seasack in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 24, 'end': 31, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Debra Carlton: thank you madam chair and members, my name is debra cliff carlton with the california apartment association. as we have said, the legislature is doing wonderful work when it comes to providing bills that would finance affordable housing and clearing the way for affordable housing. but without bills like this, the approval process is still difficult at the local level. unfortunately, we're seeing a lot of opposition from not in my backyard individuals who don't want the housing construction. it's not going to work if we don't balance our jobs and our housing at the local level. so we firmly believe in this and request your aye vote. thank you.
[{'start': 46, 'end': 65, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Hanlon: Good afternoon. My name is Brian Hanlon and I'm the co-founder of the California Renters' Legal Advocacy and Education Fund and I'm the Policy Director of the San Francisco YIMBY party, or Yes In My Backyard Party, quite different than the NIMBYs. Thank you for considering AB678. The Legislature passed the Housing Accountability Act way back in 1982, the year of my birth, and has amended it 15 times since then. In 1990, 27 years ago, the Legislature substantially expanded the HAA and included a preamble that sounds like it was written yesterday. It reads in part, the lack of affordable housing is a critical problem which threatens the economic, environmental, and social quality of life in California. California housing has become the most expensive in the nation. The excessive cost of the state's housing supply is partially caused by activities and policies of many local governments which limit the approval of affordable housing, increase the cost of land for affordable housing, and require that high fees and exactions be paid by producers of potentially affordable housing. In 2001, the Legislature again amended the HAA and dropped the word affordable from its findings. Why? Because the problems that once afflicted the least of us, now afflict most of us. Today, the Legislature is again confronted with amending the HAA. For 35 years, many local governments have thwarted the will of the Legislature, violated the HAA, and worst of all, have created a housing crisis that is both acute and chronic, that immiserates renters, and aspirational homeowners throughout the state. On a personal note, as a renter, as a moderate income earner, as a not so young person who wrestles with the effects of the state's housing shortage every day, I implore you to strengthen the Housing Accountability Act and make good on a promise of California. The YIMBY, or Yes In My Back Yard, movement, consists of mostly renters in their 20s and 30s who are locked out of home ownership, struggling with rent, or living with housemates when we want to be starting families. We know that our housing struggles are not the result of impersonal economic forces or lack of individual effort, but derived from bad laws and bad policy decisions that have thwarted housing construction for decades. In short, we are angry and we vote on housing. We are not asking for public assistance, we are asking that the Legislature make its own housing laws enforceable so that California's construction tradespeople may build the future and construct a state affordable and accessible for all of us. Thank you and I respectfully request an aye vote.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 240, 'end': 246, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Svec: Madam Chair, Members of the Committee, Jennifer Svec on behalf of the California Association of Realtors. We're also in support of the measure for the reasons previously that were stated and I respectfully request an aye vote.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 52, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Alyssa Stinson: hi, alyssa on behalf of the california building industry association, in support.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Margo Parks: Margo Parks on behalf of the California Council for Affordable Housing, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Colen: tim debra colen with the san francisco housing action coalition, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jason Rhine: Good afternoon Madam Chair and members. Jason Rhine, League of California Cities. We are opposed to the measure in print, however the amendments that are bulleted in the analysis go a long way to address our concerns. Greatly appreciate the author's efforts, committee's efforts. We're not quite in a position to remove our opposition just yet, I think we'd like to see the actual words when they go into the bill. But we believe with those bulleted amendments it's going a long way to address our concerns. We look forward to seeing that language. Our intent, really, is to remove that opposition. The League has taken very seriously the housing crisis that we're facing in our cities and we're at the front lines of this. I think one thing to really point out, though, is that I think projects are being pulled back, but projects really aren't being denied. But there are things that we can do in the Housing Accountability Act, and we are at the table to make that happen.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sande George: Sande George, representing the American Planning Association. We also really appreciate all the work that both you and the staff of the committees have particularly put in on this. We are also almost there. We hope to get to removal of our opposition. We're down to two other issues and we hope that within the next couple of weeks we're able to also come to a compromise on those and, like the League, we do need to see those amendments first before we actually withdraw. So thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Lee: Chris Lee on behalf of the California State Association of Counties. We also want to thank the author and sponsors and the chairperson for the amendments, and we look forward to working out the remaining issues that we have with the bill.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karen Lange: good afternoon members, karen tim lange on behalf of the solano county board of supervisors, i apologize for not having the letter, and they just approved their position yesterday. sounds like things are moving in the right direction. hopefully we can remove our opposition as well, thank you.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tracy Rhine: good afternoon, tracy karen rhine, rural county representatives of california. also would like to thank the author's office and committee staff for working on this bill and we, too, hope to be able to remove our opposition, thank you.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jolena Voorhis: madam chair and members, jolena tracy voorhis on behalf of the urban counties of california. similar situation, we'd like to see the language in print. very much appreciate the committee's working with our coalition and to try address our concerns, thank you.
[{'start': 25, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Rylan Gervase: thank you. good afternoon madame chair and members. i'm rylan jolena gervase with the california special districts association. and we are co-sponsoring ab 979. i'd like to thank the committee chair and staff for working on amendments that clarify the process established by the bill. the goal of this bill is to increase the number of special districts, participating in their own governance, by serving on local agency formation commissions. currently, only about half of the california's 58 counties have special district representative, seated on their lafcos. under this bill, districts can meet to take a simple majority vote on the matter of representation. the process under current law, instead requires a majority of all districts in a county to pass a board resolution supporting such action within a one year period. the most recent county to gain special district representation was santa clara in 2012. organization of the counties 20 special districts to vote on a individual board resolutionwithin one year require date, well funded campaign and a part time organizer. simplifying the lafco representation process empowers special districts to seek representation on lafco and their decision making. is valuable in solving community service deficiencies as well as their inputs. i respectfully urge the community to support. thank you and happy to answer any questions.
[{'start': 56, 'end': 76, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Pamela Miller: Good afternoon. Madam Chair, members of the community, Pamela Miller representing the California Association of Local Agency Formation Commission, and we're also co-sponsoring the bill. I want to start by thanking the Chair and the members of your staff for helping us really clarify the desired process and cleaning up the language a little bit. Want to thank the author and his staff as well as our co sponsor, they found a great job in explaining this one to be very brief, the goal of this bill is to stream line the process of seating special district on LAFCO, while keeping the opt-in opt-out choice rather than mandating it. It also assists LAFCOs by creating a process by which they can conduct the elections for special districts to the RDA oversight boards. CALAFCO feels very strongly that having special district representation on LAFCO provides a more diverse and balanced decision making process when dealing with those local service provider issues. And really strengthens the foundation of LAFCO. We realize that streamlining the process does not mean that ongoing education in those 28 counties that don't have representation, needs to stop. In fact, this creates an opportunity for our LAFCOs, for CALAFCO, and for CSDA to actually kickstart those educational conversations again. And perhaps even take across the finish line a couple of those counties where we've been having ongoing discussions with the majority of those special districts. And given the converse and process just have not been able to get the process finish to all of been considering at for quite sometime. So, we see this bill as important step in that direction and respectfully ask for your aye vote.
[{'start': 55, 'end': 68, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Christie Foy: Hi, Christie Foy on behalf of the Three Valleys Municipal Water District here in strong support. Thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amber King: Amber King with the Association of California Healthcare Districts in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Danielle Bloss: danielle rylan bloss with the california municipal utilities association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mike Dylan: dylan representing the california library association in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dorothy Johnson : good afternoon, dorothy danielle johnson with the california state association of counties, pleased to support.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 40, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Mia Kong: i'm mia dorothy kong, and i'm, thank you madam chair and committee members. i'm an affordable housing developer. i'm also on the board of the council of infill builders. and we're one of the sponsors of ab 1568. along with a coalition made up of equity, housing, environmental, labor, and local government groups. and we've come together to try to recommend some workable solutions to deal with our vexing housing problem. since the demise of redevelopment in 2011 despite the statutory authority of eifds. many communities still do not have enough resources to bond for the needed infrastructure that they have in their communities. the needed infrastructure is required for new economic development, ab 1568 would provide resources and a reliable and permanent source of new funding to enable new infrastructure and affordable housing. 20% would be for affordable housing, for the area, and we respectfully ask for you aye vote. thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 20, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Kate Neece: And I'm Kate Neece, I'm the Executive Director of the local government Commission. And we have over 700 local government members from across California and the nation. We're working on livable communities. It'll be no surprise to all of you I'm sure to hear that the top concern for our cities and counties is affordable housing, and another really pressing concern for our local governments is climate change. So this bill provides an opportunity for local governments to finance projects in economically distressed communities around transit. Helping to meet both sustainable communities strategy and climate goals and also affordable housing goals as well by helping us to increase supply in the right areas. So we urge your support of this important bill to provide this critical financing source, thank you.
[{'start': 8, 'end': 18, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Chris Lee: chris, with the california state association of counties, in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 5, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Hamlin: brian mia hamlin from the san francisco ub party in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tim Colen: tim brian colen on behalf of the 300 members of the san francisco housing action coalition in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 15, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Greg De Giere: greg tim de giere with the arc and united internal policy of the developmental disability group as well. there's not only the nimbys but the bananas that build absolutely nothing anywhere or anybody.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sande George: Thank you. Sande George with the American Planning Association. I think we understand what the author wants to do and we understand the concerns with denial of housing. We don't think it happens very often and certainly not for on the basis of whether or not something is consistent with the general planner's zoning. Most denials just are not occurring. If there are problems, usually rezone or there's some other agreement to mitigate the concerns. But the concern here is that it goes way beyond what existing law requires as a standard. And it turns it on its head so the developer would actually be making the determination on consistency. It also applies to things way beyond consistency with the general plan and housing to other conditions of approval, which is a major change in the law. And finally, we're really concerned that the bill now would be in conflict, as far as the standard of review, with two of the other bills now on the HAA that now are going with preponderance of the evidence. So we do think that that has to be reconciled. We need one standard of review and we think this one actually goes too far the other direction, so unfortunately we still cannot support the bill.
[{'start': 11, 'end': 23, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Hene Kelly: Hi there, my name is Hene Kelly and I am the Legislative Director for the California Alliance for Retired Americans. As I said before, we represent over a million members and we do have members in every single district in California. And the point of this is that we want you, as the State Legislature, we want you to tell our representatives in Washington that we want to protect our children, our seniors, our disabled. And a state, a city, a county, will be judged by history on how they treat the youngest, the oldest, and those who cannot, who cannot take care of themselves. What is happening if Medicare, Medicaid and Social Security are weakened is that we will be judged very harshly. I have traveled all over the state talking to seniors and I am realizing that when you look at what is going on, between 35% and 55% of people in all districts are on both Medicare and Medicaid. These are the people you represent. These are the people I represent. That's frightening, what is happening in Washington is that the, what keeps our people and allows them to age with dignity. That helps people who are disabled to work, learn, is being taken away from them and your job, I hope, is to speak up for our people. Social Security helps children, it helps disabled, it helps retirees. The new health care act, if it goes through, will charge, can charge older people five times what they charge my daughter. Somehow, I don't think that's right. And it is really up to us to fight for the people in our districts and to fight for the people of California and really show the way for the rest of the states to fight. Because if we don't do that, we will be judged, as I said, very poorly.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 31, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ernie Powell: Good afternoon. My name is Ernie Powell. I'm the California Director for Social Security Works, which is the national organization that fights on behalf of people on Social Security, we oppose privatization, we oppose cuts and we favor expansion of it. And we also fight on these basic retirement programs and advocate for Medicare and Medicaid as well. We strongly support AJR *, we're very concerned about some proposals we're seeing with our current congressional members in Washington that would privatize Medicare, that would voucherize Medicare, that would cut over $880 billion for Medicaid. There's currently a bill from a Texas congressman,that would raise the age of eligibility up to age 69 for Social Security. That is a brutal benefit cut. So California has done a good job of standing up to some of the bad ideas on immigration, on the economy, etc, etc., that are coming out of the current administration and coming out of the current majority in Congress. I think California needs to stand up through this resolution and say that we will not accept cuts. We will not accept privatization to these incredibly successful programs. So we urge your yes vote on behalf of all the people of, of California, because this resolution will give us the tools or one more tool to fight the fight and oppose some of the very bad ideas that we see coming out of DC. Thank you, also, to the author for authoring this. His leadership is very much respected in this and we urge an aye vote. Thank you very much.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 374, 'end': 377, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jai Sookprasert: mr. chairman and members, sookprasert with the california school employees association, representing 240,000 classified school employees in our public schools and colleges in strong support.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Mary Valdez: Mary Valdez with Health Access, we are the statewide healthcare consumer advocacy coalition and we are in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sara Flocks: sara jonah flocks, california labor federation in support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Sara Flocks: Mr. Chair, members, Sara Flocks with the California Labor Federation in support of this bill. I wanted to start off with two points though. One is that the issue of skyrocketing prescription drug prices is real. And drug companies are the ones that set those prices and increase those prices and rebates are negotiated down from that. So that is still an outstanding stated problem that needs to be addressed. The second is that pharmacy benefit managers have an important role in managing prescription benefits for purchasers. But also in containing costs and negotiating to get those discounts for our members. We see this bill and the other bills moving through the Assembly on this subject as ways to increase the accountability, transparency, and disclosure by pharmacy benefit managers. So that purchasers can better manage them as vendors. So that we're able to get savings for our members and for our enrollees, not all of this are CalPERS, it's 1.8 million covered lives. There are able to negotiate for transparency for disclosure and all of the different types of relationships that the pharmacy benefit managers have with both drug companies, with other entities in the supply chain. Transparency helps us better manage our contracts. It also gives just a baseline for us to negotiate different kinds of transparency, not all of us have full pass through contracts. There's many different arrangements that we decide to have our pharmacy benefit managers, but the foundation of that should be full disclosure. And this is not a new idea, the analysis for this bill was really excellent, it raised some of the other examples of disclosure that's required. This was in the Affordable Care Act, to have disclosure by PBMs to federal purchasers. And it was something that was recommended by the ERISA Advisory Council. Which said basically that disclosure of fees and compensation by PBMs will help our plans, our purchasers carry out their fiduciary duty to members, that the money in our plans is spent in our best interest. We already have this on the pension side for ERISA plans. And would hope to have it on the health benefit side. So we thank the author, the author stand in Dr. Wood, for his work on this issue and urge your support.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 24, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2195, 'end': 2199, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Beth Capell: capell on behalf of health access california with the amendment. we're pleased to be in support and to continue to work with the author and any other representative of the author on further polishing amendments as the bill moves forward. i would begin where ms. flocks began. the price of prescription drugs is the problem. when you think about buying a car, if you're buying a tesla, you're negotiating discount and rebates, from $120,000 price. whereas if you're buying a used kia, it's a few $1000 and the discounts necessarily would be somewhat less. similarly, as we think about the price of prescription drugs, the rebates and discounts that are negotiated in the process vary with what the sticker price of a drug is. i want to note that some of the opposition may say that health plans regard pbms is as simply a vendor. but we have already as a state have chosen to regulate other vendors such as risk space medical groups. because they have played such an important role in the delivery of care. similarly pharmacy benefit managers do more than just service middle man in the drug chain. they also help to negotiate and formulate in pharmacy and seems appropriate for us that there be direct regulation. we should also know that our friends, the health plan to the insurers have not always done an excellent job of managing their vendors. we would bring to this committee's attention the difficulties with provider direct ratio. and think that a provider directory would be a simple thing to get right yet, we find that they're often in error. similarly, timely access reports, it has been a requirement of the knox-keene act since 1975 that health plans provide timely access to care, more than 40 years. yet recently, health plans were unable to submit, 90% of health plans submitted inaccurate reports about timely access to care. so we think that some direct regulation of pharmacy benefit managers is in order given emerging importance in the health care system. thank you.
[]
John Caldwell: Mr. Chairman, members, John Caldwell, representing the Pharmaceutical Care Management Association. We're the national trade Association representing pharmacy benefit managers. Both this bill and the chair's AB 315, which was not heard in this Committee, deal with the disclosure of rebates and discounts. Both the FDC and the CBO have said public disclosure of this information will result in lower discounts and rebates, thus raising drug prices. Both the Chair and Mr. Nazarian recognize this problem. And have tried to address it by getting rid of the language that explicitly requires public disclosure of this information. However, even as amended Our concern is that this valuable information will still make its way into the public domain. And the result will be as the FTC predicts lower rebates, lower discounts, higher drug prices. AB 29, like AB 315 mandate a raft of disclosures to the clients. But PBM clients are sophisticated purchasers. They are large corporations that provide health care across state lines. There health insurers, health plans, labor trusts, and state agencies like Halpers. There are over 80 PBM's in the country, and these PBM's compete fiercely for business. If clients want specific information relevant to their business they can and they do get it. They also audit their contracts to ensure that PBM is providing the service promised. On page four under sub c of the analysis it illustrates that PBM's are indeed responsive to their clients in the case of Medicare part d the PBM's client is CMS. And per the analysis the PBM's have provided CMS the information they need and they have seen the rebates increase. Today the clients negotiate for the information that they need. But this bill results in taking away a client's flexibility to build a contract how they want and disclosing information that a client may not want. As the analysis points out on page five, sub g, the Federal Trade Commission says that quote, mandatory disclosure requirements may hinder the ability of plants to negotiate an efficient level of disclosure with PBM's. These reports in the wrong hands will be incredibly valuable and our concern is that they eventually will become public. And manufactures will get insights into a competitors discount. Again page five sub g of the analysis coding again the FTC is such disclosures publicly reveal previously proprietary private information about discounts. Negotiated with PBM's disclosure may result in less aggressive pricing by or even collusion among pharmaceutical manufacturers. Lower discounts, lower rebates, higher prices. Finally we are opposed to the suggested amendment on page 7, 9b which says that DMHC has the authority to enforce the provisions of this bill including the authority to adopt, amend, or appeal any rules. As we've conveyed to the Chair, PCMA is not opposed to requiring PBM's to register with the MHC as a part of a process to make sure that consumer complaints about pharmaceutical coverage are addressed. The problem with this amendment is that the authority is too broad, and open-ended. We think it is important to work with the author and the chair to define the problem, ensure that DMHC authorities tailored to achieve that policy goal.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 36, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 471, 'end': 479, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Steffanie Watkins: steffanie on behalf of the association of california life and health insurance companies. first, we'd like to thank the author, we appreciate his passion for this issue. unfortunately we are here today in opposition while we do acknowledge as the sponsors do the importance of the legislature looking at drug pricing. and the impact it has on overall healthcare costs. we think that the use of pbm''s within our systems is actually one of the tools that we use to help lower that cost. we think it's an important tool and function that many of my members as sophisticated purchasers use in different ways. they have different mechanisms for using them in their current systems, some of my members use them to, and they completely take over all their purchasing power. some of them use them in more modified forms. but we do believe the sophisticated purchasers that many of the disclosure requirements in this bill are things that we do negotiate in that contract requirement. and so we think that trying to create a one size fits all disclosure requirement what it does is it requires the pbm to do something that may not be necessary to each relationship. we think it's important as we look at the administrative cost and overall cost of health care. that we do our best to keep those administrative cost low. we also think that as a part of this processes, as part of the relationship, if there are things that we need to negotiate to that contract process to make sure that we understand the disclosure and the rebates. we think that that should be a conversation between the plan and the pbm. so for those reasons unfortunately we do remain opposed to the bill in its current form, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 9, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Winger: john of express scripts in opposition, also on behalf of america's health insurance plans who still has an opposing less amended position on the bill. our remaining concern is to around the disclose, some of the disclosure requirements. and the possibility of the disclosure priced from the information from that thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 4, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Beth Capell: Beth Capell on behalf of Health Access California. Despite multiple pieces of legislation and multiple efforts on our part, the Office of Patient Advocate is expressly prohibited from handling consumer complaints and that is not a troll. It plays a very important, but different kind of role in the system. They office that handles consumer complaints from managed care plans including both HMOs and PPOs is the Department of Managed Health Care. That's why we think these amendments are appropriate improvements in this measure. Thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 11, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Amber King: thank you. thank you mr. chair and members. amber sara king with the association of california healthcare districts in support of this measure. achd supports long term solutions to address the physician shortage and maldistribution of physicians in rural and underserved areas of the state. and we believe that this bill will provide some additional data, especially for the imperial county and urge your aye vote, thank you.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Larry Doyle: here you go. good afternoon, mr. chair and members, larry amber doyle on behalf of the conference of california bar associations, we're the sponsors of the bill. assemblymember eggman has pretty much covered the waterfront in terms of the need for the bill. the bill does come out of the experience of elder law. attorneys in san diego who were somewhat shocked and dismayed to find that, in cases where there were advanced healthcare directives and other directions, expressing clearly the patients' wishes on file. that nonetheless post forms executed by people much farther removed from the patient, and who really had no rational way of knowing what the patient's wishes would be, were signing pulse forms and those pulse forms were giving priority over the patients' own wishes. we're trying to correct that. we appreciate all the work that has been done, particularly the california medical association has been very gracious in working with us, to try to make this bill as narrow and clear cut as possible. that only applies in cases of clear conflict. and it provides ways, there are ways that oral expressions of a patient that are later than advanced healthcare directive, that is written on file. nonetheless, those can take precedence, so long as they are wishes of the patient. and so with that, i simply hope you will support the bill, and i'm here to answer any questions.
[{'start': 52, 'end': 69, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 177, 'end': 183, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Leza Coleman: good afternoon, my name is coleman, i'm with the california long-term care ombudsman association. ombudsmen are the advocates that work with residents in assisted living and skilled nursing facilities. and in california, we are mandated to be the authorizing witness for advanced healthcare directives for residents, that are in skilled nursing facilities. we thank ms eggman for this bill. this is important for clarifying for end of life wishes. thank you.
[{'start': 27, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 369, 'end': 375, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Hene Kelly: Hene Kelly for the Californian Alliance for Retired Americans. We represent 1 million retired Americans, our last wishes are getting closer for us than for a lot of you. And we really appreciate this bill and we support it, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Karl Steinberg: good afternoon, mr. chair, thank you, my name's karl larry steinberg. i'm a hospice and nursing home medical director in san diego. county. and i'm here to respectfully oppose this legislation. we very much appreciate the work that you do. however, i believe this particular bill is unnecessary. it's overly complex, and it's impractical. i think the cases that mr. doyle was talking about are a rarity. i'm in the trenches every day doing this kind of work. by the way, i'm here on behalf of the coalition for compassionate care of california and the california association of long term care medicine, which is basically nursing home medical directors and so on. so i believe the current law, this thing that happened in san diego, would not be acceptable under current law. and the thing that these sponsors don't seem to take into account is that, in fact, most people want a family member to speak for them if they're not able to speak for themselves. and if they don't want a family member to speak for them, then they can put that in their documents. and then no self-respecting physician or ethical physician is going to sign an order that goes against something that the person says. so i think these are cases that are unusual. and it's basically using a statutory fix for really what is an educational problem. the thing is people's wishes change, right? i'm healthy today, if i went down right here, i would want cpr. i might even write that down somewhere. 20 years from now, i would expect my spouse to be able to speak for me. if i were demented, or had a giant stroke, had pancreatic cancer, i would not want to be subjected to that. under this bill, unfortunately, i wouldn't be able to get the care that my spouse or my adult child would ask for me. and i think that's very concerning. i think this bill will do far more harm than good if passed. and i just urge you to consider that kind of harm. they're talking about a rare case that might happen once in a while. and that really shouldn't happen under current law. we don't need another law to fix it. the sponsor here, their idea was, well, in that case, you can just get a court order. and it's like there's a conspiracy of physicians and rogue family members that are trying to go against people's wishes. that's really not the way things are, so please oppose this, thank you.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 68, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 366, 'end': 371, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Marla Marshall: chairman wood, members of the committee, my name is marla and i'm here on behalf of sheriff bill gore, the san diego county sheriff's department, in support.
[{'start': 9, 'end': 13, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 52, 'end': 57, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 92, 'end': 101, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jorge Orozco: Good afternoon. So I'm Jorge Orozco. I'm the CEO at Rancho Los Amigos National Rehabilitation Center. I've been there 27 years. I started as a physical therapist, and I continue to treat patients at the hospital. My knowledge of rehabilitation across the country really has led me to recognize that there are very few hospitals that see the most complex patients and provide the much needed research to advance the science of rehabilitation. And this bill would recognize those hospitals. Our current payer mix is about 85% Medicaid, Medi-Cal. So we serve not only as an access Center for those who are most vulnerable in our community, but also to the private sector. We get 40% of our referrals from the private sector, and largely because they're either too complex or they have have Medi-Cal funding. So I'm here to respond to any thoughts or questions that you might have.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 35, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Afrack Vargas: thank you. my name is afrack jonah vargas, representing the rincon band of luiseno indians in support, also the tule river tribe out of porterville, in strong support.
[{'start': 22, 'end': 41, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jean Hurst: i'm good. i'm all set. mr. chair, members, hurst, here today on behalf of the rural county representatives of california. the rural counties are concerned about the revenue impact. as you probably know, much of rural california is already under the control of federal government exempt from the property tax. they are concerned about the revenue impact.
[]
Maria Contreras: hi, my name is maria afrack contreras and i'm here with two of my three children because this is a really important issue for us moms. my husband and i both work multiple jobs. we moved to sacramento from the bay area to have less expensive housing for our family. and we spent at least $100 at a time on diapers, because my second child is also in them as well. so we have to buy at least four or five each trip we go to the store. our youngest goes through at least two boxes of diapers a month. i'm glad i have reliable transportation, because i can go around to the different stores, making sure that i can find the best deals out there, coupons and whatnot, just to be able to save the money. but even buying the good size boxes or the store brand, and looking for the sales, it's still really expensive. when i found out i was pregnant with her last year, i started buying some extra diapers when i could so i can stock up every paycheck, but it's not right that we have to choose between better groceries and putting diapers on my child. at the end of the month, i have to stretch every penny i have and that matters to us. thank you.
[{'start': 15, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Norah Weinstein: Thank you Assemblywoman Gonzalez Fletcher for inviting me here today and for your unwavering commitment and resilience for pushing diaper reform. And thank you to Chairman Ridley-Thomas for your work advocating on behalf of the Los Angeles community, where we're from and to the Revenue and Taxation Committee for your time today. I'm Norah Weinstein, Co-President of Baby2Baby in Los Angeles, a non-profit that provides low income children ages 0 to 12 with diapers, clothing, and all the basic necessities that every child deserves. We will serve 150,000 low income children this year and our new community and distribution center is located on Stellar Drive in Culver City, right in the heart of Assembly District 54. I'm here today on behalf of my Co-President Kelly Sawyer Patricof and our Baby2Baby Board and angel supporters, an incredible group of women and mothers including Jessica Alba, Kerry Washington, Drew Barrymore, Julie Bowen, Kate Hudson, Kelly Rowland and Kristen Bell among others, all of whom are residents of Los Angeles and support our work every day. They have helped Baby2Baby distribute 13 million diapers to families living below the federal poverty line in the last five years. And at the start of each day, we remind ourselves that one in three families has to choose between providing diapers and putting food on the table for their children. When we ask a mom, a dad, or a social worker what these families need most, the first, second, and third thing they say is diapers. Diapers are like gold for the low-income families we serve. And we've seen, first-hand, the horrendous hardships and obstacles mothers face when they're unable to provide their children with diapers. Hard working mothers in our program are literally emptying out their disposable diapers, hanging them to dry, and reusing them on their babies. And this is because diapers are not covered by Cal Fresh, Cal Works, or WIC and low income families are paying two times the amount of an average parent on diapers because they don't have access to big box stores or internet deals. They're spending up to 14% of their after tax revenue on this one, excuse me, after tax income, on this one necessity. And yet, diapers are subject to sales tax of a luxury item, and as any mom can tell you, there is nothing luxurious about a dirty diaper. At the start of each day, we also remind ourselves how lucky we are to live in the State of California. We feel proud to raise our own children in a state that has consistently led the way on important social issues. Currently, seven states in our country have eliminated the sales tax on diapers, and today California has the opportunity to join them on an issue that we believe transcends politics. So we're here today because we need the help of each of you, Mr. chair and members, to take action to help elevate the weight of the enormous cost of diapers for the families in our program, many of whom come from Assembly District 54 and throughout Los Angeles, and for families in need across the state. We're here because it's time for California to catch up to states that have understood the gravity of this issue and have stopped taxing diapers. This bill would not only help shape the national agenda of how we qualify diapers, but it would also result in significant savings to families who live below the federal poverty line. So on behalf of the 150,000 low income families we serve who fight everyday to keep their children safe and healthy and protected by diapers, thank you for supporting AB 479 and standing up for them today.
[{'start': 24, 'end': 41, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 172, 'end': 185, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 335, 'end': 350, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 765, 'end': 786, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 884, 'end': 896, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 898, 'end': 914, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 916, 'end': 930, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 932, 'end': 943, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 945, 'end': 956, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 958, 'end': 971, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 976, 'end': 988, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Gregory Cramer: good afternoon mr. chair, members. gregory maria cramer on behalf of planned parenthood affiliates of california. we support this bill and commend the authors for their efforts to eliminate financial barriers from accessing feminine hygiene products and diapers. and on behalf our 115 clinics, we hope that you support this measure. thank you.
[{'start': 35, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Bruce Livingston: livingston, i'm representing today los angeles drug and alcohol policy alliance coalition of over 30 organizations in los angeles county, and we firmly support this bill. thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 10, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Gavin McHugh: mr. chairman, and members gavin gregory mchugh on behalf of the distilled spirits council, while we understand and respect and certainly can appreciate what our joined authors attempt to accomplish here. we are opposed to this bill. and i think our primary concern is that this is going to impose a tax on distilled spirits to backfill the revenue loss that would be imposed by that. i have with me today david ozgo, who's the chief economists for the distilled spirits council to share some of is thoughts and concerns on the bill, thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 46, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 405, 'end': 415, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
David Ozgo: Opposition, yes. Good afternoon, my name is David Ozgo and I'm the Chief Economist with the Distilled Spirits Council in Washington DC. Thank you for the opportunity to comment on the Assembly bill 479. Our group represents the importers and distillers of the distilled spirits in the United States. We represent around 60 % of all the bourbon, scotch, vodka, gin, rum, brandy, that's so open to the US market. Our members represent not only the large distilleries, but also 150 of the small craft distillers, including 10 here in California such as Anchor Distilling, St. George Spirits, and Square One Organic Spirits. While we understand and appreciate the author's intent with AB 479, we are opposed to imposing this new tax increase on such a narrow set of products. We agree, governments need revenue to fund important programs. But good tax policy needs to minimize economic harm. The most efficient taxes are those that are applied to the widest possible base, using the lowest possible rate. By definition, beverage alcohol excise taxes are just the opposite of efficient taxes. To generate any significant revenue, whatsoever, you have to have a high rate going against a small base. Tax increases do not occur in a vacuum, while the proposed tax will be paid by wholesalers, wholesalers would have no choice but to pass the added cost on too many package stores, grocery stores, and restaurants that sells spirits. These businesses naturally would then pass those cost increases long to their customers. Distilled spirits are like any ordinary product. When prices go up, people buy less, the proposed 36% increase in the excise tax is projected to reduce sales by around $170 million, and cost some 2400 people their jobs as a result. Now it has been suggested that since the tax has not been increased since a number of years that that's a justification for raising it now. However, distilled spirits already bear a very, very heavy tax burden. In fact, on the typical bottle sold in California, over 50% of the purchase price is made up of a tax of some kind. In addition to the current state excise tax, there's a federal excise tax that amount to over $2 per bottle. When you consider that like all other products, state and local sales taxes are applied to the retail purchase price. Spirit consumers end up paying taxes on their taxes. There is simply no public policy rationale to increase the burden. There is no denying that AB 479 is well intentioned. But when good intentions are coupled with problematic tax policy, it can spell disaster for the workers that would be impacted and Mr. Chairman I would like to go on record of saying I too like babies. This is a particularly cute one, unfortunately, there's nothing very cute about an unemployed cocktail waitress, I urge you not to pass AB479.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John Latimer: mr. chairman and members, john gavin latimer on behalf of diageo distilled spirits company. i concur with everything that's been said previously. we'd urge a no vote, thank you. thank you.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dan Carrigg: Mr. Chairman and members, Dan Carrigg on behalf of League or California Cities. Our concern as with the prior bill is on a local sales and use tax. The portion that goes to local government. The analysis I was looking here on page three, the potential impacts were up to $59 million except for those. That's the portion of the bill that we're opposed to.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tracy Sullivan: Tracy Sullivan on behalf of the California State Association of Counties and I'd like to align my comments with my colleague from the league of cities.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
John O'Malley: Mr Chair and members John O'Malley on behalf of our client, Young's Market Company also opposed.
[{'start': 21, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
James Jack: thank you, mr. chairman and members. my name is james john jack. i'm here today on behalf of the sponsor of the bill, the santa ynez band of chumash indians, and also on behalf of the sycuan band of the kumeyaay nation, who is in support of the bill. the chumash are very grateful to chairman ridley-thomas for his introduction of this important measure, and for your consideration. given the late hour, i will keep my comments brief. and will just note that acquisition of land in trust is essential to tribal self-determination. this current federal policy of tribal self-determination is built upon the protection and restoration of tribal homelands. and trust acquisitions provide tribes the ability to enhance housing opportunities for their members. ab 653 would remedy an unfortunate situation where tribes that have had approved applications through the fee-to-trust process,are forced to continue paying property tax during sometimes lengthy administrative appeals processes.
[{'start': 48, 'end': 63, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 293, 'end': 306, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Dan Carrigg: Mr. Chairman and Members, Dan Carrigg on behalf of the League of California Cities. We do appreciate the amendment and the author taking that amendment on the local government portion. And with that we certainly remove our opposition. And speaking also on behalf of CSAC.
[{'start': 26, 'end': 37, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
 : The motion is do pass as amended to appropriations. Ridley-Thomas? Aye.
[{'start': 52, 'end': 65, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Tanahill: Jennifer Tanahill on behalf of the California Society of Enrolled Agents, we support the bill. CSCA has a long standing policy of supporting measure that is compliance or encourage tax payers to comply with the state tax code. And this bill doesn't let taxpayers off the hook by any means, but it works with taxpayers by easing the requirement so compliance is more likely. So I understand the bill has been moved and there's a motion. So we just ask for your support, thank you.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 17, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Ken De Vore: good afternoon chair and members ken james de vore with the national federation of independent business and we support this measure, thank you.
[{'start': 33, 'end': 50, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Margaret Gladstein: mr. chair and members, margaret ken gladstein here on behalf of the california retailers association. we must oppose this bill. we have a divergent view from the author's office. our view is this is not a tax loophole. this legislature has recognized time and time again when taxpayers remit taxes to the state and that money is overpaid, whether it's a personal over-payment or a business over-payment, a refund is due. the policy that this bill seeks to overturn was originally created in 2000 when then assemblymember alan lowenthal passed a bill to allow retailers or their partners, their financial services company partners, to get back state sales and use tax that was paid to the state when that was not collected on a transaction. we think this is a logical policy and one that has been reaffirmed time and again. assemblyman charles calderon tried to carry a bill to overturn it, that bill was defeated in this body. i would argue just a few weeks ago, this committee, authored by assemblyman bocanegra and the chair, passed a bill, ab 433, that made it clear that retailers may assign another party to collect when there's an overpayment of taxes. so we think this situation is clear and straightforward, that if an overpayment of taxes is made, then a refund is due. and it doesn't matter which party is trying to get that money back. we think that money is due back to the owner if it's not collected on a transaction. for those reasons, we must oppose.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 521, 'end': 535, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 835, 'end': 851, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 1003, 'end': 1012, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jason Lane: mr. chair and members of the committee, i am lane with the california bankers committee. we just first want to note that the revenue numbers, we're very skeptical of those numbers and also skeptical of the statement that these refund claims are actually increasing. what has happened is the board of equalization has had a tremendous administrative backlog in processing refund claims, and this is in part due to audits. and i think the board would even recognize that they've had an administrative bottleneck. and so, our view is that the numbers represented are actually the board of equalization catching up to current tax years. we would just echo the sentiments by the california association of retailers. our belief is, well quite frankly, this is an assignment of the right to claim a refund or deduction for the entity that maintains the financial burden of the transaction. and california's bad debt statute actually recognizes that when an individual does not make payment for the product that they purchased on credit, the transaction is economically incomplete and the state should not benefit from an over-payment of taxes. if this is a tax loop hole then the mortgage interest deduction is a tax loophole. your ability to claim a refund on your taxes or claim a refund when you overpay your taxes is a loophole. and clearly this is not the case. and we'd like to finally say that we think this bill will have a negative impact on consumers and availability of credit, particularly in the auto purchasing segment of the economy. if lenders are not able to price for risk accordingly because they are not able to claim the deduction, that is going to make it very difficult for individuals with marginal credit scores to obtain financing for auto loans. so for these reasons we recommend a no vote on the bill.
[{'start': 45, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Courtney Jensen: mr. chair and members, courtney margaret jensen with the california credit union league, also want to point out this is going to have a significant impact on smaller institutions like ours, also so we request a no vote, thank you.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 47, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jennifer Barrera: jennifer courtney barrera of the california chamber of commerce, also in opposition.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 25, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Nicolina Hernandez: Good afternoon, Nicolina Hernandez with Political Solutions on behalf of Target, the Home Depot, and the Retail Industry Leaders Association. Apologies for not getting our position in on time, but we appreciate the author's willingness to work with us, but must respectfully oppose.
[{'start': 16, 'end': 34, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jonathan Strum: mr. chair and members of the committee, good afternoon. my name is jonathan and my wife jean was diagnosed with secondary multiple sclerosis when she was 37 years old. at the time of that diagnosis, she was a successful writer, an avid cyclist. she used to ride her bike 40 miles every day. she loved to hike in the nearby santa monica mountains and work out at the gym. within a few short years of her diagnosis, jean could no longer do any of the those things that had defined who she was. in that short period of time, ms had made her a bed-bound quadriplegic. then, she could no longer swallow, so she began receiving all of her nutrition by means of a feeding tube. she went on to lose her ability to speak, her vision was severely compromised, she required a tracheotomy to breathe. and she's suffered significant cognitive decline, even completely losing her short term memory. i stopped working for approximately 10 years so that i could serve as my wife's primary caregiver. and during that time, we were slowly and quite painfully financially crushed. we lost everything. and that was with what was considered very good health care coverage and above average financial reserves, so i know firsthand how financially devastating chronic illness can be to any family. but there are things that can help to soften that blow and that's why ab 806 is so important. providing a tax credit on home modifications, equipment, and specialized services will enable family caregivers to more easily ensure the safety and well-being of their chronically ill loved ones. in my own case, it would've made it less financially burdensome to add something as simple but potentially lifesaving as grab bars and a seat to our shower. ab 806 would've made it financially feasible for me to widen the doorways of our home so that my wife could actually move from room to room in her wheelchair. and ab 806 would've provided some financial support that would've enabled us to add adaptive technology to her personal computer, not only connecting jean back with the world, but enabling her to continue working, in spite of all that ms took from her. this tax credit would've helped stretch the hundreds of dollars that i paid out of pocket every month to home health aides. now, this bill isn't going to solve every problem and challenge faced by families dealing with chronic illness. but it will make at least some of those challenges more solvable than they are today. and that means that people like jean can continue to lead meaningful, productive lives while providing family caregivers like me some measure of relief from the financial devastation that goes along with chronic illnesses like ms.
[{'start': 67, 'end': 75, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 88, 'end': 92, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 414, 'end': 418, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2032, 'end': 2036, 'label': 'PERSON'}, {'start': 2489, 'end': 2493, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Jennifer Harrington: Good afternoon, I'm Jennifer Harrington and I want to talk about my story as caregiver for my mother, who had Alzheimer's, and to show the acknowledgement of the emotional commitment and financial sacrifice that people in situations like I was in face. To personalize this, I'll briefly share one of many stories that I have about that time when I was caring for my mom. I cared for her for 10 years. This is just one example. The night I was driving my mother away from the assisted care home she was living, with no place to go and no idea what to do, my mom had been hospitalized a few days before and was released from the hospital to go home that night. I was too inexperienced to think to question that decision and so I signed the hospital release papers and took her to her assisted care room. But after I'd settled her in and said goodbye, I, then as I was driving away, received a call, telling me that she was not allowed back into the facility because in their judgement, she was too unsteady on her feet. So I had to go back and pick her up. Now, I was driving down the street with my mom next to me and unsure where to turn, wondering what to do. At that stage of the disease, I was completely ill-equipped to care for her at my own house. It was a Sunday night and there would be no way to get her admitted to another assisted care facility. I could think of nothing else to do but take her back to the hospital and simply beg for her to be readmitted. So I did that and in order to accomplish it, I had to agree to pay out-of-pocket for her stay. But I was so glad I had found a place of safety for her that I readily agreed to whatever those charges would be. The next day I drove to a new assisted care place, walked in the door shaking with tears streaming down my face and simply pleaded with them, will you help me take care of my mother, which they did. This story is reflected by millions of people who find themselves in situations where the unexpected is always just around the corner in caring for people with this disease. And the outcome is not always a good one. In this case, I did find a place for her the next day. I will never forget the impact of that feeling of desperation as I realized my mother's safety was at stake and I had nowhere to turn and that feeling will never leave me. I'm proud to be an advocate for the Alzheimer's Association and here, of course, in strong support of AB 806.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 39, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Fred Main: mr. chairman, members of the committee, fred on behalf of calpace, the program for all inclusive care for the elderly, who allow frail seniors to continue to live in their home. but making these adjustments is a cost and this bill would help reduce that, thank you.
[{'start': 40, 'end': 44, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michael McLaughlin: Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman. My name is Michael McLaughlin, I'm a volunteer with AARP. AARP strongly supports this bill.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 59, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Stewart Ferry: mr. chairman, committee members, my name is stewart, i'm with the national multiple sclerosis society in strong support.
[{'start': 44, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Susan DeMarois: Susan DeMarois on behalf of the Alzheimer's Association, we strongly support the bill and we thank the author.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 14, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Patrick Sabelhaus: mr. chairman and members of the committee, my name is patrick jennifer sabelhaus, i'm the executive director of california council for affordable housing. the tax credit program has produced some 300,000 units over the last 30 years. and almost all of those projects were tax exempt under the original filante bill. assemblyman filante back in '87, recognized the need for the exemption, in order to assist with the financing of the projects. and so most of the exemptions were anticipated by the county assessors to be in place in perpetuity, forever. given the incredible increases in rents and housing costs in california, what has happened is that families, particularly families with children and tax credit projects have come in some instances to earn more than 80% of median income. and as a result, they don't want to leave the unit and pay what are market rate rents these days. particularly in the bay area and san diego and los angeles where rents have spiked enormously over the last couple of years. and so there is no incentive, and congress in its wisdom provided that families would not have to leave just because of the increase in their income, that they could remain in the unit. and so there is a small percentage, estimated by the board of equalization, to be probably somewhere around 4 to 5% of the 300,000 units or maybe 15,000 that are impacted by this tax payment that is causing some problems in terms of meeting the operation costs of the project. so, we ask for your aye vote on this matter, thank you.
[{'start': 54, 'end': 80, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 328, 'end': 335, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Lane: mr. chair, members, michael patrick lane with the nonprofit housing association in northern california. and among our members are some of the oldest, most successful and productive developers of affordable housing in the nation. and these buildings take advantage of the welfare exemptions been in place over the last three decades is a key component of how we actually finance affordable housing. these building do not create a lot of net operating income. they're not able to pay a large tax bill, so it does create a hardship, through no fault of their own, when some families do have higher income and they receive that tax bill. ab 1193 would simply align the state code around this with the internal revenue code at the federal level with respect to tax credits. and it doesn't result in any lost revenues. because at the time the board of equalization approves this welfare exemption and a local jurisdiction approves the project, everyone going in knows that those property tax will not be available or paid. and so there's no loss of revenue here. it's just to make sure that the building owner isn't hit with a large property tax bill without sufficient rents to be able to pay that. again, we urge your aye vote on this bill. thank you very much.
[{'start': 20, 'end': 40, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Murray Jones: I'm Murray Jones, the assessor recorder clerk from the County of San Diego. And after the last brawl that was up here, I'd just like to say, this is very simple. Support the bill please. Thank you.
[{'start': 4, 'end': 16, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Jonathan Clay: Good afternoon Chair, Committee Members. Jonathan Clay on behalf of the County of San Diego. Regretfully, we're here in opposition today. This is a pilot program in our county that we have not requested. We fundamentally disagree with the policy embodied in the bill, at least the second part of the bill in terms of, we think it's poor customer service to remove options for people paying their taxes. We think that, if you want to pay with check, if you want to come in in person and pay, we think those should all be options that remain on the table. Anecdotally, there's many reasons why a taxpayer may choose to pay electronically versus a check or in person. We think all those options should be preserved, but fundamentally this is a pilot we have not asked for, and for those reasons we oppose the bill.
[{'start': 41, 'end': 54, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Wolfe: mr. chairman, members, good afternoon. david michael wolfe with the howard jarvis taxpayers association in opposition. members, i would just make the comment, this is an incredibly punitive bill for seniors which make up the majority of the membership at howard jarvis. listen, you have individuals who have never filed electronically, have no idea what they're doing, may not even have access to a computer. and let's not misunderstand either, this $5,000 threshold is incredibly low. current law is $50,000. this would drop it down to $5,000. this is going to impact a lot of homeowners in san diego county and across the state. san diego, county, the median household income is $515,000. the median home price across the state of california is a little bit over $450,000. this is going to impact a lot of people. again, it just seems punitive to make it a mandate, and it's going to be onerous and burdensome for a lot of taxpayers. i ask for a no vote.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 58, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Brian Augusta: thank you, mr chairman and members. brian david augusta on behalf of the california rural legal assistance foundation and the california coalition for rural housing. since we're being urged by numerous parties to be short, i will just briefly say that we have a huge need for expanding farmworker housing in this state. this program provides funding for that. these rules will help make sure more of that money gets out on the street and builds safe and decent housing for farmworker families. and we would urge an aye vote.
[{'start': 36, 'end': 55, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Paul Ainger: Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and Committee Members. My name is Paul Ainger, Development Solutions Manager for Rural Community Assistance Corporation, RCAC. In September of 2015, RCAC helped the California Human Development Corporation secure an allocation of $982 million in state farmworker, $982,687, I'm sorry. In state farmworker housing tax credits for the development of Ortiz Plaza, 30-unit affordable housing development right outside of Santa Rosa. This was the first allocation of state farmworker housing credits since 2008, a gap of seven years. The reason why the farmworker tax credits worked at Ortiz Plaza was because the project was designed to serve 100% farmworker families. In the meantime, RCAC is working on three other projects in Northern California that plan to serve farmworkers, but other low-income families as well. But as of today, the state farmworker housing credit program will not be available for these projects. We are looking at other sources to fill the gaps in the financing. At the same time, these gaps in financing are more difficult to fill. Joe Serna Farmworker Housing Grant Funding ran out in 2012, I mean 2010. Another key source of funding, the USDA Rural Development farmworker Housing Grant has had flat funding over the last 10 years or so. Which adjusted for the the cost of construction, results in an effective decrease of 30% reduction in funding from this source. AB 571 will take a positive step forward towards producing affordable housing for both farmworkers and other very low-income families, by lowering the threshold for projects that can use a state farm or housing credits with 100% to 50%. The bill will also provide incentives for use of 4% credits, as was in the case of Ortiz Plaza. The importance here is that 4% are not competitive, and thus are more readily available when paired with the state farmer housing tax credits. This will lead to the production of affordable housing. Both for farmworkers and other low and very low-income families in communities where rents are rising, vacancy rates are low, and workers are forced to live long distances from work. RCAC urges support for AB 571.
[{'start': 60, 'end': 71, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 1082, 'end': 1091, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michael Lane: Michael Lane with the Non-Profit Housing Association of Northern California, in strong support.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 12, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
David Wolfe: Mr. Chairman members, good afternoon, David Wolfe with the Howard Jarvis Taxpayers' Association, also in support of the bill. Members, this is a narrowly tailored bill. Obviously, listen, this is not going to be an issue, for employer-provided healthcare or the self employed you can already deduct. All this says is you'll enhance access to care for the segment of the population that doesn't fall into those categories. Obviously, this a gross income deduction, there's no need to itemize, it is above the line. Just view it as completely appropriate and would ask for an aye vote.
[{'start': 38, 'end': 49, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Tam Ma: good afternoon, mr. chair and members. tam brian ma with health access california. while we support efforts to increase availability and affordability of healthcare, we must regretfully oppose this bill because it is a tax giveaway that does little to improve the affordability of healthcare or manage rising healthcare costs. this bill will cost the state upwards of $500 million a year by creating a new tax deduction that allows people to deduct their insurance premiums and transportation costs. and thus, lowering their adjusted gross income in the process. as members of this committee, know that tax deductions disproportionately benefit the wealthy. people who are in the upper-earning bracket ,who have a higher tax rate to begin with, will receive the largest cost savings as a result of this bill. and little-- lower income people would get little out of this bill because they either don't owe taxes or they owe very little because they qualify for credits such as an eitc, which this legislature has worked very hard to pass, that we do so eliminate the tax burden. so, and i think in addition we are facing a lot of uncertainty in the healthcare environment right now. i'm given some of the proposals that are being proposed at the federal level and a bill that was passed by the house last week. that bill would kick off four to 5 million californians from their health coverage and cut billions of dollars that california receives for healthcare every year. and so given the ongoing change in landscape, that aside, we don't think that this bill, like if the legislature had $500 million to spend a year on healthcare that those monies could be better targeted to address needs for people who really need it, versus creating a tax deduction that mostly benefits the wealthy. so with that, we respectfully ask for your no vote on this bill.
[{'start': 39, 'end': 51, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Michelle Cabrera: mr. chair and members, michelle tam cabrera with seiu california, we also are regretfully in opposition to this bill for many of the same reasons that miss ma just pointed out. namely, this is a matter of trade-offs when we're talking about a allowing a group of people, and again--
[{'start': 23, 'end': 43, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}, {'start': 156, 'end': 158, 'label': 'PERSON'}]
Michelle Cabrera: Thank you, Mr. Chair. Again, Michelle Cabrera with Service Employees International Union. We believe that given that a majority of Californians do have employer-based coverage, low income Californians have options of both Medi-Cal as well as Covered California where they can get tax credits and cost-sharing reductions to help make that coverage very affordable. This bill is targeted and will benefit primarily a smaller group of affluent Californians. And so we have to look at what those tradeoffs are according to FTB. Over the course of three years, this bill will result in a hit to the general fund of approximately $1.3 billion. Those are revenues that would otherwise go to education, public safety and helping our most vulnerable Californians. We do think that in precarious times such as these, where there's a lot of uncertainty in the general fund, that that tradeoff is not worth it. And for those reasons, we're opposed to this bill.
[{'start': 29, 'end': 45, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dennis Albion: Dennis Albion on behalf of the family business Association. I think CalTex actually articulated the points very well. This is not a folks that just basically allows for later payment and conformity. Thanks.
[{'start': 0, 'end': 13, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Dan Kuerig: Mr. Chairman, members, Dan Kuerig on behalf of The League of California Cities in support.
[{'start': 23, 'end': 33, 'label': 'SPEAKER'}]
Margot Parks: mr. chair, members of the committee, parks on behalf of the california council for affordable housing in support, thank you.
[]
